THE 48 LAWS OF POWER
ROBERT GREENE has a degree in classical studies
and has been an editor at Esquire and oflmt magazines.
He is also a playwright and lives in Los Angeles.
JOOST ELFERS is the producer of 772: 48 Laws ofPawer
and also of
The Sam: Language cyFB:fi-tkdays
with Gary Goldschneider
The Semi Languages ofReiatiansiuyu
with Gary Goldschneider
Play with Hmr Facet‘
with Saxton Freymann
P
O
W
E
R
ROBERT
GREENE
A JOOST
ELFFERS
PRODUCTION
P
PROFILE BOOKS
This paperback edition published in 2000
Reprinted 200}, 2002
First published in Great Britain in 1998 by
Profile Books Ltd
58A Hatnon Garden
London ECIN RLX
First published in the United States in 1998 by
Viking, a division of Penguin Putnam Inc.
Copyright ® Robert Greene aridjoost Elflers, 1998
A portion of this work first appeared in '17w Uzne Reader
Typeset in BE Baskerville
Printed and bound in Italy by
Legoprint S.p.a.
— Lavis (TN)
The moral right of the authors has been asserted.
All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this publication may be
reproduced, shared or introduced into a. retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means (electronic,
mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise), without the prior written peimission of both the copyright
owner and the publisher of this book.
A CIP catalogue record for this booliis available from the British Library.
ISBN 1 86197 278 4-
A Iieasury ofJewish Fhlklare by Nathan Ausubel, Cnpyfight (S13 1948, 1976 by Crown Publishers, Inc. Reprinted by
pemiission of Crown Publishers, Inc.
7712 C/tines: Looking Glass by Dennis Bloodworth. Copyright (C) 1966, 1967 by Dennis Bloudworth. By permission of
Ferrar, Straus and Giroux.
7712 Baal: oftfw Courtier by Baldcsar Castiglione, translated by George Bull; Penguin Books (London). Copyright ©
George Bull, 1967.
The Golden Dream: Seekers eff}! Domtla by Walker Chapman; Bobbs-Merrill. Copyright © 1967 by Walker Chapman.
TIteBa1gz'as by Ivan Cloulas, translated by Gilda Roberts; Franklin Watts, Inc. Copyright ® 1987 by Librairie
Artheme Faynrd. Translation copyright CC) I989 by Franklin Watts, Inc.
Vézrious Fablesfiom I/Zmbus Places, edited by Diane Di Prima; Capricorn Books /’ G. P. Putnanfs Sons. (0 1960 G. P.
Pulnam’s Sons.
Arnmzian Fol/rtala and Fables, translated by Charles Downing; Oxford University Press. © Charles Downing 1972.
771: Little Brown Baa/c afAneca?0tes, edited by Clifton Fadiman; Little, Brown and Company. C'x>pyn'ghc (0 L985 by
Little, Brown and Company (ln<:.)
Z7zePowzr ofthe Charlalan by Grete de Francesco, translated by Miriam Beard, Copyright, 1939, by Yale University
Press. By permission of Yale University Press.
77ze Omzle: A Marmot zftlw Art ofDi.cmtian by Baltasar Gracién, translated by L. B. Walton", Orion Press.
Behind the Same: afRoyulPalam in Korea (Yi Dynasty) by Ha 'lb.e»hung. Copynght (fl 1983 by Ha Tae~hu.ng. By perm.is~
slot: of Yonsei University Press, Seoul.
7712 Hiszaries by Herodotus, translated by Aubrey de Sélincoun, revised by A. R. Bum; Penguin Books (London).
Copyrifixt © the Estate of Aubrey de Sélincouri, 1954. Copyright (3 A. K Bum, l972.
Hollywaadby Garson Kanin (Viking). Copyright © 1967, l974 by T. F. T, Corporation.
Fabierfrom Africa, collected byjan Knappcrt; Evan Brothers Limited (London). Collection © l980]=m Knappcrt.
Ike Great Fables ofAllNatimLs, selected by Manuel Komroff; Tudor Publishing Company. Copyright, 1928, by Dial
Press, Inc.
Sxizcted Fuller by jean de La Fonmine, translated by James Michic; Penguin Books (London). Translation copyright
Qjames Mickie, 1979.
The Romance qftilz Rosa by Guillaume de Lorris, translated by Charles Dahlberg; Princeton University Press.
172: Complm Essays by Michel de Montaigne, translated by M. A. Screech; Penguin Books (London). Translation
copyright o M. A. Screech, I987, 1991.
A Book qfFa've Rings by Miyamobo Musashi, uanslatcd by Victor Harris; Overlook Press. Copyright © l97=l by Victor
The New 0zy‘i2rdAnnotated Bible with the Apaaypluz, revised standard version, edited by Heibert G. May and Bruce M.
Metzger; Oxford University Press. Copyright © 1973 by Oxford University Press, Inc.
Makers efkome: Nine Lines by Plutarch, translated by Ian Scott~Kilveit; Penguin Books (London). Copyright © Ian
Scott—Kilvert, 1965.
7722 Rise and Fuli ofAt/tens: Nine Greek Lives by Plutarch, translated by Ian Scotl«Kilvert; Penguin Books (London).
Copyright ® Ian Scott~Kilvert, 1960.
Chemo-ya." Ihejapanesz Tia Ceremony by A. L. Sadler; Charles E. Thttle Company, '11.!) 1962 by Charles E. Tuttle Co
Amara! Politia: The Persistent Iiuth qfil/Iathiavellism by Ben~Ami Scharfstein; State University of New York Press.
© l995 State University of New York.
Caravan nfbnzam by [dries Shah; Octagon Press (London). Copyright © 1970, 1980 by Idries Shah.
Ihles ofthc Dervixlxes by Idries Shah. Copyright © Idries Shah, 1967. Used by permission of Penguin Putnam lnc. and
Octagon Press (London).
The Craft offlnoev by R. G. H. Siu; john Wiley &. Sons. Copyright © 1979 byjohn Wiley 8: Sons, Inc.
The Subtle Ruse: 77;: Bank af/imbiv Wisdom and Guile, translated by Rene R. Khawam; East-West Publications. C0py~
right @> L980 English translation East~West Publications
Ltd.
Tiwzirt of M17 by Suirtzu, translated by Thomas Cleary; Shambhala Publications. ((3 1938 by Thomas Cleary.
The Art of War by Sun-tzn, translated by Yuan Shibing. © 1987 by General Tao Hanshang. Used by pennission of
Sterling Publishing Co., Inc., 387 Park Avenue South, New York, NY 10016,
The Histmy ofthe Pelaponnssian War by Thucyclides, translated by Rex Wamcr; Penguin Books (London). Translation
copyright Rex Warner, 1954.
The Thurber Carnival by James Thurber; Ha.q:erCollins. Copyright l9¢5 by James Thurber,
Tlw Court Artist: On thezimemy ofllw Modern Artist by Martin Wamlce, translated by David McLintouk. Translation ©
Maison des Sciences de 1’Homme and Cambridge University Press 1993. By permission of Cambridge University
Press.
The Can Game and “lfzlbw Kid” Mil.' 77:5 Autobiography ofllze Famous Can Artist as told to W. T Brannon; Dover Publi-
cations. Copyright © 1948 by W. T‘. Brannon.
27: Anna Biller, and ta my parents
R. G.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Firstl would like to thank Anna Biller, who helped edit and research this book, and whose in-
valuable insights played a critical role in the shape and content of 17w 48 Laws. Without her,
none of this would have been possible.
I must also thank my dear friend Michiel Schwarz who was responsible for involving me in
the art school Fabrika in Italy and introducing me there to _]oost Elffers, my partner and producer
of The 48 Laws ofPower. It was in the scheming world of Fabrika that_]oost and I saw the timeless-
ness of Machiavelli and from our discussions in Venice, Italy, this book was born.
I would like to thank Henri Le Goubin, who supplied me with many Machiavellian anec~
dotes over the years, particularly conceming the numerous French characters who play such a
large role in this book.
I would also iike to thank Les and Sumiko Biller, who lent me their library on Japanese his-
tory and helped me with the Japanese Tea Ceremony part of the book. Similarly, I must thank
my good friend Elizabeth Yang who advised me on Chinese history.
A book like this depended greatly on the research material available andl am particularly
grateful to the UCLA Research Library; I spent many pleasant days wandering through its in-
comparable collections.
My parents, Laurette and Stanley Green, deserve endless thanks for their patience and
support.
And I must not forget to pay tribute to my cat, Boris, who kept me company throughout the
never—ending days of writing.
Finally, to those people in my life who have so skillfully used the game of power to manipu~
late, torture, and cause me pain over the years, I bear you no grudges and I thank you for sup
plying me with inspiration for The 48 Laws 0fP0wer.
Rabert Greene
mfii
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
CONTENTS
PREFACE
page zrrzii
LAW
1
page I
NEVER OUTSHINE THE MASTER
Always make those above you feel comfortably superior In your desire to please or impress them, do not go
toofar in displayingyour talent: oryou might accomplish the oppasite~»—-inspirefear and insecurity. Make
your masters appear more brilliant than they are and you will attain the heights ofpower.
LAW 2
page 8
NEVER PUT TOO MUCH TRUST IN FRIENDS,
LEARN HOW TO USE ENEMIES
Be wary :.3ffziends——~they will betray you more quickly, for they are easibr aroused to envy. 'I‘hey also become
spoiled and tyrannical. But hire aformer enemy and he will be more loyal than afriend, because he has more
to prove. Infact, you have more tofearfromfriends thanfitrm enemies. Ifyou have no enemies, find a way to
make them.
LAW 3
page 16
CONCEAL YOUR INTENTIONS
Keep people off-balance and in the dark by never revealing the purpose behind your actions. If they have no
clue what you are up to, they cannot prepare a defense. Guide themfar enough down the wrongpath, envelop
them in enough smoke, and by the time thrgv realize your intentions, it will be too late.
LAW 4
page 31
ALVVAYS SAY LESS THAN NECESSARY
When you are trying to impress people with words, the more you say, the more rommon you appear, and tlw less
in control. Even ifyou are saying something banal, it will seem original ifyou make it vague, open—ended,
and sphinxlike. Powerfltl people impress and intimidate by saying less. The more you say, the more likely you
are to say somethingfoolish.
LAW
5
/mge37
SO MUCH DEPENDS ON REPUTATION-—-GUARD IT WITH YOUR LIFE
Reputation is the cornerstone ofpower. Through reputation alone you can intimidate and win," once it slips,
however, you are vulnerable, and will be attacked on all sides. Make your reputation unassailable. Always be
akrt to potential attacks and thwart them before they happen. Meanwhile, learn to destroy your enemies by
opening holes in their own reputations. Then stand aside and let public opinion hang them.
LAVV 6
page 44
COURT ATTENTION AT ALL COST
Everything is judged by its appearance; what is unseen countsfor nothing: Never let yourselfget lost in the
crowd, then, orburied in oblivion. Stand out. He conspicuous, at all cost. Malzeyourselfa magnet ofattention
by appearing larger, more colorful more mysterious than the bland and timid masses.
CONTENTS
[1
LAW
7
page 56
GET OTHERS TO DO THE WORK FOR YOU, BUT ALWAYS TAKE THE CREDIT
Use the wisdom, knowledge, and legwork of other people tofurther your own muse. Not only will such assis-
tance save you valuable time and energy, it will give you a godlike aura ofejficiertcy and speed. In the end
your hehpers will beforgotten and you will be remembered. Never do yourselfwhat others can doforyou.
LAW 8
page 62
MAKE OTHER PEOPLE COME TO YOU—-USE BAIT IF NECESSARY
When youforte the other person to act, you are the one in control. It is always better to make your opponent
come to you, abandoning his own plans in theprocess. Lure him withfabulous gains-then attack. You hold
the cards.
-
LAW’ 9
page 69
WIN THROUGH YOUR ACTIONS, NEVER THROUGH ARGUMENT
Any momentary triumph you think you have gained through argument is really a Iyrrhir victory: The resent»
ment and ill will you stir up is stronger and lasts longer than any momentary change ofopinion. It is much
more powerful to get others to agree with you through your actions, without saying :1 word. Demonstrate, do
not explicate.
LAW
1 0
page 76
INFECTION: AVOID THE UNHAPPY AND UNLUCKY
You can diefrom someone else’: misery-——emotional states are as infectious as diseases. Km may feel you are
helping the drowning man but you are only precipitatingyour own disaster: The unfortunate sometimes draw
misfortune on themselves; they will also draw it on you. Associate with the happy andfortunate instead.
LAW
1 1
page 82
LEARN TO KEEP PEOPLE DEPENDENT ON YOU
To maintain your independence you must always be needed and wanted. The more you are relied on, the more
freedom you have. Makepeople depend on youfor their happiness andprosperity and you have nothing tofear.
Never touch them enough so that they can do without you.
LAVV
12
page 89
USE SELECTIVE HONESTY AND GENEROSITY TO DISARM YOUR VICTIM
One sincere and honest move will cover over dozens of dishonest ones. 0pen~hea7ted gestures of honesty and
gertemsity bring down the guard ofeven the most suspicionspeople. Once your selective honesty opens a hole in
their armor; you can deceive and manipulate them at will. A timely gzfl-ma ’}i‘q,v'an horse-——zoill serve the same
purpose.
LAW
I 3
page 95
WHEN ASKING FOR HELP, APPEAL TO PEOPLE’S SELFAINTEREST,
NEVER TO THEIR MERCY OR GRATITUDE
Ifyou need to turn to an allyfor help, do not bother to remind him ofyourpast assistance and good deeds. He
willfind a way to ignore you. Instead, uncover something in your request, or in your alliance with him, that
will benefit him, and emphasize it out of all proportion, He will respond enthusiastically when he sees some-
thing to be gainedfor himself.
1-
comsms
LAW
14
page 107
POSE AS A FRIEND, WORK AS A SPY
Knowing about your rival is critical. Use spies to gather valuable information that will keep you a step ahead.
Better still: Play the spy yourself In polite social encounters, learn to probe. Ask indirect questions to get people
to reveal their weaknesses and intentions. There is no occasion that is not an opportunityfinr artful spying.
LAW J5
page 107
CRUSH YOUR ENEMY TOTALLY
All great leaders since Adoses have known that a feared enemy must be crushed completely. (Sometimes they
have learned this the hard way.) If one ember is left alight, no matter how dimly it smolders, afire will eventu-
ally break out. More is lost through stopping halfway than through total annihilation: The enemy will recover,
and will seek revenge. Crush him, not only in body but in spirit.
LAW
16
page 115
USE ABSENCE TO INCREASE RESPECT AND HONOR
Too much circulation makes the price go down: The more you are seen and heardfrom, the more common you
appear Ifyou are already established in a group, temporary withdrawalfrom it will make you more talked
about, even more admired. You must learn when to leave. Create value through scarcity.
LAW
17
page 1:23
KEEP OTHERS IN SUSPENDED TERROR: CULTIVATE AN AIR OF UNPREDICTABILITY
Humans are creatures of habit with an insatiable need to seefamiliarity in otherpeoples actions. Your pre-
dictability gives them a sense ofcontrol. Turn the tables: Be deliberately unpredictable. Behavior that seems to
have no consistency orpurpose will keep them off—balance, and they will wear themselves out trying to explain
your moves. Taken to an extreme, this strategy can intimidate and terrorize.
LAW
18
page 130
DO NOT BUILD FORTRESSES TO PROTECT YOURSELF—ISOLATION IS DANGEROUS
The world is dangerous and memies are everywhere——et/eryone has to protect themselves. A fortres.s seems the
safest. But isolation exposes you to more dangers than it protects you frorn—-—it cuts you offflom valuable in-
formation, it makes you conspicuous and an easy target. Better to circulate amongpeople, find allies, mingle.
You are shieldedfrom your
by the crowd.
LAW
no
page 137
KNOW WHO YOU'RE DEALING WITH—DO NOT OFFEND THE WRONG PERSON
There are many different kinds ofpeople in the world, and you can never assume that everyone will react to
your strategies in the same way. Deceive or outmaneuver somepeople and they will spend the rest oftheir lives
seeking revenge. They are wolves in lambs’ clothing. Choose your victims and opponents carefully, then—
never offend or deceive the wrongperson.
CONTENTS
xi
LIXW 20
page 14;)’
DO NOT COMMIT TO ANYONE
It is thefool who always rushes to take sides. Do not commit to any side or cause but yourseh‘. By maintaining
your independence, you become the master of(ufhers—~playingj7eo[1le against one another: making them pursue
you.
LAW 21
page 156
PLAY A SUCKER TO CATCH A SUCKER—--SEEM DUMBER THAN YOUR MARK
No one likesjeelingsmpider than the next person. The trick, then, is to makeyour victimsjeel smart—and not
just smart, out smarter than you are. Once convinced o/"this, they will never suspect that you may have ulte-
rior motives‘
LAW 22
page 163
USE THE SURRENDER TACTIC: TRANSFORM WEAKNESS INTO POWER
When you are weaker; neverfightfor honor’s sake; choose surrender instead. Surrender gives you time to ne-
couer, time to torment and irritate your conqueror; time to waitfor his power to wane. Do not give him the sat»
isfaction offighting and defeatingyou——surrenderfirst. By turning the other cheek you infiiriate and unsettle
him. Make surrender a tool ofprmren
LAVV 23
page 171
CONCENTRATE YOUR FORCES
Conserveyourforces and energies by keeping them conrentrated at theirstwngastjsaint. You gain more byfind~
ing a rich mine and mining it deeper; than byflittingfrom one shallow mine to anotherwintenstty defeats ex-
tensity every time. When lookingfor sourres ofpower to elevate you, find the one key patron, thefat cow who
will give you milhjor a longtime to
LAW 24
page 178
PLAY THE PERFECT COURTIER
The perfect eourtier thrives in a world where everything revolves around power and political dexterity‘ He has
mastered the art ofindirection; heflutters, yields to superiors, and asserts power over others in the most oblique
and graceful manner Learn and apply the laws ofcorurtiership and there will be no limit to howfaryou can
rise in the court.
LAW 25
page 19;/'
RE-CREATE YOURSELF
Do not acvept the roles that society foists on you. Rmreate yourself by forging a new identity, one that com-
mands attention and never bones the audience. Be the master ofyour own image rather than letting others de-
fine it for you. Ineorporate dramatic devices into your public gestures and octiom——your power will be
enhanced and your character will seem larger than life.
LAW 26
page 200
KEEP YOUR HANDS CLEAN
Km must seem a paragon ofcivility and
Your hands are never soiled by mistakes and nasty deeds.
Maintain such a spotless afrpearance by using others as scapegoats and eativpaws to disguise your in»
volvement.
xii
CONTENTS
LAW 27
page 225
PLAY ON PEOPLE'S NEED TO BELIEVE TO CREATE A CULTLIKE FOLLOWING
People have an overwhelming desire to believe in something. Become thefocalpoint of such desire by ojj‘m'ng
them a cause, a nemfaith tofollow. Keep your wants vague butfull ofpromise; emphasize enthusiasm over
rationality and clear thinking. Give your new disciples rituals to perform, ask them to make sacrifices on your
oehaqf In the absence oforganized religion and grand causes, your new belief system will bring you untold
power.
LAW 28
page 227
ENTER ACTION WITH BOLDNESS
Ifyou are unsure of a course of action, do not attempt it. Your doubts and hesitations will infect your execu-
tion, Timidity is dangerous: Better to enter with boldness. Any mistakes you commit through audacity are eas»
ily corrected with more audacity. Everyone admires the bold; no one honors the léfllid.
LAW 29
page 236
PLAN ALL THE WAY TO THE END
The ending is everything. Plan all the way to it, taking into account all the possible consequences, obstacles,
and twists offortune that might reverse your hard work and give the glory to others. By planning to the end
you will not be overwhelmed by circumstances and you will know when to stop. Gently guidefortune and help
determine thefittune by thinkingfar ahead.
LA‘/V 30 page 245
MAKE YOUR ACCOMPLISHMENTS SEEM EFFORTLESS
Your actions must seem natural and executed with ease. All the toil and practice that go into them, and also
all the clever tricks, must be concealed. When you act, act eflortlessly, as zfyou could do much more. Avoid the
temptation of-revealing how hard you wurk—it only raises questions. Teach no one your tricks or they will be
used against you.
LAW 31
page 25-?
CONTROL THE OPTIONS: GET OTHERS TO PLAY WITH THE CARDS YOU DEAL
The best deceptions are the ones that seem to give the other person a choice: Your victimsfeel they are in control,
but are actually yourpuppets. Give people options that some out in yourfavor whichever one they choose, Force
them to make choices between the lesser oftwo evils, both ofwhich serve yourpurpose. Put them on the horns of
a dilemma: They are gored wherever they turn.
LAW 3 2
page 263
PLAY TO PEOPLES FANTASIES
The truth is often avoided because it is ugly and unjbleasant. Never appeal to truth and reality unless you are
preparedfor the anger that comesfrom disenchantment. Life is so harsh and distressing that people who can
manufacture romance or conjure npfarztasy are like oases in the desert: Everyoneflocks to them. There is great
power in tapping into thefantasies ofthe masses.
CO NTENTS
xiii
LAW’ 33
page ‘.771
DISCOVER EACH MAN'S THUMBSCREW
Everyone has a weakness, a gap in the castle wall. That weakness is usually an insecurity, an uncontrollable
emotion or need; it can also be a smafl secret pleasure. Either may, oncefound, it is a thumbscrew you can turn
to your advantage.
LAW
734
page 252
BE ROYAL IN YOUR OWN FASHION: ACT LIKE A KING TO BE TREATED LIKE ONE
The way you carry yourselfwill often determine how you are treated: In the long run, appearing vulgar or com-
mon will make people disrespect you. For a king respects himselfand inspires the same sentiment in others. By
acting regally and confident ofyour powers, you make yourselfseem destined to wear a crown.
LAVV 33
page 291
MASTER THE ART OF TIMING
Never seem to be in a hurry—hurrying betrays a lack of control over yourself: and over time. Always seem pa-
tient, as ifyou know that everything will come to you eventually. Become a detective of the right moment;
out the spirit of the times, the trends that will carry you to power: Learn to stand back when the time is not yet
ripe, and to strikefiercely when it has reachedfruition.
LAVV 36
page 300
DISDAIN THINGS YOU CANNOT HAVE: IGNORING THEM IS THE BEST REVENGE
By acknowledging a petgr problem you give it existence and credibility. The more attention you pay an enemy,
the strongeryou make him; and a small mistake is often made worse and more visible when you try tofix it. It
is sometimes best to leave things alone. If there is something you want but cannot have, show contemptfor it.
'I7te less interest you reveal, the more superioryou seem.
LAW 37 page3()9
CREATE COMPELLING SPECTACLES
Striking imagery andgrand symbolic gestures create the aura ofpower—e1/eryone responds to them. Stage spec-
tacles for those around you, then, full ofarresting visuals and radiant symbols that heighten your presence.
Dazzled by appearances, no one will notice what you are really doing.
LAVV 38
page 317
THINK AS YOU LIKE BUT BEHAVE LIKE OTHERS
Ifyou make a show ofgoing against the times, flaunting your unconventional ideas and unorthodox ways,
people will think that you only want attention and that you look down upon them. They willfind a way to
punish youfor making themfeel inferior It isfar safer to blend in and nurture the common touch. Shareyour
originality onh with tolerantfriends and those who are sure to appreciate your uniqueness.
I. /\VV 3 9
page 325
STIR UP WATERS TO CATCH FISH
Anger and emotion are strategically counterproductive. You must always stay calm and objective. But ifyou
can make your enemies angry while staying calm yourselfl you gain a decided advantage. Put your enemies
off-balance: Find the think in their vanity through which you can rattle them and you hold the strings.
.rio
CONTENTS
LAW 40
page 333
DESPISE THE FREE LUNCH
What is offeredforfree is dangenms—~it usually involves either a trick or a hidden obligation. What has worth
is worth payingfor By payingyour own way you stay clear ofgratitude, guilt, and deceit. It is also often wise
to pay thefull price-—there is no cutting corners with excellence. Be lavish with your money and
it cirru-
lating, for g'enemsity is a sign and a magnetforpower.
LAVV 4]
page 347
AVOID STEPPING INTO A GREAT MAN'S SHOES
What happensfirst always appears better and more original than what comes after Ifyou succeed a great man
or have ajarnous parent, you will have to accomplish double their achievements to outshine them. Do not get
lost in their shadow, or stuck in a past not ofyour own making: Establish your own name and identity by
changing course. Slay the overbearingfathei; disparage his legacy, and gain power by shining in your own
way.
LA W’ 42
page 358
STRIKE THE SHEPHERD AND THE SHEEP WILL SCATTER
Trouble can often be traced to a single strong indi-oidual——the stirrer, the arrogant underling, the poisoner of
goodwill. you allow such people room to operate, others will succumb to their influence. Do not waitfor the
troubles they cause to multiply, do not try to negotiate with them—thty are irredeemable. Neutralize their in»
jluence by isolating or banishing them. Strike at the source of the trouble and the sheep will scatter.
LAVV 43
page 367
WORK ON THE HEARTS AND MINDS OF OTHERS
Coercion creates a reaction that will eventually work against you. You must seduce others into wanting to
move in your direction. A person you have seduced becomes your loyal pawn. And the way to seduce others is to
operate on their individualpsychologies and weaknesses. Soften up the resistant by working on their emotions,
playing on what they hold dear and what theyfear: Ignore the hearts and minds ofothers and they will grow to
hate you.
L AVV
«'14
page 3 76
DISARM AND INFURIATE WITH THE MIRROR EFFECT
The mirror reflects reality, but it is also the perfect toolfor deception: When you mirroryour enemies, doing ex~
actly as they do, they cannotfigure out your strategy. The Mirror Eflect mocks and humiliates them, making
them overreact. By holding up a mirror to theirpsyehes, you seduce them with the illusion that you share their
values; by holding up a mirror to their actions, you teach them a lesson. Few can resist thepower ofthe Mirror
Effect.
LA‘/V 45
page 392
PREACH THE NEED FOR CHANGE, BUT NEVER REFORM TOO MUCH AT ONCE
Everyone understands the needfor change in the abstract, but on the day-to-day level people are creatures of
habit. Too much innovation is traumatic, and will lead to revolt. Ifyou are new to a position ofpower, or an
outsider trying to build a power base, make a show of respecting the old way ofdoing things. Ifchange is nec-
essary, make itfeel like a gentle improvement on the past.
CONTENTS
.ro
LAW 46
page 400
NEVER APPEAR TOO PERFECT
Appearing better than others is always dungwmcs, but most drmgmms ofall is to appear to have nofault: or
weaknesses. Envy mates silent enemies. It is smart to occasionally display defects, and admit to harmless
vices, in order to dcflect envy and appear more human and apfiwctchable. Only guds and the dead can seem
pevfect with impunity.
LAW 47
page 410
DO NOT G0 PAST THE MARK YOU AIME!) FOR;
IN VICTORY, LEARN WHEN TO STOP
The moment of victory is often tlw mtmmzi ofgmttest peril. In the heat of victory, armganne and 0vmonfi—
dense can push you past the gmzl you had aimedjbr; and by going toofar, you make more enemies than you
defeat. Do not allow success to go to your head. Time is no substétumfor strategy and canrfulplanning. Set a
goal, and when you mach it, stop.
LAVV 48
page 419
ASSUME. FORMLESSNESS
By talking a shape, by having a visible plan, you open yourself to attack. Instead of taking afmmfor your
enemy to grasp, keepyoursetfadaptable and on the move. Accept thefaa that nothingis certain and no law is
fixed. The best way to pmtect yourself is to be asfluid andformless as water; never bet on stabifity or lasting
urder. Everything changes.
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY page 431
[N D EX page 433
231;!‘
C ONTENTS
PREFACE
The feeling of having no power over people and events is generally un-
bearable to us«—-when we feel helpless we feel miserable. No one wants less
power; everyone wants more. In the world today, however, it is dangerous
to seem too power hungry, to be overt with your power moves. We have
to seem fair and decent. So we need to be subtle~—congenial yet cunning,
democratic yet devious.
This game of constant duplicity most resembles the power dynamic
that existed in the scheming world of the old aristocratic court. Throughout
history, a court has always formed itself around the person in power—king,
queen, emperor, leader. The courtiers who filled this court were in an espe-
cially delicate position: They had to serve their masters, but if they seemed
to fawn, if they curried favor too obviously, the other courtiers around
them would notice and would act against them. Attempts to win the mas-
ter’s favor, then, had to be subtle. And even skilled courtiers capable of
such subtlety still had to protect themselves from their fellow courtiers,
who at all moments were scheming to push them aside.
Meanwhile the court was supposed to represent the height of civiliza-
tion and refinement. Violent or overt power moves were frowned upon;
couniers would work silently and secretly against any among them who
used force. This was the couxtier’s dilemma: While appearing the very
paragon of elegance, they had to outwit and thwart their own opponents in
the subtlest of ways. The successful comtier learned over time to make all
of his moves indirect; if he stabbed an opponent in the back, it was with a
velvet glove on his hand and the sweetest of smiles on his face. Instead of
using coercion
or outright treachery, the perfect courtier got his way
through seduction, charm, deception, and subtle strategy, always planning
several moves ahead. Life in the court was a never-ending game that re-
quired constant vigilance and tactical thinking. It was civilized war.
Today we face a peculiarly similar paradox to that of the courtier:
Everything must appear civilized, decent, democratic, and fair. But if we
play by those rules too strictly, if we take them too literally, we are crushed
by those around us who are not so foolish. As the great Renaissance diplo-
mat and courtier Niccolo Machiavelli wrote, “Any man who tries to be
good all the time is bound to come to ruin among the great number who
are not good.” The court imagined itself the pinnacle of refinement, but un-
PREFACE
.1’1:{z'
(,'om'Is are, uI1que.x1irm-
ably. the scum‘ ufpuliiee
r/css and good
i>reediIl;,>; were they not
so, they wmtirl be the
seals vfslzmghrer and
rlewluliml. I/msr who
now rmtle upon and
:’mlm1L'e, would uf/‘mm
and mh. well other,
If mannmxs dui nor
iIllC¥‘[3(J.\‘e.
.
.
.
LORD CllI;$'l 1;lI.)-IFID,
1694-1 713’
There is nothing very’
add about lambs
ciisiiking birds ofpn-y,
but this is no ranmzz fr»-
holding it against large
br'rd.s ofpre
r that rluzy
carry offlmnbs. And
when the I/mzlzx wim-
[mr among Iheniselvex,
“ I lww birds‘ nfprcy
are evil, and zz',0e.\ this
not give as (1 right to
Say that whatever is the
«;p;m.s'im ofa bird of
prey must be good.‘’'‘
there is nothing in/rm—
sically wrong Wil/I rut-I:
rm urgummt
~
- though
{he birds ofprey will
look so/mzwlmt qmzztl
mlly and say. “We have
rmtliirzg agaimi Ifiese
gum! ImnI,>_9'.' in fact, we
love 1lu*rIz;rwIIu'Izg
tastes better t/um a
tender‘ lamb.
"
llRllLDl{l(JH ."'4'lE-.’l‘ZS(‘HI:.
l 8444 900
;1miii
PREFACE
derneath its glittering surface a cauldron of dark emotions--greed, envy,
lust, hatred-—boi1ed and simmered. Our world today similarly imagines it-
self the pinnacle of fairness, yet the same ugly emotions still stir within us,
as they have forever. The game is the same. Outwardly, you must seem to
respect the niceties, but inwardly, unless you are a fool, you learn quickly
to be prudent, and to do as Napoleon advised: Place your iron hand inside
a. velvet glove. If, like the courtier of times gone by, you can master the arts
of indirection, learning to seduce, charm, deceive, and subtly outmaneuver
your opponents, you will attain the heights of power. You will be able to
make people bend to your will without their realizing what you have done.
And if they do not realize what you have done, they will neither resent not
resist you.
To some people the notion of consciously playing power games—no mat-
ter how indii-ect—seems evil, asocial, a relic of the past. They believe they
can opt out of the game by behaving in ways that have nothing to do with
power. You must beware of such people, for while they express such opin~
ions outwardly, they are often among the most adept players at power.
They utilize strategies that cleverly disguise the nature of the manipulation
involved. These types, for example, will often display their weakness and
lack of power as a kind of moral virtue. But true powerlessness, without
any motive of selfiinterest, would not publicize its weakness to gain sympa-
thy or respect. Making a show of one’s weakness is actually a very effective
strategy, subtle and deceptive, in the game of power (see Law 22, the Sur—
render Tactic).
Another strategy of the supposed nonplayer is to demand equality in
every area of life. Everyone must be treated alike, whatever their status and
strength. But
to avoid the taint of power, you attempt to treat everyone
equally and fairly, you will confront the problem that some people do cer-
tain things better than others. Treating everyone equally means ignoring
their differences, elevating the less skillful and suppressing those who
excel. Again, many of those who behave this way are actually deploying
another power strategy, redistributing people’s rewards in a way that they
determine.
Yet another way of avoiding the game would be perfect honesty and
straightforwardness, since one of the main techniques of those who seek
power is deceit and secrecy. But being perfectly honest will inevitably hurt
and insult a great many people, some of whom will choose to injure you in
return. No one will see your honest statement as completely objective and
free of some personal motivation. And they will be right: In truth, the use
of honesty is indeed a power strategy, intended to convince people of one’s
noble, goodehearted, selfless character. It is a form of persuasion, even a
subtle form of coercion.
Finally, those who claim to be nonplayers may affect an air of naiveté,
to protect them from the accusation that they are after power. Beware
again, however, for the appearance of naiveté can be an effective means of
deceit (see Law 21, Seem Dumber Than Your Mark). And even genuine
naiveté is not free of the snares of power. Children may be naive in many
ways, but they often act from an elemental need to gain control over those
around them. Children suffer greatly from feeling powerless in the adult
world, and they use any means available to get their way. Genuinely inno-
cent people may still be playing for power, and are often horribly effective
at the game, since they are not hindered by reflection. Once again, those
who make a show or display of innocence are the least innocent of all.
You can recognize these supposed nonplayers by the way they flaunt
their moral qualities, their piety, their exquisite sense of justice. But since
all of us hunger for power, and almost all of our actions are aimed at gain-
ing it, the nonplayers are merely throwing dust in our eyes, distracting us
from their power plays with their air of moral superiority. If you observe
them closely, you will see in fact that they are often the ones most skillful at
indirect manipuiation, even if some of them practice it unconsciously. And
they greatly resent any publicizing of the tactics they use every day.
If the world is like a giant scheming court and we are trapped inside it,
there is no use in trying to opt out of the game. That will only render you
powerless, and powerlessness will make you miserable. Instead of strug-
gling against the inevitable, instead of arguing and whining and feeling
guilty, it is far better to excel at power. In fact, the better you are at dealing
with power, the better friend, lover, husband, wife, and person you be
come. By following the route of the perfect courtier (see Law 24) you learn
to make others feel better about themselves, becoming a source ofpleasure
to them. They will grow dependent on your abilities and desirous of your
presence. By mastering the 48 laws in this book, you spare others the pain
that comes from bungling with power—~by playing with fire without know-
ing its properties. If the game of power is inescapable, better to be an artist
than 2. denier or a bungler.
Learning the game of power requires a certain way of looking at the world,
a shifting of perspective. It takes effort and years of practice, for much of
the game may not come naturally. Certain basic skills are required, and
once you master these skills you will be able to apply the laws of power
more easily.
The most important of these skills, and power’s crucial foundation, is
the ability to master your emotions. An emotional response to a. situation is
the single greatest barrier to power, a mistake that will cost you a lot more
than any temporary satisfaction you might gain by expressing your feel-
ings. Emotions cloud reason, and if you cannot see the situation clearly,
you cannot prepare for and respond to it with any degree of control.
Anger is the most destructive of emotional responses, for it clouds
your vision the most. It also has a ripple effect that invariably makes situa-
tions less controllable and heightens your enemy’s resolve. If you are try»
ing to destroy an enemy who has hurt you, far better to keep him off—guard
by feigning friendliness than showing your anger.
l
The old)“ means in gum
mm is main‘ with people
are fr7l‘1."£’ um] czmni/lg.
Low a/xv, /hey say; but
[/10] is /0 wail for
sunshine. and life needs
every‘ moment.
JUHANN vow (‘nomm-..
l749»— 1 832
The arrow rim! by tile
zzrdrc-rrn1l_,v or may not
kill (I .i~/'n;:le fI(‘I'\’(m. Hm
.¢rr(zI¢r;,Wn.s' rleviwri by (I
Wm’ man can lull we-n
hr]/)f’S in I/1:‘ womb.
K At : rn.rA .
lNI.|lI\N l’ll|Lf)SUl’lll K.
‘I lllltl) (’l,'\"l l?llY li.(‘.
Pl-RE FACE
rile
I thought to myself
With what means, with
what dtf(?P,‘[}!l0Il.\', with
how many varied arts,
with what! induxzry a
man sharpens his wits
to zleceive another.
and lhrough these
variations the world is
madc more beautiful.
FRA
' nsro V|;’l”l'()Rl,
(‘0.\Il|1MI‘(‘IR/\RY AND
FRIFND or
MA<‘rIIAvr|_i_I.
FA RI Y SI.Y'lT,FNTH
(‘FNTKI RY
There are no princi-
pl€SCl/1(’Y(,' are only
evmtr. There is no
good and had, there are
only «:ircmrIslumte,.r.
The superior man
C.\‘p()l4S(’.§' events and
circumstames in order
In guide them. If there
were principlm and
fixed laws, nations
would not change them
as we change our shirrs
and a man curt not be
expecrr/l to be wiser
than an entire mmnn.
HONORE Dr. BALZAC.
1'/‘)‘)~1 850
L1?
;'
PREFACE
Love and affection are also potentially destructive, in that they blind
you to the often self-serving interests of those whom you least suspect of
playing a power game. You cannot repress anger or love, or avoid feeling
them, and you should not try. But you should be careful about how you ex-
press them, and most important, they should never influence your plans
and strategies in any way.
Related to mastering your emotions is the ability to distance yourself
from the present moment and think objectively about the past and future.
Like Janus, the double—faced Roman deity and guardian of all gates and
doorways, you must be able to look in both directions at once, the better to
handle danger from wherever it comes. Such is the face you must create for
yourself-one face looking continuously to the future and the other to the
ast.
P
For the future, the motto is, “No days unalert.” Nothing should catch
you by surprise because you are constantly imagining problems before
they arise. Instead of spending your time dreaming of your plan’s happy
ending, you must work on calculating every possible permutation and pit-
fall that might emerge in it. The further you see, the more steps ahead you
plan, the more powerful you become.
The other face ofJanus looks constantly to the past—though not to re-
member past hurts or bear grudges. That would only curb your power.
Half of the game is learning how to forget those events in the past that eat
away at you and cloud your reason. The real purpose of the backward-
glancing eye is to educate yourself constantly—you look at the past to learn
from those who came before you. (The many historical examples in this
book will greatly help that process.) Then, having looked to the past, you
look closer at hand, to your own actions and those of your friends. This is
the most vital school you can learn from, because it comes from personal
experience.
You begin by examining the mistakes you have made in the past, the
ones that have most grievously held you back. You analyze them in terms
of the 48 laws of power, and you extract from them a lesson and an oath:
“I shall never repeat such a mistake; I shall never fall into such a trap
again.” If you can evaluate and observe yourself in this way, you can learn
to break the patterns of the past—an immensely valuable skill.
Power requires the ability to play with appearances. To this end you
must learn to wear many masks and keep a bag full of deceptive tricks. De-
ception and masquerade should not be seen as ugly or immoral. All human
interaction requires deception on many levels, and in some ways what sep—
arates humans from animals is our ability to lie and deceive. In Greek
myths, in India’s Mahabharata cycle, in the Middle Eastern epic of Gilga~
mesh, it is the privilege of the gods to use deceptive arts; a great man,
Odysseus for instance, wasjudged by his ability to rival the craftiness of the
gods, stealing some of their divine power by matching them in wits and de-
ception. Deception is a developed art of civilization and the most potent
weapon in the game of power.
You cannot succeed at deception unless you take a somewhat dis-
tanced approach to yourself——-unless you can be many different people,
wearing the mask that the day and the moment require. With such a flexi«
ble approach to all appearances, including your own, you lose a lot of the
inward heaviness that holds people down. Make your face as malleable as
the actor’s, work to conceal your intentions from others, practice luring
people into traps. Playing with appearances and mastering arts of decep
tion are among the aesthetic pleasures of life. They are also key compo«
nents in the acquisition of power.
If deception is the most potent weapon in your arsenal, then patience
in all things is your crucial shield. Patience will protect you from making
moronic blunders, Like mastering your emotions, patience is
:1 skill-—it
does not come naturally. But nothing about power is natural; power is
more godlike than anything in the natural world. And patience is the
supreme virtue of the gods, who have nothing but time. Everything good
will happen——-the grass will grow again, if you give it time and see several
steps into the future. Impatience, on the other hand, only makes you look
weak. It is a. principal impediment to power.
Power is essentially amoral and one of the most important skills to ac~
quire is the ability to see circumstances rather than good or evil. Power is a
game—-this cannot be repeated too often—and in games you do not judge
your opponents by their intentions but by the effect of their actions. You
measure their strategy and their power by what you can see and feel. How
often are someone’s intentions made the issue only to cloud and deceive!
What does it matter if another player, your friend or rival, intended good
things and had only your interests at heart, if the effects of his action lead to
so much min and confusion? It is only natural for people to cover up their
actions with all kinds ofjustifications, always assuming that they have acted
out of goodness. You must learn to inwardly laugh each time you hear this
and never get caught up in gauging someone’s intentions and actions
through a set of moral judgments that are really an excuse for the accumu-
lation of power.
It is a game. Your opponent sits opposite you. Both of you behave as
gentlemen or ladies, observing the rules of the game and taking nothing
personally. You play with
a strategy and you observe your opponent’s
moves with as much calmness as you can muster. In the end, you will ap-
preciate the politeness of those you are playing with more than their good
and sweet intentions. Train your eye to follow the results of their moves,
the outward circumstances, and do not be distracted by anything else.
Half of your mastery of power comes from what you do not do, what
you do not allow yourself to get dragged into. For this skill you must learn
tojudge all things by what they cost you. As Nietzsche wrote, “The value of
a thing sometimes lies not in what one attains with it, but in what one pays
l
for it——what it costs us.” Perhaps you will attain your goal, and a worthy goal
at that, but at what price? Apply this standard to everything, including
whether to collaborate with other people or come to their aid. In the end,
PREFACE
.
mi
xxii
PREFACE
r“'"“”‘fi
life is short, opportunities are few, and you have only so much energy to
draw on. And in this sense time is as important a consideration as any
other. Never waste valuable time, or mental peace of mind, on the affairs of
others—that is too high a price to pay.
Power is a social game. To learn and master it, you must develop the
ability to study and understand people. As the great seventeenth-century
thinker and courtier Baltasar Gracién wrote: “Many people spend time
studying the properties of animals or herbs; how much more important it
would be to study those of people, with whom we must live or die!” To be a
master player you must also be a master psychologist. You must recognize
motivations and see through the cloud of dust with which people surround
their actions. An understanding of people’s hidden motives is the single
greatest piece of knowledge you can have in acquiring power. It opens up
endless possibilities of deception, seduction, and manipulation.
People are of infinite complexity and you can spend a lifetime watch-
ing them without ever fully understanding them. So it is all the more im-
portant, then, to begin your education now. In doing so you must also keep
one principle in mind: Never discriminate
as to whom you study and
whom you trust. Never trust anyone completely and study everyone, in-
cluding friends and loved ones.
Finally, you must learn always to take the indirect route to power. Dis-
guise your cunning. Like a billiard ball that caroms several times before it
hits its target, your moves must be planned and developed in the least ob
vious way. By training yourself to be indirect, you can thrive in the modern
court, appearing the paragon of decency while being the consummate ma-
nipulator.
Consider The 48 Laws ofPower a kind of handbook on the arts of indirec»
tion. The laws are based on the writings of men and women who have
studied and mastered the game of power. These writings span a period of
more than three thousand years and were created in civilizations as dis»
parate
as ancient China and Renaissance Italy; yet they share common
threads and themes, together hinting at an essence of power that has yet to
be fully articulated. The 48 laws of power are the distillation of this accu-
mulated wisdom, gathered from the writings of the most illustrious strate
gists (Sun-tzu, Clausewitz),
statesmen (Bismarck, Talleyrand),
courtiers
(Castiglione, Gracién), seducers (Ninon de Lenclos, Casanova), and con
artists (“Yellow Kid” Weil) in history.
The laws have a simple premise: Certain actions almost always in-
crease one’s power (the observance of the law), while others decrease it
and even ruin us (the transgression of the law). These transgressions and
observances are illustrated by historical examples. The laws are timeless
and definitive.
T7ze 48 Laws ofPower can be used in several ways. By reading the book
straight through you can learn about power in general. Although several of
the laws may seem not to pertain directly to your life, in time you will
probably find that all of them have some application, and that in fact they
are interrelated. By getting an overview of the entire subject you will best
be able to evaluate your own past actions and gain a greater degree of con-
trol over your immediate affairs. A thorough reading of the book will in»
spire thinking and reevaluation long after you finish it.
The book has also been designed for browsing and for examining the
law that seems at that particular moment most pertinent to you. Say you
are experiencing problems with a superior and cannot understand why
your efforts have not lead to more gratitude or a promotion. Several laws
specifically address the master-underling relationship, and you are almost
certainly transgressing one of them. By browsing the initial paragraphs for
the 48 laws in the table of contents, you can identify the pertinent law.
Finally, the book can be browsed through and picked apart for enter-
tainrnent. for an enjoyable ride through the foibles and great deeds of our
predecessors in power. A warning, however, to those who use the book for
this purpose: It might be better to tum back. Power is endlessly seductive
and deceptive in its own way. It is a 1abyrinth—your mind becomes con-
sumed with solving ifs infinite problems, and you soon realize how pleas-
antly lost you have become. In other words, it becomes most amusing by
taking it seriously. Do not be frivolous with such a critical matter. The gods
of power frown on the frivolous; they give ultimate satisfaction only to
those who study and reflect, and punish those who skim the surfaces look-
ing for a good time.
Any man who tries to be good all the time is bound to come to ruin
among the great number who are not good. Hence :2 prince who wants
to keep his authority must [mm how not to be good, and use that
knowledge, or rgfiain
wing it, as necessity requires.
THE PRINCE, Niu.-011) Machiavelli, 7469- 7527
PREFACE
cmciii
LAW
I¢E\/EI{()[TTSI{IDJE
'TIIE B4AiYFEI{
JUDGMENT
Always make those shave yau feel comfartably superior
In your desim to ptease and impress them, do not go too
far in dispfaying your talents or you might accomplish
the o[)posite——inspire fear and insecurity. Make your
masters appear more brilliant than they are and you will
attain the heights ofpowen
9
LAW
1
TRANSCRESSION OF THE LAW
Nicolas Fouquet, Louis XIV’s finance minister in the first years of his reign,
was a generous man who loved lavish parties, pretty women, and poetry.
He also loved money, for he led an extravagant lifestyle. Fouquet was
clever and very much indispensable to the king, so when the prime mim's—
ter, Jules Mazarin, died, in 1661, the finance minister expected to be
named the successor. Instead, the king decided to abolish the position. This
and other signs made Fouquet suspect that he was falling out of favor, and
so he decided to ingraliate himself with the king by staging the most spec-
tacular party the world had ever
seen. The party’s ostensible purpose
would be to commemorate the completion of Fouquet’s chateau, Vaux—le-
Vicomte, but its real function was to pay tribute to the king, the guest of
honor.
The most brilliant nobility of Europe and some of the greatest minds
of the Iime—La Fontaine, La Rochefoucauld, Madame de Sévigné—
attended the party. Moliere wrote a play for the occasion, in which he
himself was to perform at the evening’s conclusion. The party began with a
lavish
seven—course dinner, featuring foods from the Orient never be-
fore tasted in France, as well as new dishes created especially for the night.
The meal
was accompanied with music commissioned by Fouquet to
honor the king.
After dinner there was a promenade through the chateau’s gardens.
The grounds and fountains of Vaux—le»Vicomte were to be the inspiration
for Versailles.
Fouquet personally accompanied the young king through the geomet-
rically aligned arrangements of shrubbery and flower beds. Arriving at the
gardens’ canals, they witnessed a fireworks display, which was followed by
the performance of Moliere’s play. The party ran well into the night and
everyone agreed it was the most amazing affair they had ever attended.
The next day, Fouquet was arrested by the king’s head musketeer,
D’Artagna.n. Three months later he went on trial for stealing from the
country’s treasury. (Actually, most of the stealing he was accused of he had
done on the kings behalf and with the king’s permission.) Fouquet was
found guilty and sent to the most isolated prison in France, high in the
Pyrenees Mountains, where he spent the last twenty years of his life in soli-
tary confinement.
Interpretation
Louis XIV, the Sun King, was a proud and arrogant man who wanted to be
the center of attention at all times; he could not countenance being out-
done in lavishness by anyone, and certainly not his finance minister. To
succeed Fouquet, Louis chose _]ean—Baptiste Colbert, a man famous for his
parsimony and for giving the dullest parties in Paris. Colbert made sure
that any money liberated from the treasury went straight into Louis’s
hands. With the money, Louis built a palace even more magnificent than
Fouquet’s—the glorious palace of Versailles. He used the same architects,
decorators, and garden designer. And at Versailles, Louis hosted parties
even more extravagant than the one that cost Fouquet his freedom.
Let us examine the situation. The evening of the party, as Fouquet pre-
sented spectacle on spectacle to Louis, each more magnificent than the one
before, he imagined the affair as demonstrating his loyalty and devotion to
the king. Not only did he think the party would put him back in the king’s
favor, he thought it would show his good taste, his connections, and his
popularity, making him indispensable to the king and demonstrating that
he would make an excellent prime minister. Instead, however, each new
spectacle, each appreciative smile bestowed by the guests on Fouquet,
made it seem to Louis that his
own friends and subjects were
more
charmed by the finance minister than by the king himself, and that Fouquet
was actually flauming his wealth and power. Rather than flattering Louis
XXV, Fouquet’s elaborate party offended the king’s vanity. Louis would not
admit this to anyone, of course-—-instead, he found a convenient excuse to
rid himself of a man who had inadvertently made him feel insecure.
Such is the fate, in some form or other, of all those who unbalance the
master’s sense of self, poke holes in his vanity, or make him doubt his pro
eminence.
When the wming began, Fouquet was at the to}: of the world.
By the time it had ended, he was at the bottom.
Voltaire, 16.944 778
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In the early 1600s, the Italian astronomer and mathematician Galileo
found himself in a precarious position. He depended on the generosity of
great rulers to support his research, and so, like all Renaissance scientists,
he would sometimes make gifts of his inventions and discoveries to the
leading patrons of the time. Once, for instance, he presented a militaiy
compass he had invented to the Duke of Gonzaga. Then he dedicated a
book explaining the use of the compass to the Medicis. Both rulers were
grateful, and through them Galileo was able to find more students to teach.
No matter how great the discovery, however, his patrons usually paid him
with gifts, not cash. This made for a life of constant insecurity and depen-
dence. There must be an easier way, he thought.
Galileo hit on a new strategy in l6l0, when he discovered the moons
of Jupiter. Instead of dividing the discovery among his patrons—giving
one the telescope he had used, dedicating a book to another, and so on—as
he had done in the past, he decided to focus exclusively on the Medicis. He
chose the Medicis for one reason: Shortly after Cosimo I had established
the Medici dynasty, in 1540, he had made Jupiter, the mightiest of the
gods, the Medici symbol—a symbol of a. power that went beyond politics
and banking, one linked to ancient Rome and its divinities.
Galileo turned his discovery of _]upiter’s moons into a cosmic event
LAW
1
33
-1’
,
LAW]
honoring the Medicis’ greatness. Shortly after the discovery, he announced
that “the bright stars [the moons ofjupiterl offered themselves in the heav~
ens” to his telescope at the same time as Cosimo II’s enthronement. He
said that the number of the moons-—-four——harmonized with the number of
the Medicis (Cosimo II had three brothers) and that the moons orbitecl
Jupiter as these four sons revolved around Cosimo I, the dynasty’ s founder.
More than coincidence, this showed that the heavens themselves reflected
the ascendancy of the Medici family. After he dedicated the discovery to
the Medicis, Galileo commissioned an emblem representingJupiter sitting
on a cloud with the four stars circling about him, and presented this to
Cosimo II as a symbol of his link to the stars.
In 1610 Cosimo II made Galileo his official court philosopher and
mathematician, with a full salary. For a scientist this was the coup of a life»
time. The days of begging for patronage were over.
Interpretation
In one stroke, Galileo gained more with his new strategy than he had in
years of begging. The reason is simple: All masters want to appear more
brilliant than other people.
They do not care about science or empirical tmth or the latest inven~
tion; they care about their name and their glory. Galileo gave the Medicis
infinitely more glory by linking their name with cosmic forces them he had
by making them the patrons of some new scientific gadget or discovery.
Scientists are not spared the vagaries of court life and patronage. They
too must serve masters who hold the purse strings. And their great intellec-
tual powers can make the master feel insecure, as if he were only there to
supply the funds~—an ugly, ignoble job. The producer of a great work
wants to feel he is more thanjust the provider of the financing. He wants to
appear creative and powerful, and also more important than the work pro~
duoed in his name. Instead of insecurity you must give him glory. Galileo
did not challenge the intellectual authority of the Medicis with his discov~
ery, or make them feel inferior in any way; by literally aligning them with
the stars, he made them shine brilliantly among the courts of Italy. He did
not outshine the master, he made the master outshine all others.
KEYS TO POWER
Everyone has insecurities. When you show yourself in the world and dis-
play your talents, you naturally stir up all kinds of resentment, envy, and
other manifestations of insecurity. This is to be expected. You cannot spend
your life worrying about the petty feelings of others. With those above you,
however, you must take a different approach: When it comes to power,
outshining the master is perhaps the worst mistake of all.
Do not fool yourself into thinking that life has changed much since the
days of Louis XIV and the Medicis. Those who attain high standing in life
are like kings and queens: They want to feel secure in their positions, and
superior to those around them in intelligence, wit, and charm. It is a. deadly
but common misperception to believe that by displaying and vaunting
your gifts and talents, you are winning the master’s affection. He may feign
appreciation, but at his first opportunity he will replace you with someone
less intelligent, less attractive, less threatening, just as Louis XIV replaced
the sparkling Fouquet with the bland Colbert. And as with Louis, he will
not admit the tmth, but will find an excuse to rid himself of your presence.
This Law involves two rules that you must realize, First, you can inad-
vertently outshine a master simply by being yourself. There are masters
who are more insecure than others, nronstrously insecure; you may natu-
rally outshine them by your charm and grace.
No one had more natural talents than Astorre Manfredi, prince of
Faenza. The most handsome of all the young princes of Italy, he captivated
his subjects with his generosity and open spirit.
In the year 1500, Cesare Borgia laid siege to Faenza. When the city
surrendered, the citizens expected the worst from the cruel Borgia, who,
however, decided to spare the town: He simply occupied its fortress, exe-
cuted none of its citizens, and allowed Prince Manfredi, eighteen at the
time, to remain with his court, in complete freedom.
A few weeks later, though, soldiers hauled Astorre Manfredi away to a
Roman prison. A year after that, his body was fished out of the River
Tiber, a stone tied around his neck. Borgiajustified the horrible deed with
some sort of tmmped~up charge of treason and conspiracy, but the real
problem was that he was notoriously vain and insecure. The young man
was outshining him without even trying. Given Manfredi’s natural talents,
the prince’s mere presence made Borgia seem less attractive and charis-
matic. The lesson is simple: If you cannot help being charming and supe~
not, you must learn to avoid sud: monsters of vanity. Either that, or find a
way to mute your good qualities when in the company of a Cesare Borgia.
Second, never imagine that because the master loves you, you can do
anything you want. Entire books could be written about favorites who fell
out of favor by taking their status for granted, for daring to outshine. In
late-sixteentbcenturyjapan, the favorite of Emperor Hideyoshi was a man
called Sen no Rikyu. The premier artist of the tea ceremony, which had be-
come an obsession with the nobility, he was one of Hideyoshi’s most
trusted advisers, had his own apartment in the palace, and was honored
throughout japan. Yet in 1591, Hideyoshi had him arrested and sentenced
to death. Rikyu took his own life, instead. The cause for his sudden change
of fortune was discovered later: It seems that Rikyu, former peasant and
later court favorite, had had a wooden statue made of himself wearing san-
dals (a Sign of nobility) and posing loftily. He had had this statue placed in
the most important temple inside the palace gates, in clear sight of the roy-
alty who often would pass by. To Hidcyoshi this signified that Rikyu had
no sense of limits. Presurning that he had the same rights as those of the
highest nobility, he had forgotten that his position depended on the em»
peror, and had come to believe that he had earned it on his own. This was
LAW
1
6
LAW
1
an unforgivable miscalculation of his own importance and he paid for it
with his life.
Remember the following:
Never take your position for
granted and never let any favors you receive go to your head.
Knowing the dangers of outshining your master, you can turn this Law
to your advantage. First you must flatter and puff up your master. Overt
flattery can be effective but has its limits; it is too direct and obvious, and
looks bad to other courtiers. Discreet flattery is much more powerful. If
you are more intelligent than your master, for example, seem the opposite:
Make him appear more intelligent than you. Act naive. Make it seem that
you need his expertise. Commit harmless mistakes that will not hurt you in
the long run but will give you the chance to ask for his help. Masters adore
such requests. A master who cannot bestow on you the
of his experi-
ence may direct rancor and ill will at you instead.
If your ideas are more creative than your master’s, ascribe them to
him, in as public a manner as possible. Make it clear that your advice is
merely an echo of his advice.
If you surpass your master in wit, it is okay to play the role of the court
jester, but do not make him appear cold and surly by comparison. Tone
down your humor if necessary, and find ways to make him seem the dis-
penser of amusement and good cheer. If you are naturally more sociable
and generous than your master, be careful not to be the cloud that blocks
his radiance from others. He must appear as the sun around which every-
one revolves, radiating power and brilliance, the center of attention. If you
are thrust into the position of entertaining him, a display of your limited
means may win you his sympathy. Any attempt to impress him with your
grace and generosity can prove fatal: Learn from Fouquet or pay the price.
In all of these cases it is not a weakness to disguise your strengths if
in the end they lead to power. By letting others outshine you, you remain
in control, instead of being a victim of their insecurity. This will all come in
handy the day you decide to rise above your inferior status. If, like Galileo,
you can make your master shine even more in the eyes of others, then you
are a godsend and you will be instantly promoted.
Image:
The Stars in the
Sky. There can be only
one
sun at
a time. Never
obscure
the sunlight,
or
rival the sun's brilliance‘,
rather, fade into the sky and
find ways to heighten
the
master star’s
intensity.
Authority: Avoid outsliining the master. All superiority is odious, but the
superiority of a subject over his prince is not only stupid, it. is fatal. This is a
lesson that the stars in the sky Leach us-—--they may be related to the sun,
and just as brilliant, but they never appear in her company. (Baltasar
Grzutifm, llilll-I658}
REVERSAI.
You cannot worry about upsetting every person you come across, but you
must be selectively cruel. If your superior is a falling star, there is nothing
to fear from outshining him. Do not be merciful-—-your master had no such
scruples in his own cold—blooded climb to the top. Gauge his strength. If he
is weak, discreetly hasten his downfall: Outclo, outchann, outsmart him at
key moments. If he is very weak and ready to fall, let nature take its course.
Do not risk outshining a feeble superior--it might appear cruel or spiteful.
But if your master is firm in his position, yet you know yourself to be the
more capable, hide your time and be patient. It is the natural course of
things that power eventually fades and weakens. Your master will fall
someday, and if you play it right, you will outlive and someday outshine
him.
LAW
1
z
LAW
NEVER PUT TOO MUCH
TRUST IN FRIENDS, LEARN
HOW TO USE ENEMIES
JU D GM ENT
Be wary zyffn'emds-they will betray you more quickly, for
they are easily aroused to envy. They also became spaileri
and tyrannical. But hive afmmer enemy and he will be
mofre loyal than a fiimd, because he has more to pmve.
Infact, you have mam tofearfmmfviemls thanfivm en—
emies. Ifyou have no emmnies, find a may to make them.
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
In the mid—ninth century A.l.)., a young man named Michael III assumed
the throne of the Byzantine Empire. His mother, the Empress Theodora,
had been banished to a nunnery, and her lover, Theoctistus, had been mur-
dered; at the head of the conspiracy to depose Theodora and enthrone
Michael had been Michael’s uncle, Bardas, a man ofintelligence and a:mbi~
tion. Michael was now a young, inexperienced ruler, surrounded by in»
triguers, murderers, and profligates. In this
time of peril he needed
someone he could trust as his councillor, and his thoughts turned to Basil~
ius, his best friend. Basilius had no experience whatsoever in government
and politics——-in fact, he was the head of the royal stables——buI he had
proven his love and gratitude time and again.
They had met a few years before, when Michael had been visiting the
stables just as a wild horse got loose. Basilius, a. young groom from peasant
Macedonian stock, had saved Michael’s life. The gmom’s strength and
courage had impressed Michael, who immediately raised Basilius from the
obscurity of being a horse trainer to the position of head of the stables. He
loaded his friend with gifts and favors and they became inseparable. Basil-
ius was sent to the finest school in Byzantium, and the crude peasant be—
came a cultured and sophisticated courtier.
Now Michael was emperor, and in need of someone loyal. Who could
he better trust with the post of chamberlain and chief councillor than a
young man who owed him everything?
Basilius could be trained for the job and Michael loved him like a
brother. Ignoring the advice of those who recommended the much more
qualified Bardas, Michael chose his friend.
Basilius learned well and was soon advising the emperor on all matters
of state. The only problem seemed to be money-——Basilius never had
enough. Exposure to the splendor of Byzantine court life made him avari-
cious for the perks of power. Michael doubled, then tripled his salary, en-
nobled him, and married him off to his own mistress, Eudoxia Ingerina.
Keeping such a trusted friend and adviser satisfied was worth any price.
But more trouble was to come. Bardas was now head of the army, and
Basilius convinced Michael mat the man was hopelessly ambitious. Under
the illusion that he could control his nephew, Bardas had conspired to put
him on the throne, and he could conspire again, this time to get rid of
Michael
and
assume the
crown himself. Basilius poured poison into
Michael’s ear until the emperor agreed to have his uncle murdered. During
a great horse race, Basilius closed in on Bardas in the crowd and stabbed
him to death. Soon after, Basilius asked that he replace Bardas as head of
the army, where he could keep control of the realm and quell rebellion.
This was granted.
Now Basilius’s power and wealth only grew, and a few years later
Michael, in financial straits from his own extravagance, asked him to pay
back some of the money he had borrowed over the years. To Michael’s
shock and astonishment, Basilius refused, with a look of such impudence
To have a good enemy,
choose a /rierld.' He
knows where to mike.
DIANE DE Pomrns,
l499~»l566, Mismess or
HENRI II or Fnawcr,
Every mm: I bestow a
vacant ajffice :7 make 52
hundred discontented
persons and one
ingraze.
LOUIS XIV, 1638-1715
Thus for my own part
I have more than omze
been (leroived by the
person I loved moss
and of whose love.
above‘ everyone else Cr,
I have been most r:/on}?
denr. So that I believe
that it may be/viggizt to
love arzd¥€efi‘/re one
person above all others,
according to merit and
worth. but never to
trust .\'0 much in this
tempting trap of/'n'eml-
ship as to have cause to
repent of it later an.
BALDASSARF,
CASTIGLIONE,
1*-178452‘)
LAW 2
9
rt
|'| Ha
>.\,\|\l2
|‘l ll-.
\l{Mlxlt. »\\l)‘l‘Hl“
é€|<1R()\
/\
make
chased
by
Imnteris as/(ed a furrrwr
In lave ifs life. To hide it
from
its
pur.\'uer.\;
the
finmer .aqna£te(l amt lei
(hr Snake crawl inn) his
belly
Bu!
when
the
tlangttr had pasxswl and
the [unuer cwketl the
snake to coma out. zhe
xnake rrfusml. Ir
was
warm and safiz inside.
On his way harm», the
/7um saw a heron and
worn‘ up
:0 him and
whispered
what had
huppemerl. Tim heron
told him to mud: and
smzin
to
eject
the
make. When the snake
snm;k its head (ml, the
heron caughl it. pulled it
our, and killed
it.
The
former was worried that
the makfs polxrzn
Inighl
will
be
inside
him,
and
the
heron
told him (ha! the Lure
for snakz’ poison was
to cook and eat sit
white fowl.
“ You ‘re
(1
while fowl,
"
.\'(Ii(l
Y h a farmer.
"You'll
do far
a
start.
”
He grabbed
the’ heron. put it in at
bag,
h 0
and
carried it
me, where he
hung 2'! up while he
told his wife
whal
had
happened.
"I'm surprised at
you,
" suit! the wife.
"The hird timer
you
a
kimlrms‘.
rizls you ofthv evil
in your belly,
.save.\‘ your Ilia in
fact,
yet
you
(arch if tmcl talk
of
killing
it."
She
immedi-
ate!)
J releaxetl
the henm, and
it flew
3 ul
0
away.
n its
way, it gouged
out her eyes.
M0
7 at‘;
When
you
.\'(’(:'
water
/ l 0 w i n g
1:phiIl , it
m€u!’LS‘ that
that the emperor suddenly realized his predicament: The former stable
boy had more money, more allies in the army and senate, and in the end
more power than the emperor himself. A few weeks later, after a night of
heavy drinking, Michael awoke to find himself surrounded by soldiers.
Basilius watched as they stabbed the emperor to death. Then, after pro-
claiming himself emperor, he rode his horse through the streets of Byzan-
tium, brandishing the head of his former benefactor and best friend at the
end of a long pike.
Interpretation
Michael III staked his future on the sense of gratitude he thought Basilius
must feel for him. Surely Basilius would serve him best; he owed the em-
peror his wealth, his education, and his position. Then, once Basilius was in
power, anything he needed it was best to give to him, strengthening the
bonds between the two men. It was only on the fateful day when the em-
peror saw that impudent smile on Basilius’s face that he realized his deadly
mistake.
He had created a monster. He had allowed a man to see power up
close-—a man who then wanted more, who asked for anything and got it,
who felt encumbered by the charity he had received and simply did what
many people do in such a situation: They forget the favors they have re-
ceived and imagine they have earned their success by their own merits.
At Michael’s moment of realization, he could still have saved his own
life, but friendship and love blind every man to their interests. Nobody be—
Iieves a friend can betray. And Michael went on disbelieving until the day
his head ended up on a pike.
Lord, protect mefrum myfriends; I can take care qf my enemies.
Volmlre, 1694-1778
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
For several centuries after the fall of the Han Dynasty {A.D. 222}, Chinese his-
tory followed the same pattern of violent and bloody coups, one after the
other. Army men would plot to kill a weak emperor, then would replace him
on the Dragon Throne with a strong general. The general would start a new
dynasty and crown himselfemperor; to ensure his own survival he would kill
offhis fellow generals. A few years later, however, the pattern would resume:
New generals would rise up and assassinate him or his sons in their turn. To
be emperor of China was to be alone, surrounded by a pack of enemies—it
was the least powerful, least secure position in the realm.
In A.D. 959, General Chao K’uang—yin became Emperor Sung. He
knew the adds, the probability that within a year or two he would be mur-
dered; how could he break the pattern? Soon after becoming emperor,
Sung ordered a banquet to celebrate the new dynasty, and invited the most
powerful commanders in the army. After they had drunk much wine, he
somcrmc is repaying or kirzrlnmzxt
AFRICAN /-‘oz./4 1;: LE
dismissed the guards and everybody else except the generals, who now
feared he would murder them in one fell swoop. Instead, he addressed
them: “The whole day is spent in fear, and I am unhappy both at the table
and in my bed. For which one of you does not dream of ascending the
throne? I do not doubt your allegiance, but if by some chance your subor-
dinates, seeking wealth and position, were to force the emperor’s yellow
robe upon you in turn, how could you refuse it?” Drunk and tearing for
their lives, the generals proclaimed their innocence and their loyalty. But
Sung had other ideas: “The best way to pass one’s days is in peaceful en~
joyment of riches and honor. If you are willing to give up your commands,
I am ready to provide you with line estates and beautiful dwellings where
you may take your pleasure with singers and girls as your companions.”
The astonished generals realized that instead of a life of anxiety and
struggle Sung was offering them riches and security. The next day, all of
the generals tendered their resignations, and they retired as nobles to the
estates that Sung bestowed on them.
In one stroke, Sung turned a pack of “friendly” wolves, who would
likely have betrayed him, into a group of docile lambs, fax from all power.
Over the next few years Sung continued his campaign to secure his
rule. In A.D. 971, King Lin of the Southern Han finally surrendered to him
after years of rebellion. To Liu’s astonishment, Sung gave him a rank in the
imperial court and invited him to the palace to seal their newfound friend-
ship with wine. As King Liu took the glass that Sung offered him, he hesi-
tated, fearing it contained poison. “Your subject’s crimes certainly merit
death,” he cried out, “but I beg Your Majesty to spare your subject’s life. In-
deed I dare not drink this wine.” Emperor Sung laughed, took the glass
from Lin, and swallowed it himself. There was no poison. From then on
Liu became his most trusted and loyal friend.
At the time, China had splintered into many smaller kingdoms. When
Ch’ien Shu, the king of one of these, was defeated, Sung’s ministers ad-
vised the emperor to lock this rebel up. They presented documents prov-
ing that he was still conspiring to kill Sung. When Ch’ien Shu came to visit
the emperor, however, instead of locking him up, Sung honored him. He
also gave him a package, which he told the former king to open when he
was halfway home. Ch’ien Shu opened the bundle on his return journey
and saw that it contained all the papers documenting his conspiracy. He re-
alized that Sung knew of his murderous plans, yet had spared him nonethe-
less. This generosity won him over, and he too became one of Sung’s most
loyal vassals.
Interpretation
A Chinese proverb compares friends to the jaws and teeth of a dangerous
animal: If you are not careful, you will find them chewing you up. Emperor
Sung knew the jaws he was passing between when he assumed the throne:
His “friends” in the army would chew him up like meat, and if he some-
how survived, his “friends” in the government would have him for supper.
'1‘/iere are rmmy who
think zlzerefizre thzu a
wise prince ought,
when he has the
chance, 10 form-m
astzarely some cnmizy,
so that by rlcpprmirirzg
it he willu1:gn1mtl1is'
_ur4m(nm-.s‘. f’rin«'ex, and
espwizzlly new ones,
have found more fair/1
and more uxejiilmzss in
those men. whom :11 the
bcgimiing of their
power they regarded
with ruspicimi. than in
those they tztfirsl
confided in. Pandolfo
}’c'lru<::'i, primte nf
Stems. gm-‘Billed his
State more by Iiwse
it-liom he sltspecrezi
[Iran by oilzers.
Nxcrtnt) NlACHl.-\\‘l;‘LLL
ls:l6‘J- ) 527
A brahmzm. a great
expert in Veda who has
become a great archer
as well, offers his
.s‘t?rL'It'(,'.\' Ir) Iris grmrl
frimd, who is now the
king. The hruhrn/In
tries am when he sees
I/14’ king, "kemgnize
me, yu1u'V/"/'z'cm1.r"’T/u’
king atzswers /rim with
comempt and than
t'.\‘[)1l1iI1S."‘YL'.V, we wcna
fricm1.\' Iznfrme, but our
friewzis/1/p war based
[NZ lvlltll [1(7Mv’6’)' WP
had.
.
.
. I w:1rfrie'nzI.s'
with van. good
hmhnmn. hecttmsv it
served my purpose. No
pauper is friend to the
rich. no fool to the
wisr. no rmvzml to rim
LAW 2
II
brave. An, Old friim/I-—
who needs him? It is
two men ofeqnal
wealth and equal birth
who rmi1racrfrier1d-
ship and marriage, not
(1 rich man and (I
pauper.
.
. ./in old
friend—- who needs
him?
‘i Hi-, MAHABH.IxRA’lA,
I". rnum L:«_=N'r1;RY ac.
Pick up n beefrom
klIH]I1E‘S,\‘, and learn (he
liIm'ruIlrm.i u/‘kindmzws.
SIIH PR()VEl{l.i
M(III are mun! remly ll)
repay an injury than a
bz:ru:j7‘t, Iwmme grilli-
tude is
£1‘ burden and
revenge it pleasme.
T.-ugnus, c. An 55-420
1.‘)
LAW 2
Emperor Sung would have no truck with “friends”—-he bribed his fellow
generals with splendid estates and kept them far away. This was a much
better way to emasculate them than killing them, which would only have
led other generals to seek vengeance. And Sung would have nothing to do
with “friendly” ministers. More often than not, they would end up drinking
his famous cup of poisoned wine.
Instead of relying on friends, Sung used his enemies, one after the
other, transforming them into far more reliable subjects. While a friend ex-
pects more and more favors, and seethes with jealousy, these former £:ne~
mies expected nothing and got everything. A man suddenly spared the
guillotine is a grateful man indeed, and will go to the ends of the earth for
the man who has pardoned him. In time, these former enemies became
Sung’s most trusted friends.
And Sung was finally able to break the pattern of coups, violence, and
civil war—the Sung Dynasty ruled China for more than three hundred
years.
In a speech Abraham Lincoln delivererl at the height of the (Ii:/il War,
he referred to the Southerners as
_fellow human beings who were in
error. An elderly lady chastised himfor not calling them irremncilable
enemies who must be destroyed. “Why, madam,”L2'ncoln replied,
“do I not destroy my enemies when I make them myfr2Tends?”
KEYS TO POWER
It is natural to want to employ your friends when you find yourself in times
of need. The world is a harsh place, and your friends soften the harshness.
Besides, you know them. ‘Why depend on a stronger when you have a
friend at hand?
The problem is that you often do not know your friends as well as you
imagine. Friends often agree on things in order to avoid an argument.
They cover up their unpleasant qualifies so as to not offend each other.
They laugh extra hard at each other’s jokes. Since honesty rarely strength-
ens friendship, you may never know how a friend tmly feels. Friends will
say that they love your poetry, adore your music, envy your taste in
clothes———maybe they mean it, often they do not.
When you decide to hire a friend, you gradually discover the qualities
he or she has kept hidden. Strangely enough, it is your act of kindness that
unbalances everything. People want to feel they deserve their good for-
tune. The receipt of a favor can become oppressive: It means you have
been chosen because you are a friend, not necessarily because you are do
serving. There is almost a touch of condescension in the act of hiring
friends that secretly afflicts them. The injury will come out slowly: A little
more honesty, flashes of resentment and envy here and there, and before
you know it your friendship fades. The more favors and gifts you supply to
revive the friendship, the less gratitude you receive.
Ingratitude has along and deep history. It has demonstrated its powers
for so many centuries, that it is truly amazing that people continue to un
derestimate them. Better to be wary. If you never expect gratitude from a
friend, you will be pleasantly surprised when they do prove grateful.
The problem with using or hiring friends is that it will inevitably limit
your power. The friend is rarely the one who is most able to help you; and
in the end, skill and competence are far more important than friendly feel-
ings. (Michael Ill had a man right under his nose who would have steered
him right and kept him alive: That man was Bardas.)
All working situations require a kind of distance between people. You
are trying to work, not make friends; friendliness (real or false) only ob
scores that fact. The key to power, then, is the ability to judge who is best
able to further your interests in all situations. Keep friends for friendship,
but work with the skilled and competent.
Your enemies, on the other hand, are an untapped gold mine that you
must learn to exploit. When Talleyrancl, Napc-leon’s foreign minister, de-
cided in 1807 that his boss was leading France to ruin, and the time had
come to turn against him, he understood the dangers of conspiring against
the emperor; he needed a partner, a confederate-——-what friend could he
trust in such a project? He chose Joseph Fouché, head of the secret police,
his most hated enemy, a man who had even tried to have him assassinated.
He knew that their former hatred would create an opportunity for an emo~
tional reconciliation. He knew that Fouché would expect nothing from
him, and in fact would work to prove that he was worthy of Talleyra.nd’s
choice; a person who has something to prove will move mountains for you.
Finally, he knew that his relationship with Fouché would be based on mu-
tual selfiinterest, and would not be contaminated by personal feeling. The
selection proved perfect; although the conspirators did not succeed in top-
pling Napoleon, the union of such powerful but unlikely partners gener-
ated much interest in the cause; opposition to the emperor slowly began to
spread. And from then on, Talleyi-and and Fouché had a. fruitful working
relationship. Whenever you can, bury the hatchet with an enemy, and
make a point of putting him in your service.
V
As Lincoln said, you destroy an enemy when you make a friend of
him. In 1971, during the Vietnam War, Henry Kissinger was the target of
an unsuccessful kidnapping attempt, a conspiracy involving, among others,
the renowned antiwar activist priests the Berrigan brothers, four more
Catholic priests, and four nuns. In private, without informing the Secret
Service or the justice Department, Kissinger arranged a Saturday-morning
meeting with three of the alleged kidnappers. Explaining to his guests that
he would have most American soldiers out of Vietnam by mid-1972, he
completely charmed them. They gave him some “Kidnap Kissinger” but»
tons and one of them remained a friend of his for years, visiting him on
several occasions. This was not just 8. onetime ploy: Kissinger made a pol-
icy of working with those who disagreed with him. Colleagues commented
that he seemed to get along better with his enemies than with his friends.
Without enemies around us, we grow lazy. An enemy at our heels
sharpens our wits, keeping us focused and alert. It is sometimes better,
l‘li()l‘l'l'l\A'» l\l\' til If
I'.\l.\1||2$
King Iliero clumceri
upon it time. .vpeakin_;,r
with one ()f]‘1tS
enemies. to be told in a
rrproacliful rmzrzrmr
that he had stinking
brculli. lrV/wrc’upon the
good kmg, bring some-
whrzz di.9:rza_wd in
Izim.ve‘I/I as soon as he
mtlrrnmi hanw chided
his wife, “How does it
Imppm Ihm you never
told me 0/‘this pm!»
(em?
" The wonum.
bring a simple. chrlsir,
um! hrrwnivss rlame,
Said. “Sir, I /um’ thought
all max k lmazniz imri
smaller! so.
" Thus it is
plain that faults that
are evzdml lo the
senses. gross‘ and
corpu/'u!, or otherwise
noiorrous tn the world.
we know by our
e'm°mim Sooner than
by um'frieml.s and
familiar;
PLUTARCII.
c. A.I). 46-120
LAW 2
13
14
LAW 2
then, to use enemies as enemies rather than transforming them into friends
or allies.
Mao Tse-tung saw conflict as key in his approach to power. In 1937 the
Japanese invaded China, i.nte.rrupi:i:ug the aim‘! war between Mods Com-
munists and their enemy, the Nationalists.
Fearing that the Japanese would wipe them out, some Communist
leaders advocated leaving the Nationalists to fight the Japanese, and using
the time to recuperate. Mao disagreed: The Japanese could not possibly
defeat and occupy a vast country like China for long. Once they left, the
Communists would have grown rusty if they had been out of combat for
several years, and would be ill prepared to reopen their struggle with the
Nationalists. To fight a formidable foe like the Japanese, in fact, would be
the perfect training for the Communists’ ragtag army. Mao’s plan
was
adopted, and it worked: By the time the Japanese finally retreated, the
Communists had gained the fighting experience that helped them defeat
the Nationalists.
Years later, aJapanese visitor tried to apologize to Mao for his coun-
try’s invasion of China. Mao interrupted, “Should I not thank you in»
stead?” Without a worthy opponent, he explained, a man or group cannot
grow stronger.
Mao’s strategy of constant conflict has several key components. First,
be certain that in the long run you will emerge victorious. Never pick a
fight with someone you are not sure you can defeat, as Mao knew the
Japanese would be defeated in time. Second, if you have no apparent ene-
mies, you must sometimes set up a convenient target, even turning a friend
into an enemy. Mao used this tactic time and again in politics. Third, use
such enemies to define your cause more clearly to the public, even framing
it as a struggle of good against evil. Mao actually encouraged Chi.na’s dis
agreements with the Soviet Union and the United States; without clear-cut
enemies, he believed, his people would lose any sense of what Chinese
Communism meant A sharply defined enemy is a far stronger argument
for your side than all the words you could possibly put together.
Never let the presence of enemies upset or distress you—you are far
better off with a declared opponent or two than not knowing where your
real enemies lie. The man of power welcomes conflict, using enemies to
enhance his reputation as a surefoobed fighter who can be relied upon in
times of uncertainty.
Image: The jaws of Ingrzttitude.
Knowing what would happen
if you put
a finger in
the mouth of a lion,
you would stay
clear of it.
VVith friends
you
will
have
no such caution, and
if you hire them, they will
eat you alive with ingratitude.
A u t h o r i ty
:
Know how to
use
enemies for your own
profit. You must learn to grab at
sword not by its blade, which would
cut you, but by the handle, which allows
you to defend yourself. The wise man
profits more from his enemies,
than a fool from his friends.
(BaltasarGraciz'1n,
1 6 0 1
— 1 6 5 8)
REVERSA L
Although it is generally best not to mix work with friendship, there are
times when a friend can be used to greater effect than an enemy. A man of
power, for example, often has dirty work that has to be done, but for the
sake of appearances it is generally preferable to have other people do it for
him; friends often do this the best, since their afiection for him makes them
willing to take chances. Also, if your plans go awry for some reason, you
can use a friend as a convenient scapegoat. This “fall of the favorite” was a
trick often used by kings and sovereigns: They would let their closest friend
at court take the fall for a mistake, since the public would not believe that
they would deliberately sacrifice a friend for such a purpose. Of course,
after you play that card, you have lost your friend forever. It is best, then, to
reserve the scapegoat role for someone who is close to you but not too
close.
Finally, the problem about working with friends is that it confuses the
boundaries and distances that working requires. But if both partners in the
arrangement understand the dangers involved, a friend often can be em-
ployed to great effect. You must never let your guard down in such a ven-
ture, however; always be
on the lookout for any signs of emotional
disturbance such as envy and ingratitude. Nothing is stable in the realm of
power, and even the closest of friends can be transformed into the worst of
enernies.
LAW 2
15
16
LAW
CONCEAL YOUR
INTENTIONS
JUD G M E NT
Keep people ojfbalancc and in the dark by never reveal-
ing the purpose behind your actions. If they have no clue
what you are up to, they cannot prepmzz cl defense. Guide
themfar enough down the wrong path, mzrelop them in
enough smoke, and by the time they realize your inten-
tions, it will be too late.
PART I: USE DECOYED OBJECTS OF DESIRE AND RED
HERRINGS TO THROW PEOPLE OFF THE SCENT
Ifat any point in the deception you practicepeople have the slightest suspi-
eion as to your intentions, all is lost. Do not give them the chance to sense
what you are up to: Throw them off the seen! by dragging ml herrings
across the path. Use false sincerity, send ambiguous signals, set up mis—
leading objects 0}’ desire. Unable to distinguish the genuinefmm thefalse,
thrgr ccmnatpick out your vealgoal.
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
Over several weeks, Ninon de Lenclos, the most infamous courtesan of
seventeentlrcentury France, listened patiently as the Marquis de Sevigné
explained his struggles in pursuing a beautiful but difficult young countess.
Ninon was sixty~two at the time, and more than experienced in matters of
love; the marquis was a lad of twenty-two, handsome, dashing, but hope
lessly inexperienced in romance. At first Ninon was amused to hear the
marquis talk about his mistakes, but finally she had had enough. Unable to
bear ineptitude in any realm, least of all in seducing a woman, she decided
to take the young man under her wing. First, he had to understand that this
was war, and that the beautiful countess was {citadel to which he had to
lay siege as carefully as any general. Every step had to be planned and exe-
cuted with the utmost attention to detail and nuance.
Instructing the marquis to start over, Ninon told him to approach the
countess with a bit of distance, an air of nonchalance. The next time the
two were alone together, she said, he would confide in the countess as
would a friend but notva potential lover. This was to throw her off the scent.
The countess was no longer to take his interest in her for granted-perhaps
he was only interested in friendship.
Ninon planned ahead. Once the countess was confused, it would be
time to make herjealous. At the next encounter, at a major féte in Paris, the
marquis would show up with a beautiful young woman at his side. This
beautiful young woman had equally beautiful friends, so that wherever the
countess would now see the marquis, he would be surrounded by the most
stunning young women in Paris. Not only would the countess be seething
with jealousy, she would come to see the marquis as someone who was de-
sired by others. It was hard for Ninon to make the marquis understand, but
she patiently explained that a woman who is interested in a man wants to
see that other women are interested in him, too. Not only does that give
him instant value, it makes it all the more satisfying to snatch him from
their clutches.
Once the countess was jealous but intrigued, it would be time to be-
guile her. On Ninon’s instructions, the marquis would fail to show up at af-
fairs where the countess expected to see him. Then, suddenly, he would
appear at salons he had never frequented before, but that the countess at-
LAW 3
I7
18
LAW 3
tended often. She would be unable to predict his moves. All of this would
push her into the state of emotional confusion that is a prerequisite for sum
cessful seduction.
These moves were executed, and took several weeks. Ninon moni-
tored the marquis’s progress: Through her network of spies, she heard how
the countess would laugh
a little harder at his witticisms, listen more
closely to his stories. She heard that the countess was suddenly asking ques-
tions about him. Her friends told her that at social affairs the countess
would often look up at the marquis, following his steps. Ninon felt certain
that the young woman was falling under his spell. It was a matter of weeks
now, maybe a month or two, but if all went smoothly, the citadel would
fall.
A few days later the marquis was at the countess’s home. They were
alone. Suddenly he was a different man: This time acting on his own im—
pulse, rather than following Ninon’s instructions, he took the countess’s
hands and told her he was in love with her. The young woman seemed
confused, 3 reaction he did not expect. She became polite, then excused
herself. For the rest of the evening she avoided his eyes, was not there to
say goodnight to him. The next few times he visited he was told she was
not at home. When she finally admitted him again, the two felt awkward
and uncomfortable with each other. The spell was broken.
Interpretation
Ninon de Lenclos knew everything about the art of love. The greatest writ-
ers, thinkers, and politicians of the time had been her lovers——men like La
Rochefoucauld, Moliére, and Richelieu. Seduction was a game to her, to be
practiced with skill. As she got older, and her reputation grew, the most im~
portant families in France would send their sons to her to be instructed in
matters of love.
Ninon knew that men and women are very different, but when it
comes to seduction they feel the same: Deep down inside, they often sense
when they are being seduced, but they give in because they enjoy the feel-
ing of being led along. It is a pleasure to let go, and to allow the other per-
son
to detour you
into
a strange country. Everything in seduction,
however, depends on suggestion. You cannot announce your intentions or
reveal them directly in words. Instead you must throw your targets off the
scent. To surrender to your guidance they must be appropriately confused.
You have to scramble your signals——~appea.r interested in another man or
woman (the decoy), then hint at being interested in the target, then feign
indifference, on and on. Such patterns not only confuse, they excite.
Imagine this story from the countess’s perspective: After a few of the
marquis’s moves, she sensed the marquis was playing some sort of game,
but the game delighted her. She did not know where he was leading her,
but so much the better. His moves intrigued her, each of them keeping her
waiting for the next one———she even enjoyed herjealousy and confusion, for
sometimes any emotion is be-tier than the boredom of security. Perhaps the
marquis had ulterior motives; most men do. But she was willing to wait and
see, and probably if she had been made to wait long enough, what he was
up to would not have mattered.
The moment the marquis uttered that fatal word “love,” however, all
was changed. This was no longer a game with moves, it was an artless show
of passion. His intention was revealed: He
was seducing her. This put
everything he had done in a new light. All that before had been charming
now seemed ugly and conniving; the countess felt embarrassed and used.
A door closed that would never open again.
Do not be held a cheat, even though 2'! is impossible to live today without being one.
Let your greatest cunning lie in covering up what looks like cunning.
l:ia.lm.s'm (}rzu‘iz1u., I 6 /)1
I6 58
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In 1850 the young Otto von Bismarck, then a thirty—five—yearvold deputy in
the Prussian parliament, was at a turning point in his career. The issues of
the day were the unification of the many states (including Prussia) into
which Germany was then divided, and a war against Austria, the powerful
neighbor to the south that hoped to keep the Germans weak and at odds,
even threatening to intervene if they tried to unite. Prince William, next in
line to be P:ussia’s king, was in favor of going to war, and the parliament
rallied to the cause, prepared to back any mobilization of troops. The only
ones to oppose war were the present king, Frederick William IV, and his
ministers, who preferred to appease the powerful Austrians.
Throughout his career, Bismarck had been a loyal, even passionate
supporter of Prussian might and power. He dreamed of German unifica-
tion, of going to war against Austria and humiliating the country that for so
long had kept Germany divided. A former soldier, he saw warfare as a glo-
rious business.
This, after all, was the man who years later would say, “The great
questions of the time will be decided, not by speeches and resolutions, but
by iron and blood.”
Passionate patriot and lover of military glory, Bismarck nevertheless
gave a speech in parliament at the height of the war fever that astonished
all who heard it “Woe unto the statesman,” he said, “who makes war with-
out a reason that will still be valid when the war is over! After the war, you
will all look differently at these questions. Will you then have the courage
to turn to the peasant contemplating the ashes of his farm, to the man who
has been crippled, to the father who has lost his children?” Not only did
Bismarck go on to talk of the madness of this war, but, strangest of all, he
praised Austria and defended her actions. This went against everything he
had stood for. The consequences were immediate. Bismarck was against
the wa.r——what could this possibly mean? Other deputies were confused,
and several of them changed their votes. Eventually the king and his minis-
ters won out, and war was averted.
A few weeks after Bisma.rck’s infamous speech, the king, grateful that
LAW 3
19
20
LAW 3
he had spoken for peace, made him a cabinet minister. A few years later he
became the Prussian premier. In this role he eventually led his country and
a. peace-loving king into a war against Austria, crushing the former empire
and establishing a
German state, with Prussia at its head.
lnterpretation
At the time of his speech in 1850, Bismarck made several calculations.
First, he sensed that the Prussian military, which had not kept pace with
other European armies, was unready for war--that Austria, in fact, might
very well win, a disastrous result for the future. Second, if the war were lost
and Bismarck had supported it, his career would be gravely jeopardized.
The king and his conservative ministers wanted peace; Bismarck wanted
power. The answer was to throw people off the scent by supporting a cause
he cletested, saying things he would laugh at if said by another. A whole
country was fooled. It was because of Bismarck’s speech that the king made
him a minister, at position from which he quickly rose to be prime minister,
attaining the power to strengthen the Prussian military and accomplish
what he had wanted all along: the humiliation of Austria and the unifica»
tion of Germany under Prussia’s leadership.
Bismarck was certainly one of the cleverest statesman who ever lived,
a master of strategy and deception. No one suspected what he was up to in
this case. Had he announced his real intentions, arguing that it was better
to wait now and fight later, he would not have won the argument, since
most Prussians wanted war at that moment and mistakenly believed that
their army was superior to the Austrians. Had he played up to the king,
asking to be made a minister in exchange for supporting peace, he would
not have succeeded either: The king would have distrusted his ambition
and doubted his sincerity.
By being completely insincere and sending misleading signals, how-
ever, he deceived everyone, concealed his purpose, and attained every-
thing he wanted. Such is the power of hiding your intentions.
KEYS TO POWER
Most people are open books. They say what they feel, blurt out their opin-
ions at every opportunity, and constantly reveal their plans and intentions.
They do this for several reasons. First, it is easy and natural to always want
to talk about one’s feelings and plans for the future. It takes effort to control
your tongue and monitor what you reveal. Second, many believe that by
being honest and open they are winning people's hearts and showing their
good nature.They are greatly deluded. Honesty is actually a blunt instru-
ment, which bloodies more than it cuts. Your honesty is likely to offend
people; it is much more prudent to tailor your words, telling people what
they want to hear rather than the coarse and ugly truth of what you feel or
think. More important, by being unabashedly open you make yourself so
predictable and familiar that it is almost impossible to respect or fear you,
and power will not accrue to a person who cannot inspire such emotions.
If you yearn for power, quickly lay honesty aside, and train yourself in
the art of concealing your intentions. Master the art and you will always
have the upper hand. Basic to an ability to conceal one’s intentions is a
simple tmth about human nature: Our first instinct is to always trust ap-
pearances. We cannot go around doubting the reality of what we see and
hear—-constantly imagining that appearances concealed something else
would exhaust and terrify us. This fact makes it relatively easy to conceal
one’s intentions. Simply dangle an object you seem to desire, a goal you
seem to aim for, in front of people’s eyes and they will take the appearance
for reality. Once their eyes focus on the decoy, they will fail to notice what
you are really up to. In seduction, set up conflictinghsignals, such as desire
and indiiference, and you not only throw them off the scent, you inflame
their desire to possess you.
A tactic that is often effective in setting up a red herring is to appear to
support an idea or cause that is actually contrary to your own sentiments.
(Bismarck used this to great effect in his speech in 1850.) Most people will
believe you have experienced a change of heart, since it is so unusual to
play so lightly with something as emotional as one’s opinions and values.
The same applies for any decoyed object of desire: Seem to want some-
thing in which you are actually not at all interested and your enemies will
be thrown oil the scent. making all kinds of errors in their calculations.
During the War of the Spanish Succession in 1711, the Duke of Marl-
borough, head of the English army, wanted to destroy a key French fort,
because it protected a vital thoroughfare into France. Yet he knew that if be
destroyed it, the French would realize what he wanted-to advance down
that road. Instead, then, he merely captured the fort, and garrisoned it with
some of his troops, making it appear as if he wanted it for some purpose of
his own. The French attacked the fort and the duke let them recapture it.
Once they had it back, though, they destroyed it, figuring that the duke had
wanted it for some important reason. Now that the fort was gone, the road
was unprotected, and Marlborough could easily march into France,
Use this tactic in the following manner: Hide your intentions not by
closing up (with the risk of appearing secretive, and making people suspi-
cious) but by talking endlessly about your desires and goals—~just not your
real ones. You will kill three birds with one stone: You appear friendly,
open, and trusting; you conceal your intentions; and you send your rivals
on timeconsuming wild~goose chases.
Another powerful tool in throwing people oh’ the scent is false sincer-
ity. People easily mjstake sincerity for honesty. Remember-their first in
stinct is to trust appearances, and since they value honesty and want to
believe in the honesty of those around them, they will rarely doubt you or
see through your act. Seeming to believe what you say gives your words
great weight. This is how Iago deceived and destroyed Othello: Given the
depth of his emotions, the apparent sincerity of his concerns about Desde—
rnona’s supposed infidelity, how could Othello distrust him? This is also
how the great con artist Yellow Kid Weil pulled the wool over suckers’
eyes: Seeming to believe so deeply in the decayed object he was dangling
LAW 3
,2]
22
f
LAW 3
in front of them (a phony stock,
a. touted racehorse), he made its reality
hard to doubt. It is important, of course, not to go too far in this area. Sin~
cexity is a tricky tool: Appear overpassionate and you raise suspicions. Be
measured and believable or your ruse will seem the put-on that it is.
To make your false sincerity an effective weapon in concealing your
intentions, espouse a belief in honesty and fertlirightness as important so-
cial values. Do this as publicly as possible. Emphasize your position on this
subject by occasionally divulging some heartfelt thought-though only one
that is actually meaningless or irrelevant, of course. Napoleon"; minister
Talleyrand was a master at taking people into his confidence by revealing
some apparent secret. This feigned confidence——a decoy—-would then
elicit a real confidence on the other person’s part.
Remember: The best deceivers do everything they can to cloak their
{roguish
qualities. They cultivate an air of honesty in one area to disguise
their dishonesty in others. Honesty is merely another decoy in their arsenal
of weapons.
1
r
I
5.-
PART II: USE SMOKE SCREENS TO
DISGUISE YOUR ACTIONS
Deception is always the best strategy, but the best deceptions require a screen
of smoke to distract peoples attention from your real purpose. The bland
exterior—like the unreadable pokerface——is often the perfect smoke screen,
hidingyour intentions behind the comfortable andfamiliar Ifyou lead the
sucker down afamiliarpath, he won ’t catch on when you lead him into a
trap.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I
In 1910, a Mr. Sam Geezil of Chicago sold his warehouse business for close
to $1 million. He settled down to semiretirement and the managing of his
many properties, but deep inside he itched for the old days of deal-making.
One day a young man namedJoseph Weil visited his office, wanting to buy
an apartment he had up for sale. Geezil explained the terms: The price was
$8,000, but he only required a down payment of $2,000. Weil said he
would sleep on it, but he came back the following day and offered to pay
the full $8,000 in cash, if Geezil could wait a couple of days, until a deal
Weil was working on came through. Even in semiretirement, a clever busi-
nessman like Geezil was curious as to how Weil would be able to come up
with so much cash (roughly $150,000 today) so quickly. Wei] seemed reluc-
tant to say, and quickly changed the subject, but Geezil was persistent. Fi-
nally, after assurances of confidentiality, Weil told Geezil the following
story.
Weil’s uncle
was the secretary to
a coterie of multimillionaire fi-
nanciers. These wealthy gentlemen had purchased
a hunting lodge in
Michigan ten years ago, at a cheap price. They had not used the lodge for a
few years, so they had decided to sell it and had asked Weil’s uncle to get
whatever he could for it. For reasons——-good reasons—of his own, the uncle
had been nursing a grudge against the millionaires for years; this was his
chance to get back at them. He would sell the property for $35,000 to a set-
up man (whom it was Weil’s job to find). The financiers were too wealthy to
worry about this low price. The set-up man would then turn around and
sell the property again for its real price, around $155,000. The uncle, Weil,
and the third man would split the profits from this second sale. It was all
legal and for a good cause—the uncle’s just retribution.
Geezil had heard enough: He wanted to be the set-up buyer. Weil was
reluctant to involve him, but Geezil would not back dovmz The idea of a
large profit, plus a little adventure, had him champing at the bit. Weil ex-
plained that Geezil would have to put up the $35,000 in cash to bring the
deal off. Geezil, a millionaire, said he could get the money with a snap of
his fingers. Weil finally relented and agreed to arrange a meeting between
the uncle, Geezil, and the financiers, in the town of Galesburg, Illinois.
On the train ride to Galesburg, Geezil met the uncle—a.n impressive
.||'Jlll
. KIM? HI‘ lHIt.v\|"|,.
Fl-'_l(l\.'* \l()RHll||’ (ll~
'|'l|I} ll)()l. liN\I.
Then Jehu assembled
all the people, and said
(0 them, “Ahab .\'erw¢a'
Ba ‘til a little: bm.lelzu
will serve him much
nwre. Now therefore
call to me all the
prophets 0fBa’al, all
his wars/rippers will all
his pri:?s1.\; let mme he
mis.ring,f0r1 have a
great mcrrifice to offer
/0 Ba’ul; whoever is
missing shall not live.
"
Bu! Jehu did it with
rmming in unler to
destroy the worship-
pers of Ba 'al.
Am] Jehu orderell.
“Sanctify a solemn
as'seml>ly for Ba ’al.
So
they procluinzerl it. And
Jehu sen! throughout
all Israel: and all the
worshippers 0fBzI "al
mine, so that there was
not a more left who (llll
not come. Ami they
entered the house of
Ba’al. and the lmusc of
Ba '41! was filled from
one end to the otlmr.
.
.
.
Then Jehu went into
Ihe house ofBa'al.
.
.
and he Stlitl m the
worshippers of 8u’al,
“Search, and see
that there is no servant
uftlze LORD here
LAW :4
23
rmumg you, but only
flu’ ivurshipperx of
Ba’u[,” Then he went in
to offer sacrifices and
burnt offeringx.
Now Jeim had
stationed eight; man
outside, and said,
“ The
man who allows any of
those whom [give into
your hands to escape
shall forfezt his life.
"‘ So
as soon as he had made
an and ofoffcring the
burnt offering, Jehu
mill to Ihe guard and to
the officers, “Go in and
slay rhem;le1 not a man
escape.
”
So when they put them
In the .s'word, Ihe guard
and the officer: cast
them um and went into
the inner mom oflhe
house of 81111! and they
brought nm the pillar
that war in the house of
li’a'al and burned it
Ami they demolished
the pillar of Ba-’al arul
deniolixired the house
of Ba 11!, and made it (1
[amine to this day.
Thus Jclxu wiped mu
Ba ‘:11 from Israel.
OLD TESTAMENT.
2 KINGS 10:18-28
24
Law
:1
man, with whom he avidly discussed business. Weil also brought along a
companion, a somewhat paundiy man named George Gross. Weil ex-
plained to Geezil that he himself was a boxing trainer, that Gross was one
of the promising piizefighters he trained, and that he had asked Gross to
come along to make sure the fighter stayed in shape. For a promising
fighter, Gross was unimpressive looking—he had gray hair and a beer
belly—but Geezil was so excited about the deal that he didn‘t really think
about the man’s flabby appearance.
Once in Galesburg, Weil and his uncle went to fetch the financiers
while Geezil waited in a hotel room with Gross, who promptly put on his
boxing trunks. As Geezil half watched, Gross began to shadowbox. Dis-
tracted as he was, Geezil ignored how badly the boxer wheezed after a few
minutes of exercise, although his style seemed real enough. An hour later,
Weil and his uncle reappeared with the financiers, an impressive, intimidat
ing gmup of men, all wearing fancy suits. The meeting went well and the fi-
nanciers agreed to sell the lodge to Geezil, who had already had the
$35,000 wired to a local bank.
This minor business now settled, the financiers sat back in their chairs
and began to banter about high finance, throwing out the name ‘f]. P. Mor~
gain” as if they knew the man. Finally one of them noticed the boxer in the
corner of the room. Weil explained what he was doing there. The financier
countered that he too had a boxer in his entourage, whom he named. Weil
laughed brazenly and exclaimed that his man could easily knock out their
man. Conversation escalated into argument. In the heat of passion, Weil
challenged the men to a bet. The financiers eagerly agreed and left to get
their man ready for a fight the next day.
As soon as they had left, the uncle yelled at Weil, right in front of
Geezil: They did not have enough money to bet with, and once the fi-
nanciers discovered this, the uncle would be fired. Weil apologized for get»
ting him in this mess, but he had a plan: He knew the other boxer well, and
with a little bribe, they could fix the fight. But where would the money
come from for the bet? the uncle replied. Without it they were as good as
dead. Finally Geezil had heard enough. Unwilling to jeopardize his deal
with any ill will, he offered his own $35,000 cash for part of the bet. Even if
he lost that, he would wire for more money and still make a. profit on the
sale of the lodge. The uncle and nephew thanked him. With their own
$15,000 and Geezil’s $35,000 they would manage to have enough for the
bet. That evening,
as Geezil watched the two boxers rehearse the fix in
the hotel room, his mind reeled at the killing he was going to make from both
the boxing match and the sale of the lodge.
The fight took place in a gym the next day. Well handled the cash,
which was placed for security in a locked box. Everything was pro»
ceeding as planned in the hotel room. The financiers were looking glum at
how badly their fighter was doing, and Geezil was dreaming about the easy
money he was about to make. Then, suddenly, a wild swing by the li-
nai1cier’s fighter hit Gross hard in the face, knocking him down. When he
hit the canvas, blood spurted from his mouth. He coughed, then lay still.
One of the financiers, a former doctor, checked his pulse; he was dead. The
millionaires panicked: Everyone had to get out before the police arrived-—
they could all be charged with murder.
Terrified, Geezil hightailed it out of the gym and back to Chicago, leav-
ing behind his $35,000 which he was only too glad to forget, for it seemed
a small price to pay to avoid being implicated in a crime. He never wanted
to see Weil or any of the others again.
After Geezil scurried out, Gross stood up, under his own steam. The
blood that had spurted from his mouth came from a ball filled with chicken
blood and hot water that he had hidden in his cheek. The whole affair had
been masterminded by Weil, better known as “the Yellow Kid,” one of the
most creative con artists in history. Weil split the $35,000 with the fi-
nanciers and the boxers (all fellow con a:u'sts)—a nice little profit for a few
days’ work.
Interpretation
The Yellow Kid had staked out Geezil as the perfect sucker long before he
set up the con. He knew the boxingmatch scam would be the perfect ruse
to separate Geezil from his money quickly and definitively. But he also
knew that if he had begun by trying to interest Geezil in the boxing match,
he would have failed miserably. He had to conceal his intentions and
switch attention, create a smoke screen-—-in this case the sale of the lodge.
On the train ride and in the hotel room Geezil’s mind had been com-
pletely occupied with the pending deal, the easy money, the chance to
hobnob with wealthy men. He had failed to notice that Gross was out of
shape and middle-aged at best. Such is the distracting power of a smoke
screen. Engrossed in the business deal, Gee-zil’s attention was easily di—
verted to the boxing match, but only at a point when it was already too late
for him to notice the details that would have given Gross away. The match,
after all, now depended on a bribe rather than on the boxer’s physical condi~
lion. And Geezil was so distracted at the end by the illusion ofthe boxer’s death
that he completely forgot about his money.
Learn from the Yellow Kid: The familiar, inconspicuous front is the
perfect smoke screen. Approach your mark with an idea that seems ordi~
nary enough—a business deal, financial intrigue. The sucker’s mind is dis
tracted, his suspicions allayed. That is when you gently guide him onto the
second path, the slippery slope down which he slides helplessly into your
trap.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II
In the mid-1920s, the powerful warlords of Ethiopia were coming to the re-
alization that a young man of the nobility named Haile Selassie, also
known as Ras Tafari, was outcompeting them all and nearing the point
where he could proclaim himself their leader, unifying the country for the
first time in decades. Most of his rivals could not understand how this
wispy,'quiet, mild—mannered man had been able to take control. Yet in
?:l:\llAI\' :\tIIi‘}SS THE
(N l‘Ll\.\ l\ BROAD
I)-’\\‘l.l(;llT
This means to create :1
from that eventually
becomes imbued with
flil fl[VflDSfl/IE7? 0!
irrtpresxian nffamilizzb
ily, within which the
strategist may mcmeu-
ver unseen while all
eyes are trained to sea
obn'mrs faniiliarities.
“’l‘!ilE 'mmTv-six
sTR;n'r.Gn-5.“ QUOTET) rs
TH]: JAPANESE ARI‘ Ul“
WAR.
THOMAS Crmsv, 1991
26
LAW 3
1927, Selassie was able to summon the warlords, one at a time, to come to
Amldis Ababa to declare their loyalty and recognize him as leader.
Some hurried, some hesitated, but only one, Dejazmach Balcha of
Sidamo, dared defy Selassie totally. A blustery man, Balcha was a great
warrior, and he considered the new leader weak and unworthy. He point-
edly stayed away from the capital. Finally Selassie, in his gentle but stern
way, commanded Balcha to come. The warlord decided to obey, but in
doing
so he would turn the tables
on this pretender to the Ethiopian
throne: He would come to Addis Ababa at his own speed, and with an
army of 10,000 men, a. force large enough to defend himself, perhaps even
start a civil war. Stationing this formidable force in a valley three miles
from the capital, he waited, as a king would. Selassie would have to come
to him.
Selassie did indeed send emissaries, asking Balcha to attend an after»
noon banquet in his honor. But Balcha, no fool, knew history—he knew
that previous kings and lords of Ethiopia had used banquets
as
a trap.
Once he was there and full of drink, Selassie would have him arrested or
murdered. To signal his understanding of the situation, he agreed to come
to the banquet, but only if he could bring his personal b0dyguaId—-500 of
his best soldiers, all armed and ready to defend him and themselves. To
Balcha’s surprise, Selassie answered with the utmost politeness that he
would be honored to play host to such warriors.
On the way to the banquet, Balcha warned his soldiers not to get
drunk and to be on their guard. When they arrived at the palace, Selassie
was his charming best. He deferred to Balcha, treated him as if he desper-
ately needed his approval and cooperation. But Balcha refused to be
charmed, and he warned Selassie that if he did not return to his camp by
nightfall, his army had orders to attack the capital. Selassie reacted as if
hurt by his mistrust. Over the meal, when it came time for the traditional
singing of songs in honor of Ethiopia’s leaders, he made a. point of allowing
only songs honoring the warlord of Sidarno. It seemed to Balcha that Se»
lassie was scared, intimidated by this great warrior who could not be out-
wittecl. Sensing the change, Balcha believed that he would be the one to
call the shots in the days to come.
At the end of the afternoon, Balcha and his soldiers began their march
back to camp amidst cheers and gun salutes. Looking back to the capital
over his shoulder, he planned his strategy—-how his own soldiers would
march through the capital in triumph within weeks, and Selassie would be
put in his place, his place being either prison or death. When Balcha came
in sight of his camp, however, he saw that something was terribly wrong.
Where before there had been colorful tents stretching as far as the eye
could see, now there was nothing, only smoke from doused fires. What
devil’s magic was this?
A witness told Balcha what had happened. During the banquet, a large
army, commanded by an ally of Selassie’s, had stolen up on Balcha’s en-
campment by a side route he had not seen. This army had not come to
light, however: Knowing that Balcha would/have heard a noisy battle and
hurried back with his 600-man bodyguard, Selassie had .armed his own
troops with baskets of gold and cash. They had surrounded Balcha’s army
and proceeded to purchase every last one of their weapons. Those who re»
fused were easily intimidated. Within a few hours, Balcha’s entire force had
been disarmed and scattered in all directions.
Realizing his danger, Balcha decided to march south with his 600 sol-
diers to regroup, but the same army that had disarmed his soldiers blocked
his way. The other way out was to march on the capital, but Selassie had set
a large army to defend it. Like a chess player, he had predicted Balcha’s
moves, and had checkmatecl him. For the first time in his life, Balcha sur-
rendered. To repent his sins of pride and ambition, he agreed to enter a
monastery.
‘
Interpretation
Throughout Selassie’s long reign,
no
one could quite figure him out.
Ethiopians like their leaders fierce, but Selassie, who wore the front of a
gentle, peaceloving man, lasted longer than any of them. Never angry or
impatient, he lured his victims with sweet smiles, lulling them with charm
and obsequiousness before he attacked. In the case of Balcha, Selassie
played on the man’s wariness, his suspicion that the banquet was a trap—
which in fact it was, but not the one he expected. Selassie’s way of allaying
Balcha’s fears—letting him bring his bodyguard to the banquet, giving him
top billing there, making him feel in contro1—-created a thick smoke screen,
concealing the real action three miles away.
Remember: The paranoid and wary are often the easiest to deceive.
Win their trust in one area and you have a smoke screen that blinds their
View in another, letting you creep up and level them with a devastating
blow. A helpful or apparently honest gesture, or one that implies the other
persorfs supen‘ority——these are perfect diversionary devices.
Properly set up, the smoke screen is a weapon of great power. It en-
abled the gentle Selassie to totally destroy his enemy, without firing a single
bullet.
Do not underestimate the power of Tafari. He creefis
like a mouse but he hasjaws like a lion.
fimlrim n/‘Sidmn.o’.s last ruarzls’ be/ima erztmzivcg the z:rnn.a.stary
KEYS TO POWER
If you believe that deceivers are colorful folk who mislead with elaborate
lies and tall tales, you are greatly mistaken. The best deceivers utilize a
bland and inconspicuous front that calls no attention to themselves. They
know that extravagant words and gestures immediately raise suspicion. In-
stead, they envelop their marlc in the familiar, the banal, the ha.rmless. In
Yellow Kid Weil’s dealings with Sam Geezil, the familiar was a business
deal. In the Ethiopian case, it was Selassie’s misleading obsequiousness—
exactly what'Balcha. would have expected from a weaker warlord.
LAW 3
27
LAW 3
Once you have lulled your suckers’ attention with the familiar, they
will not notice the deception being perpetrated behind their backs. This
derives from a simple truth: people can only focus on one thing at a time. It
is really too difficult for them to imagine that the bland and harmless per~
son they are dealing with is simultaneously setting up something else. The
grayer and more uniform the smoke in your smoke screen, the better it
conceals your intentions. In the decoy and red herring devices discussed in
Part I, you actively distract people; in the smoke screen, you lull your vic-
tims, drawing them into your web. Because it is so hypnotic, this is often
the best way of concealing your intentions.
The simplest form of smoke screen is facial expression. Behind a bland,
unreadable exterior, all sorts ofmayhem can be planned, without detection.
This is a weapon that the most powerful men in history have learned to per-
fect. It was said that no one could read Franklin D. Roosevelfs face. Baron
james Rothschild made a lifelong practice ofdisguising his real thoughts be
hind bland smiles and nondescript looks. Stendhal wrote of Talleyrand,
“Never was a face less of a barometer.” Henry Kissinger would bore his op—
ponents around the negotiating table to tears with his monotonous voice,
his blank look, his endless recitations of details; then, as their eyes glazed
over, he would suddenly hit them with a list of bold terms. Caught off»
guard, they would be easily intimidated. As one poker manual explains it,
“While playing his hand, the good player is seldom an actor. Instead he
practices a bland behavior that minimizes readable patterns, frustrates and
confuses opponents, permits greater concentration,”
An adaptable concept, the smoke screen can be practiced on a num-
ber of levels, all playing on the psychological principles of distraction and
misdirection. One of the most effective smoke screens is the noble gesture.
People want to believe apparently noble gestures are genuine, for the belief
is pleasant. They rarely notice how deceptive these gestures can be.
The art dealerjoseph Duveen was once confronted with a terrible prob-
lem. The millionaires who had paid so dearly for Duveen’s paintings were
running out of wall space, and with inheritance taxes getting ever higher, it
seemed unlikely that they would keep buying. The solution was the National
Gallery ofArt in Washington, D.C., which Duveen helped create in 1937 by
getting Andrew Mellon to donate his collection to it. The National Gallery
was the perfect front for Duveen. In one gesture, his clients avoided taxes,
cleared wall space for new purchases, and reduced the number of paintings
on the market, maintaining the upward pressure on their prices. All this
while the donors created the appearance ofbeing public benefactors.
Another effective smoke screen is the pattern, the establishment of a se
ries of actions that seduce the victim into believing you will continue in the
same way. The pattern plays on the psychology of anticipation: Our behav~
ior conforms to patterns, or so we like to think.
In 1878 the American robber baronjay Gould created a company that
began to threaten the monopoly of the telegraph company Western Union.
The directors of Western Union decided to buy Gould’s company up-
they had to spend a hefty sum, but they figured they had managed to rid
themselves of an irritating competitor. A few months later, though, Gould
was it at again, complaining he had been treated unfairly. He started up a
second company to compete with Western Union and its new acquisition.
The same thing happened again: Western Union bought him out to shut
him up. Soon the pattern began for the third time, but now Gould went for
the jugular: He suddenly staged a bloody takeover struggle and managed
to gain complete control of Western Union. He had established a pattern
that had tricked the company’s directors into thinking his goal was to be
bought out at a handsome rate. Once they paid him off, they relaxed and
failed to notice that he was actually playing for higher stakes. The pattern is
powerful in that it deceives the other person into expecting the opposite of
what you are really doing.
Anotlier psychological weakness on which to construct a smoke screen
is the tendency to mistake appearances for reality-——the feeling that if some-
one seems to belong to your group, their belonging must be real. This habit
makes the seamless blend a very effective front. The trick is simple: You sim«
ply blend in with those around you. The better you blend, the less suspi-
cious you become. During the Cold War of the 1950s and ’60s, as is now
notorious, a slew of British civil servants passed secrets to the Soviets. They
went undetected for years because they were apparently decent chaps, had
gone to all the right schools, and lit the oldvboy network perfectly. Blend~
ing in is the perfect smoke screen for spying. The better you do it, the bet-
ter you can conceal your intentions.
Remember: It takes patience and humility to dull your brilliant colors,
to put on the mask of the inconspicuous. Do not despair at having to wear
such a bland rnask~—it is often your unreadability that draws people to you
and makes you appear a person of power.
Image: A Sheep’s Skin.
A sheep never marauds,
a sheep never deceives,
a sheep is magnificently
dumb and docile. With a
sheepskin on his back,
a fox can pass right
into the chicken coop.
Authority: Have you ever heard of a skillful general, who intends to
surprise a citadel, announcing his plan to his enemy? Conceal your
purpose and hide your progress; do not disclose the extent of your
designs until they cannot be opposed. until the combat is over. Win
the victory before you declare the war. In a word, imitate those walk
like people whose designs are not known except by the ravaged coun—
try through which they have passed. (Ninon cle Lenclos, 16234706)
LAW 3
$29
30
LAW 3
REVERSAL
No smoke screen, red herring, false sincerity, or any other diversionary de-
vice will succeed in concealing your intentions if you already have an es-
tablished reputation for deception. And
as you get older and achieve
success, it often becomes increasingly difficult to disguise your cunning.
Everyone knows you practice deception; persist in playing naive and you
run the risk of seeming the rankest hypocrite, which will severely limit
your room to maneuver. In such cases it is better to own up, to appear the
honest rogue, or, better, the repentant rogue. Not only will you be admired
for your frankness, but, most wonderful and strange of all, you will be able
to continue your stratagems.
As P. T. Barnum, the nineteenth-century king of humbuggery, grew
older, he learned to embrace his reputation as a grand deceiver. At one
point he organized a buffalo hunt in New jersey, complete with Indians
and a few imported buffalo. He publicized the hunt as genuine, but it came
off as so completely fake that the crowd, instead of getting angry and ask-
ing for their money back, was greatly amused. They knew Barnum pulled
t:ricks all the time; that was the secret of his success, and they loved him for
it. Learning a lesson from this affair, Barnum stopped concealing all of his
devices,
even revealing his deceptions in
a tell—all autobiography. As
Kierkegaard wrote, “The world wants to be deceived.”
Finally, although it is wiser to divert attention from your purposes by
presenting a bland, familiar exterior, there are times when the colorful,
conspicuous gesture is the right diversionary tactic. The great charlatan
mountebanks of seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Europe used humor
and entertainment to deceive their audiences. Dazzled by a great show, the
public would not notice the charlatans’ real intentions. Thus the star charla-
tan himself would appear in town in a night-black coach drawn by black
horses. Clowns, tightrope walkers, and star entertainers would accompany
him, pulling people in to his demonstrations of elixirs and quack potions.
The charlatan made entertainment seem like the business of the day; the
business of the day was actually the sale of the elixirs and quack potions.
Spectacle and entertainment, clearly, are excellent devices to conceal
your intentions, but they cannot be used indefinitely. The public grows
tired and suspicious, and eventually catches on to the trick. And indeed the
charlatans had to move quickly from town to town, before word spread
that the potions were useless and the entertainment a trick. Powerful peo-
ple with bland exteriors, on the other hand—the Talleyrands, the Roth-
schilds, the Selassies—can practice their deceptions in the
same place
throughout their lifetimes. Their act never wears thin, and rarely causes
suspicion. The colorful smoke screen should be used cautiously, then, and
only when the occasion is right.
LAW
ALWAYS SAY LESS
THAN NECESSARY
_j UDGMENT
When you are trying to impress people with words, the
more you say, the move common you appear and the less
in control. Even you are sayingsomething banal, it will
seem miginal
you make it vague, open—ended, and
sphinxlike. Powerful people impress and intimidate by
\
saying less. The more you say, the more likely you me to
say somethingfoolish.
Down, on his luck, [the
S(3l‘e(?flWflf(<‘Y] Mirrhuel
Arlm wmt to /Vow
York in 1944. T2) drown
l1is.s'¢2rrow.s‘ he paid 11
VlSlI to the famous
restaurant “2I." In the
lobby, he ran into Sam
Goldwyn, who offered
Ihc somewhat impracti-
cal advice that he
should buy mcelzorsex
A! the box./irien met
Louis 8. Mayer. an old
acquaintance, who
asked him what were
his plans for the future.
‘‘I was just talking to
Sam Goldwyn
.
.
began Arlen. "How
much did he offer
you?
" ziiterruptcd
Mayer. “Not enough,"
he replied evusively.
“Would you take fifteen
ihousami for thirty
wt-ek5?”uskcd Mayer.
No hesitation this time.
“Yes
" said Arlen.
rm: urns, snows
300K or ANF.(‘D(}TES.
CLIFTON FADIMAN.
Fan, 1985
Om’ oft-will tale about
Kissinger
.
.
.
involved a report that
l'Vimrtrm Lord had
worked‘ on for days.
Afiter giving it to
Kissinger, he got it
baclc with the notation,
“Is this the best you
can Ila?” Lord rowrote
and polLx'l2ez1 and
finally I’(<‘SMlNYliI!(¢(.l it,‘
back 11 came with the
same curl question.
After rellmfting it one
more n'me—and once
again getting the same
32
LAW 4
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
Gnaeus Marcius, also known as Coriolanus, was a great military hero of
ancient Rome. In the first half of the fifth century B.C. he won many impor-
tant battles, saving the city from calamity time and time again. Because he
spent most of his time on the battlefield, few Romans knew him personally,
making him something of a legendary figure.
In 454 B.C., Coriolanus decided it was time to exploit his reputation
and enter politics. He stood for election to the high rank of consul. Candi—
dates for this position traditionally made a public address early in the race,
and when Coriolanus came before the people, he began by displaying the
dozens of scars he had accumulated over seventeen years of fighting for
Rome. Few in the crowd really heard the lengthy speech that followed;
those scars, proof of his valor and patriotism, moved the people to tears.
Coriola.nus’s election seemed certain.
When the polling day arrived, however, Coriolanus made an entry
into the forum escorted by the entire senate and by the city’s patricians, the
aristocracy. The common people who saw this were disturbed by such a
blustering show of confidence on election day.
And then Coriolanus spoke again, mostly addressing the wealthy citi-
zens who had accompanied him. His words were arrogant and insolent.
Claiming certain victory in the vote, he boasted of his battlefield exploits,
made sour jokes that appealed only to the patricians, voiced angry accuser»
tions against his opponents, and speculated on the riches he would bring to
Rome. This time the people listened: They had not realized that this leg-
endary soldier was also a common braggart.
News of Coriolanus’s second speech spread quickly through Rome,
and the people turned out in great numbers to make sure he was not
elected. Defeated, Coriolanus returned to the battlefield, bitter and vowing
revenge on the common folk who had voted against him. Some weeks later
a large shipment of grain arrived in Rome. The senate was ready to distrib~
ute this food to the people, for free, but just as they were preparing to vote
on the question Coriolanus appeared on the scene and took the senate
floor. The distribution, he argued, would have a. harmful effect on the city
as a whole. Several senators appeared won over, and the vote on the distri-
bution fell into doubt. Coiiolanus did not stop there: He went on to con—
demo the concept of democracy itself. He advocated getting rid of the
people’s represen!atives—the tribunes-—-and turning over the governing of
the city to the patricians.
When word of Coriolanus’s latest speech reached the people, their
anger knew no bounds. The tribunes were sent to the senate to demand
that Coriolanus appear before them. He refused. Riots broke out all over
the city. The senate, fearing the people’s wrath, finally voted in favor of the
grain distribution. The tribunes were appeased, but the people still do
manded that Coriolanus speak to them and apologize. If he repented, and
agreed to keep his opinions to himself, he would be allowed to return to
the battlefield.
Coriolanus did appear one last time before the people, who listened to
him in rapt silence. He started slowly and softly, but as the speech went on,
he became more and more blunt. Yet again he hurled insults! His tone was
arrogant, his expression disdainful. The more he spoke, the angtier the
people became. Finally they shouted him down and silenced him.
The tribunes conferred, condemned Coriolanus to death, and ordered
the magistrates to take him at once to the top of the Titrpeian rock and
throw him over. The delighted crowd seconded the decision. The patri-
cians, however, managed to intervene, and the sentence was commuted to
a lifelong banishment. When the people found out that Rome’s great mili-
tary hero would never retum to the city, they celebrated in the streets. In
fact no one had ever seen web a celebration, not even after the defeat of a
foreign enemy.
Interpretation
Before his entrance into politics, the name of Coriolanus evoked awe.
His battlefield accomplishments showed him as a man of great brav-
ery. Since the citizens knew little about him, all kinds of legends became at-
tached to his name. The moment he appeared before the Roman citizens,
however, and spoke his mind, all that grandeur and mystery vanished. He
bragged and blustered like a common soldier. He insulted and slandered
people, as if he felt threatened and insecure. Suddenly he was not at all
what the people had imagined. The discrepancy between the legend and
the reality proved immensely disappointing to those who wanted to be
lieve in their hero. The more Coriolanus said, the less powerful he ap-
peared——-a person who cannot control his words shows that he cannot
control himself, and is unworthy of respect.
Had Coriolanus said less, the people would never have had cause to
be offended by him, would never have known his true feelings. He would
have maintained his powerful aura, would certainly have been elected con’
sul, and would have been able to accomplish his antidemocratic goals. But
the human tongue is a beast that few can master. It strains constantly to
break out of its cage, and if it is not tamed, it will run wild and cause you
grief. Power cannot accrue to those who squander their treasure of words.
(lysters open completely when the moon isfull; and when the crab sees one
it throws a piece ofstone or seaweed into it and the IIy.§’lR‘V cannot close
again so that it serves the crabfor mmt. Such is the’fate ofhim who opens
his mouth too much and thereby puts himself at the mercy of the listener.
I,Hmtz.2“(.ir9 {Ia Vina, 1452-£519
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In the court of Louis XIV, nobles and ministers would spend days and
nights debating issues of state. They would confer, argue, make and break
alliances, and argue again, until finally the critical moment arrived: Two of
them would be chosen to represent the different sides to Louis himself,
who would decide what should be done. After these persons were chosen,
question from
Kissinger
—— [nrd
snapped. “Damn ii. yes
its rim bar I can do.
"
To which Ki.\‘SlIlg¢','f
replied: “Fina than I
guess I'll read it this
nrmr.
"
KISSINGER,
\\«’m:rF,R ls,-1/tC$0N,
1992
The King ,‘1.nm'5 XIV]
maintains the mar!
impenetrable xecrrery
about affairs of Salli’.
The rninirlcrs utleml
cmmcil nieclmgs, but
he confides his plans to
.'hem only when he has
reflertiz/ti at length uprm
them and has come to
a zlefinizc dcnsimi,
I with you might see
the King. Hir BXpN.’.)'“
.\‘ion is inscmIaI.wle>; I1i.\'
e_ve5' like lhosc of a fm-.
He never dz'scus.s‘e.$
Slate affairs except with
hI'.s- rliinisfers in (‘mm-
cil. W/mu he speaks to
courtiers he refers only
to their respective
przerogazives or dz¢Ii.2y.
Even the most friw.»
lous ofhir utI€n‘1rl(‘€.s‘
has the air ofheirzg the
manozmcemenl of an
anurle.
YRIM‘. VlS(‘,()NTl.
<>I.'m1=,n IN
Louis xiv.
Lot. is
r«:Ri'i{A:~£r).
1928
LAW 4
3:3’
Umiuziful words ofa
sI4b}er.'I (In often mks
deeper I'()()l than the
memory zwflll ileedv
.
.
.
The late Earl of Emex
mlal Qzmerx E/izulmh
that her co/zdilizms
were as cznmkrd as her
xx: but il ms: Izim
his hmd, WhiL'h his‘
im'urrec(z’mz had 711)!
ms! htfil but for that
.\‘p(‘d(,'ll.
car
SIR WAl'I‘liR RA|,FI{jH.
1554--1618
34
LAW 4
everyone would argue some more: How should the issues he phrased?
What would appeal to Louis, what would annoy him? At what fime of day
should the representatives approach him, and in what part of the Versailles
palace? What expression should they have on their faces?
Finally, after all this was settled, the fateful moment would finally at»
rive. The two men would approach Louis—always a delicate matterwand
when they finally had his ear, they would talk about the issue at hand,
spelling out the options in detail.
Louis would listen in silence, a most enigmatic look on his face. Fi-
nally, when each had finished his presentation and had asked for the king’s
opinion, he would look at them both and say, “I shall see.” Then he would
walk away‘
The ministers and courtiers would never hear another word on this
subject from the king——they would simply see the result, weeks later, when
he would come to a decision and act. He would never bother to consult
them on the matter again.
lnterpretation
Louis XIV was a man of very few words. His most famous remark is
" ‘fiat, c’est moi” (“I am the state”); nothing could be more pithy yet more
eloquent. His infamous “I shall see” was one of several extremely short
phrases that he would apply to all manner ofrequests.
Louis was not always this way; as a young man he was known for talk-
ing at length, delighting in his own eloquence. His later taciturnity was self-
imposed, an act, a mask he used to keep everybody below him off-balance.
No one knew exactly where he stood, or could predict his reactions. No
one could try to deceive him by saying what they thought he wanted to
hear, because no one knew what he wanted to hear. As they talked on and
on to the silent Louis, they revealed more and more about themselves, in-
formation he would later use against them to great effect.
In the end, Louis’s silence kept those around him terrified and under
his thumb. It was one of the foundations of his power. As Saint—Simon
wrote, “No one knew as well as he how to sell his words, his smile, even his
glances. Everything in him was valuable because he created differences,
and his majesty was enhanced by the sparseness of his words.”
It is evm more damagingfor a minister to sayfoalish things than to do them.
(Ianlimzl de Rm, 1613 1679
KEYS T0 POWER
Power is in many ways a game of appearances, and when you say less than
necessary, you inevitably appear greater and more powerful than you are.
Your silence will make other people uncomfortable. Humans are machines
of interpretation and explanation; they have to know what you are think»
ing. When you carefully control what you reveal, they cannot pierce your
intentions or your meaning.
Your short answers and silences will put them on the defensive, and
they will jump in, nervously filling the silence with all kinds of comments
that will reveal valuable information about them and their weaknesses.
They will leave a meeting with you feeling as if they had been robbed, and
they will go home and ponder your every word. This extra attention to
your brief comments will only add to your power.
Saying less than necessary is not for kings and statesmen only. In most
areas of life, the less you say, the more profound and mysterious you ap-
pear. As a young man, the artist Andy Warhol had the revelation that it was
generally impossible to get people to do what you wanted them to do by
talking to them. They would turn against you, subvert your wishes, disobey
you out of sheer perversity. He once told a friend, “I learned that you actu~
ally have more power when you shut up.”
in his later life Warhol employed this strategy with great success. His
interviews were exercises in oracular speech: He would say something
vague and ambiguous, and the interviewer would twist in circles trying to
figure it out, imagining there was something profound behind his often
meaningless phrases. Warhol rarely talked about his work; he let others do
the interpreting. He claimed to have learned this technique from that mas-
ter of enigma Marcel Duchamp, another twentieth-century artist who real-
ized early on that the less he said about his work, the more people talked
about it. And the more they talked, the more valuable his work became.
By saying less than necessary you create the appearance of meaning
and power. Also, the less you say, the less risk you run of saying something
foolish, even dangerous. In 1825
a new czar, Nicholas 1, ascended the
throne of Russia. A rebellion immediately broke out, led by liberals de-
manding that the country modemize~—-that its industries and civil struc-
tures catch up with the rest of Europe. Brutally crushing this rebellion (the
Decembrist Uprising), Nicholas I sentenced one of its leaders, Kondraty
Ryleyev, to death. On the day of the execution Ryleyev stood on the
lows, the noose around his neck. The trapdoor opened~——~but as Ryleyev
dangled, the rope broke, dashing him to the ground. At the time, events
like this were considered signs of providence or heavenly will, and a man
saved from execution this way was usually pardoned. As Ryleyev got to his
feet, bruised and dirtied but believing his neck had been saved, he called
out to the crowd, “You see, in Russia they don’t know how to do anything
properly, not even how to make rope!”
A messenger immediately went to the Winter Palace with news of the
failed hanging. Vexed by this disappointing turnabout, Nicholas 1 never-
theless began to sign the pardon. But then: “Did Ryleyev say anything after
this miracle?” the czar asked the messenger. “Sire,” the messenger replied,
“he said that in Russia they don’t even know how to make rope.”
“In that case,” said the Czar, “let us prove the contrary,” and he tore
up the pardon. The next day Ryleyev was hanged again. This time the
rope did not break.
Learn the lesson: Once the words are out, you cannot take them back.
Keep them under control. Be particularly careful with sarcasm: The mo-
LAW 4
.75
36
LAW 4
mentary satisfaction you gain with your biting words will be outweighed by
the price you pay.
I m
at g e
1
The Oracle at Delphi.
When visitors consulted the
Oracle, the priestess would utter
a few enigmatic words that seemed
full of meaning and import. No one
disobeyed the words of the Oracle-
they held power over life and death.
Authority: Never start moving your own lips and teeth before
the subordinates do. The longer I keep quiet, the sooner others
move their lips and teeth. As they move their lips and teeth, I
can thereby understand their real intentions.
.
.
. If the sovereign
is not mysterious, the ministers will find opportunity to take
and take. (Han-feivtzu, Chinese philosopher, third century B.C.)
REVERSAL
There are times when it is unwise to be silent. Silence can arouse suspicion
and even insecurity, especially in your superiors; a vague or ambiguous
comment can open you up to interpretations you had not bargained for. Si-
lence and saying less than necessary must be practiced with caution, then,
and in the right situations. It is occasionally wiser to imitate the courtjester,
who plays the fool but knows he is smarter than the king. He talks and talks
and entertains, and no one suspects that he is more than just a fool.
Also. words can sometimes act as a kind of smoke screen for any de-
ception you might practice. By bending your listener’s ear with talk, you
can distract and mesmerize them; the more you talk, in fact, the less suspi-
cious of you they become. The verbose are not perceived as sly and ma-
nipulative but as helpless and unsophisticated. This is the reverse of the
silent policy employed by the powerful: By talking more, and making
yourself appear weaker and less intelligent than your mark, you can prac-
tice deception with greater ease.
LAW
SO MUCH DEPENDS ON
RE PUTATION—GUARD IT
WITH YOUR LIFE
JUDGMENT
Reputation is the camerstane afpowet: Tlmmgh reputw
tion alone you can intimidate and win; once it slips,
however, you (me vulnerable, and will be attacked on all
sides. Make your refiutatéon unassailable. Always be
alert to poiential attacks and thwart them before they
happen. Meanwhiie, leam to dastmy your enemies by
opming lwles in their own rejmtaéiorzs.
Then stand
aside and let public opinion hang them.
37
‘I Ill’. .\\|\| U
.‘\
at |iH.K!:\ \\ (Tl! TH!
l'l
HA
1'
A frig/1/ful ¢-/iidmm,
SKIN
To mrvh by llwwn
[merit In rm!
Its /‘ury an 41 smful
worfd. In calf
It by its rightful name.
the [7(,’.8‘fi[(’Il(‘I{,
That Arhermzfillirzg
2.-512! of vim:’cIz<:¢'
Had Iallvn on every
animal.
Not all were (Ir.-art. but
all lay near (0 dying»,
And nuns‘ was any
I(7ngcr Irymg
To find new fuel mflem‘
life '5 _flI'('kwzngfires:
Nu fimds mciled their
(im'zW.\','
No more [lid wnlvm
and f(Jxé’.\‘ row
In .wurrtI1 uflmrni/e.x.i,
/w/piers: pray,‘
/X mi dove wtmi(I' not
mnmr: will: tinvr.
For low and joy lzuzl
/lawn rm-av.
Tlzr Lion axxtzriverl flu»-
Lthnir tn my.‘ “Dear
_frtcm1.\‘.
I doubt not lfvfor
heaven's Iiigh (‘mfg
Thur on us .xinrwr.i' wm»
mmtfull.
Let him ofm who‘;
.3iII!1('ll the mar!
Full virrint II) the
£Il‘E’HgiIIg /l('Ll V011,)’
hoxz,
Ami mr1_v hr min .mIm—
firm for 11,) all;
For hiSI()ry truth
'
that in riww 1
We must Inukr
.s‘m‘r1:/i(1’.\‘.
Ul1(1(ft‘€lW€(1 and .st<'rnA
eyrri. 1:13‘ in.«'{2€cI
Our L(H'I.s(.‘l£,‘!1(‘(’. Ax I
re: ollccr.
To put my ;:r:'rrI_v
appetite In .s'1r><-p,
I've hanqzwluzl my
\‘
38
,
LAW5
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAWI
During China’s War of the Three Kingdoms (A.D. 207—265), the great gen-
eral Chuko Liang, leading the forces of the Sim Kingdom, dispatched his
vast army to a distant camp while he rested in a small town with a handful
of soldiers. Suddenly sentinels hurried in with the alarming news that an
enemy force of over 150,000 troops under Sima Yi was approaching. With
only a hundred men to defend him, Chuko Liang’s situation was hopeless.
The enemy would finally capture this renowned leader.
Without lamenting his fate, or wasting time trying to figure out how he
had been caught, Liang ordered his troops to take down their flags, throw
open the city gates, and hide. He himself then took a seat on the most visi-
ble part of the city’s wall, wearing a Taoist robe. He lit some incense,
strummed his lute, and began to chant. Minutes later he could see the vast
enemy army approaching, an endless phalanx of soldiers. Pretending not
to notice them, he continued to sing and play the lute.
Soon the army stood at the town gates, At its head was Sima Yi, who
instantly recognized the man on the wall.
Even so, as his soldiers itched to enter the unguarded town through its
open gates, Sima Yi hesitated, held them back, and studied Liang on the
wall. Then, he ordered an immediate and speedy retreat.
Interpretation
Chuko Liang was commonly known as the “Sleeping Dragon.” His ex-
ploits in the War of the Three Kingdoms were legendary. Once a man
claiming to be a disaffected enemy lieutenant came to his camp, offering
help and information. Liang instantly recognized the situation as a setup;
this man was a false deserter, and should be beheaded. At the last minute,
though, as the ax was about to fall, Liang stopped the execution and of-
fered to spare the man’s life if he agreed to become a double agent. Grate
ful and terrified, the man agreed, and began supplying false information to
the enemy. Liang won battle after battle.
On another occasion Liang stole a military seal and created false docu-
ments dispatching his enemy’s troops to distant locations. Once the troops
had dispersed, he was able to capture three cities, so that he controlled an
entire corridor of the enemy’s kingdom. He also once tricked the enemy
into believing one of its best generals was a traitor, forcing the man to es-
cape and join forces with Liang. The Sleeping Dragon carefully cultivated
his reputation of being the cleverest man in China, one who always had a
trick up his sleeve. As powerful as any weapon, this reputation struck fear
into his enemy.
Sima Yi had fought against Chuko Liang dozens of times and knew
him well. When he came on the empty city, with Liang praying on the
wall, he was stunned. The Taoist robes, the chanting, the incense——this had
to be a game of intimidation. The man was obviously taunting him, daring
him to walk into a trap. The game was so obvious that for one moment it
crossed Yi’s mind that Liang actually
was alone, and desperate. But so
great was his fear of Liang that he dared not risk finding out. Such is the
power of reputation. It can put a vast army on the defensive, even force
them into retreat, without a single arrow being fired.
F07; as Cicero says, even those who argue againstfame still want the books they
write against it to bear their name in the title and hope to becamefamousfor
despising it. Everything else is subject to barter: we will let ourfriends have
our goods and our lives if need be; but a case ofsharing auvfame and
making someone else the gift of our reputation is hardly to befound.
ll/Ior1Io7'g74.e, 1533-1 592
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II
In 1841 the young P. T. Barnum, trying to establish his reputation as Amer-
ica's premier showman, decided to purchase the American Museum in
Manhattan and turn it into a collection of curiosities that would secure his
fame. The problem was that he had no money. The museum’s asking price
was $15,000, but Barnum was able to put together a proposal that appealed
to the institution’s
owners even though it replaced cash up front with
dozens of guarantees and references. The owners came to a verbal agree
ment with Barnum, but at the last minute, the principal partner changed
his mind, and the museum and its collection were sold to the directors of
Peale’s Museum. Barnum was infuriated, but the partner explained that
business
was business——the museum had been sold to Pea1e’s because
Peale’s had a reputation and Barnum had none.
Barnum immediately decided that if he had no reputation to bank on,
his only recourse was to min the reputation of Peale’s. Accordingly he
launched a letter-writing campaign in the newspapers, calling the owners a
bunch of “broken-down bank directors” who had no idea how to run a mu-
seum or entertain people. He warned the public against buying Peale’s
stock, since the business’s purchase of another museum would invariably
spread its resources thin. The campaign was effective, the stock plum-
meted, and with no more confidence in Pea.le’s track record and reputa-
tion, the owners of the American Museum reneged on their deal and sold
the whole thing to Barnum.
It took years for Pea.le’s to recover, and they never forgot what Bar-
num had done. Mr. Peale himself decided to attack Barnum by building a
reputation for “highbrow entertainment,” promoting his museum’s pro
grams as more scientific than those of his vulgar competitor. Mesmerism
(hypnotism) was one of Pea.le’s “scientific” attractions, and for a while it
drew big crowds and was quite successful. To fight back, Barnum decided
to attack Peale’s reputation yet again.
Barnum organized a rival mesmeric performance in which he himself
apparently put a little girl into a trance. Once she seemed to have fallen
deeply under, he tried to hypnotize members of the audience~—but no mat-
ter how hard he tried, none of the spectators fell under his spell, and many
of them began to laugh. A frustrated Barnum finally announced that to
prove the little girl’s trance was real, he would cut off one of her fingers
many a sheep
Who’d in/ured me in
no rH.\’])4’Cl.
And even in my time
been known to rry
Shepherd pie.
I/‘need he, then. I’ll die.
Yet I SIISPECI
That others also cough!
(0 own their film‘.
1119 only fair tho! all
should do their best
To single out the
guilllesl.
"
“Sire, you're too good
a king,
" the For hcgmv;
"Sucli scruples’ are too
delicate. lily word,
lb cm shc'cp, thu!
profane mu] vulgar
herd,
Thafs sin? Nay. Sim
enough /or Slltll ti crew
To be dr-vourerl by
xuclz as you;
While oflhc .\‘l7€[lllL‘t‘(lS
we may my
Thur they ¢l(’.l'€IvE'il the
worst they got,
'l‘heir.v bcmg rlze lo!
llwl over us‘ [1eu5!.\' plot
A /Iinzsy dream-
ll(’g()ll¢’,Il sway.
"
Thiix spake (he Fox,
and tomly L'hccr.s' rate
high,
While none dam! cm‘!
too cold an cyr:
(M 'l'lgerI\, Bcur'.s: Illltl
other eminmccs‘
(1/lax‘! Impanlamzlalra
of‘/’PI1ce.s‘.
Each, ofnevcr mind
what currish lmrd.
Was really
11 saint, lhey
all agrecrl.
Tlzm mm." My Ass, In
my: "1 do recall
[low once I crmxwzrl on
obln’y-mt-ad
Whore hunger, grim‘ in
plenty. and wtrhul,
I /lave no zlmiln. xome
imp ofg/‘ecrl,
/l.\'.\'alli*rl me. and I
slmverl a /ungue '3‘-
hrezzdzh wide
Whive frurzkly I ll no
right to Amy grass.
"
LAW 5
39
All forthwith fell full
cry upon the Ass:
A Wolfofsome book-
learning teslified
Tim! that curs: beast
mus! suffer Iheir
despite,
That gullskimzerl
author of their [71'te0L¢s
plight.
They judged him fir
for naught but
gallows-bail.’
How vile, anal/zeris
grass to xec1uestrzIlr’.’
His death alone could
wcpiale
A crime so heinous, as
full well he learns.
Tim (curt, as youtz» of
grcal or poor estate,
Willpamt you either
white or bfllilk by turns‘.
III}?-. masr i=AnLi:s
or LA FON'IAl\'lZ,
J1-:AN m= LA l7()NT.A\lNF,
1621-1695
4!)
LAW 5
without her noticing. But as he sharpened the knife, the little girl’s eyes
popped open and she ran away, to the audience’s delight. He repeated this
and other parodies for several weeks. Soon no one could take Peale’s show
seriously, and attendance went way down. Within a few weeks, the show
closed. Over the next few years Bamum established a reputation for audac-
ity and consummate showtnanship that lasted his whole life. Pea1e’s reputa-
tion, on the other hand, never recovered.
Interpretation
Bamum used two different tactics to ruin Peale’s reputation. The first was
simple: He sowed doubts about the museum’s stability and solvency.
Doubt is a powerful weapon: Once you let it out of the bag with insidious
rumors, your opponents are in a horrible dilemma. On the one hand they
can deny the rumors, even prove that you have slandered them. But a
layer of suspicion will remain: Why are they defending themselves so des-
perately? Maybe the rumor has some truth to it? If, on the other hand, they
take the high road and ignore you, the doubts, unrefuted, will be even
stronger. If done correctly, the sowing of rumors can so infuriate and unset-
tle your rivals that in defending themselves they will make numerous mis-
takes. This is the perfect weapon for those who have no reputation of their
own to work from.
Once Bamum did have a reputation of his own, he used the second,
gentler tactic, the fake hypnotism demonstration: He ridiculed his rivals’
reputation. This too was extremely successful. Once you have a solid base
of respect, ridiculing your opponent both puts him on the defensive and
draws more attention to you, enhancing your own reputation. Outright
slander and insult are too strong at this point; they are ugly, and may hurt
you more than help you. But gentle barbs and mockery suggest that you
have a strong enough sense of your own worth to enjoy a good laugh at
your rival’s expense. A humorous front can make you out as a harmless en-
tertainer while poking holes in the reputation of your rival.
It is easier to cope with a bad conscience than with a bad reputation.
Friedrirh /Vietzsrhrc, 18-44—I 900
KEYS TO POWER
The people around us, even our closest friends, will always to some extent
remain mysterious and unfathomable. Their characters have secret recesses
that they never reveal. The unknowableness of other people could prove
disturbing if we thought about it long enough, since it would make it im-
possible for us really to judge other people. So we prefer to ignore this fact,
and to judge people on their appearances, on what is most visible to our
eyes—-clothes, gestures, words, actions. In the social realm, appearances are
the barometer of almost all of our judgments, and you must never be nus-
led into believing otherwise. One false slip, one awkward or sudden change
in your appearance, can prove disastrous.
This is the reason for the supreme importance of making and main-
taining a reputation that is of your own creation.
That reputation will protect you in the dangerous game of appear-
ances, distracting the probing eyes of others from knowing what you are
really like, and giving you a degree of control over how the world judges
you—a powerful position to be in. Reputation has a power like magic:
With one stroke of its wand, it can double your strength. It can also send
people scurrying away from you. Whether the exact same deeds appear
brilliant or dreadful can depend entirely on the reputation of the deer.
In the ancient Chinese court of the Wei kingdom there was a man
named Mi Tzu-hsia who had a reputation for supreme civility and gracious-
ness. He became the mler’s favorite. It was a law in Wei that “whoever
rides secretly in the ruler’s coach shall have his feet cut off,” but when Mi
Tzu-hsia’s mother fell ill, he used the royal coach to visit her, pretending
that the ruler had given him permission. When the ruler found out, he said,
“How dutiful is Mi Tzu-hsia! For his mother’s sake he even forgot that he
was committing a crime making him liable to lose his feet!”
Another time the two of them took a stroll in an orchard. Mi Tzu-hsia
began eating a peach that he could not finish, and he gave the ruler the
other half to eat. The ruler remarked, “You love me so much that you would
even forget your own saliva taste and let me eat the rest of the peach!”
Later, however, envious fellow courtiers, spreading word that Mi Tzu-
hsia was actually devious and arrogant, succeeded in damaging his reputa-
tion; the ruler came to see his actions in a new light “This fellow once rode
in my coach under pretense of my order,” he told the courtiers angrily,
“and another time he gave me a half-eaten peach.” For the same actions
that had charmed the ruler when he was the favorite, Mi Tzu-hsia now had
to suffer the penalties. The fate of his feet depended solely on the strength
of his reputation.
In the beginning, you must work to establish a reputation for one out-
standing quality, whether generosity or honesty or cunning. This quality
sets you apart and gets other people to talk about you. You then make your
reputation known to as many people as possible (subtly, though; take care
to build slowly, and with a firm foundation), and watch as it spreads like
wildfire.
A solid reputation increases your presence and exaggerates your
strengths without your having to spend much energy. It can also create an
aura around you that will instill respect, even fear. In the fighting in the
North African desert during World War II, the German general Erwin
Rommel had a reputation for cunning and for deceptive maneuvering that
struck terror into everyone who faced him. Even when his forces were de-
pleted, and when British tanks outnumbered his by five to one, entire cities
would be evacuated at the news of his approach.
As they say, your reputation inevitably precedes you, and if it inspires
respect, a lot of your work is done for you before you arrive on the scene,
or utter a single word.
Your success seems destined by your past triumphs. Much of the suc-
LAW 5
41
42
LAW 5
cess of Henry Kissinger‘s shuttle diplomacy rested on his reputation for
ironing out differences; no one wanted to be seen as so unreasonable that
Kissinger could not sway him. A peace treaty seemed a fait accompli as
soon as Kissinger’s name became involved in the negotiations.
Make your reputation simple and base it on one sterling quality. This
single quality—-efiiciency, say, or seductiveness-—becomes a kind of calling
card that announces your presence and places others under a spell. A repu-
tation for honesty will allow you to practice all manner of deception.
Casanova used his reputation as a great seducer to pave the way for his fu-
ture conquests; women who had heard of his powers became immensely
curious, and wanted to discover for themselves what had made him so ro-
mantically successful.
Perhaps you have already stained your reputation, so that you are pre-
vented from establishing a new one. In such cases it is wise to associate
with someone whose image counteracts your own, using their good name
to whitewash and elevate yours. It is hard, for example, to erase a reputa-
tion for dishonesty by yourself; but a paragon of honesty can help. ‘Nixon
P. T. Barnum wanted to clean up a reputation for promoting vulgar enter-
tainment, he brought the singer jenny Lind over from Europe. She had a
stellar, high—class reputation, and the American tour Bamum sponsored for
her greatly enhanced his own image. Similarly the great robber barons of
nineteentlrcentury America were long unable to rid themselves of a repu-
tation for cruelty and mean-spiritedness. Only when they began collecting
art, so that the names of Morgan and Frick became permanently associated
with those of da Vinci and Rembrandt, were they able to soften their un-
pleasant image.
Reputation is a treasure to be carefully collected and hoarded. Espe-
cially when you are first establishing it, you must protect it strictly, antici-
pating all attacks on it. Once it is solid, do not let yourself get angry or
defensive at the slanderous comments of your enemies—that reveals inse-
curity, not confidence in your reputation. Take the high road instead, and
never appear desperate in your self—defense. On the other hand, an attack
on another man’s reputation is a potent weapon, particularly when you
have less power than he does. He has much more to lose in such a battle,
and your own thus~far-small reputation gives him a. small target when he
tries to return your fire. Bamum used such campaigns to geat effect in his
early career. But this tactic must be practiced with skill; you must not seem
to engage in petty vengeance. If you do not break your enemy’s reputation
cleverly, you will inadvertently ruin your own.
Thomas Edison, considered the inventor who harnessed electricity,
believed that a workable system would have to be based on direct cur-
rent (DC). When the Serbian scientist Nikola Tesla appeared to have suc-
ceeded in creating a system based on alternating current (AC), Edison was
furious. He determined to ruin Tesla’s reputation, by making the public be-
lieve that the AC system was inherently unsafe, and Tesla irresponsible in
promoting it.
To this end he captured all kinds of household pets and electrocuted
them to death with an AC current. When this wasn’t enough, in 1890 he got
New York State prison authorities to organize the world’s first execution by
electrocution, using an AC current. But Edison’s electrocution experiments
had all been with small creatures; the charge was too weak, and the man
was only half killed. In perhaps the country’s cruelest state-authorized exe
cufion, the procedure had to be repeated. It was an awful spectacle.
Although, in the long run, it is Edison’s name that has survived, at the
time his campaign damaged his own reputation more than Tesla’s. He
backed off. The lesson is simple-—never go too far in attacks like these, for
that will draw more attention to your own vengefulness than to the person
you are slandering. When your own reputation is solid, use subtler tactics,
such as satire and ridicule, to weaken your opponent while making you out
as a charming rogue. The mighty lion toys with the mouse that crosses his
path—any other reaction would mar his fearsome reputation.
Image:
A Mine Full of
Diamonds and Rubies.
You dug for it, you found it,
and your wealth is now assured.
Guard it with your life. Robbers and thieves
will appear from all sides. Never take your wealth
for granted, and constantly renew it—time
will diminish the jewels’ luster,
and bury them from sight.
Authority: Therefore I should wish our courtier to bolster up his inherent
worth with skill and cunning, and ensure that whenever he has to go where
he is
a stranger, he is preceded by
a good reputation.
4
.
. For the lame
which appears to rest on the opinions of many fosters a certain unshak-
able belief in a man’s worth which is then easily strengthened in minds
already thus disposed and prepared. {Baldassare Castiglione, 1478— 1529)
REVERSAL
There is no possible Reversal. Reputation is critical; there are no excep-
tions to this law. Perhaps, not caring what others think of you, you gain a
reputation for insolence and arrogance, but that can be a valuable image in
itself—0scar Wilde used it to great advantage. Since we must live in soci-
ety and must depend on the opinions of others, there is nothing to be
gained by neglecting your reputation. By not caring how you are per»
ceived, you let others decide this for you. Be the master of your fate, and
also of your reputation.
LAW 5
‘
43
LAW
COURT ATTENTION
AT ALL COST
JUDGMENT
Everything is judged
its appearance,‘ wlmt is unseen
counts for nothing. Never let yourself get lost in the
crowd, ihen, or buried in oblivicm. Stand out. Be am-
spicuous, at all cast. Make youmzlf a magnet of atten-
tion by appearing larger, more colmful, more mysterious
than the bland and timid masses.
PART I: SURROUND YOUR NAME WITH THE
SENSATIONAL AND SCANDALOUS
Draw attention to yourselfby creating an unforgettable, even controversial
image. Court scandal. Do anything to make yourself seem larger than life
and shine more brightly than those around you. Make no distinction be-
tween kinds ofattention—notoriety ofany sort will bringyon power. Better
to be slandered and attacked than ignored.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAVV
P. T. Barnum, America’s premier nineteenth-century showman, started his
career as an assistant to the owner of a circus, Aaron Turner. In 1836 the
circus stopped in Annapolis, Maryland, for a series of performances. On
the morning of opening day, Barnum took a stroll through town, wearing a
new black suit. People started to follow him. Someone in the gathering
crowd shouted out that he was the Reverend Ephraim K. Avery, infamous
as a man acquitted of the charge of murder but still believed guilty by most
Americans. The angry mob tore off Bamum’s suit and was ready to lynch
him. After desperate appeals, Barnum finally convinced them to follow
him to the circus, where he could verify his identity.
Once there, old Turner confirmed that this was all a practical joke-—he
himself had spread the rumor that Barnum was Avery. The crowd dis—
persed, but Barnum, who had nearly been killed,
was not amused. He
wanted to know what could have induced his boss to play such a trick. “My
dear Mr. Barnum,” Turner replied, “it was all for our good. Remember, all
we need to ensure success is notoriety.” And indeed everyone in town was
talking about thejoke, and the circus was packed that night and every night
it stayed in Annapolis. Barnum had learned a lesson he would never forget.
Bamum‘s first big venture of his own was the American Museum——a
collection of curiosities, located in New York. One day
a beggar ap-
proached Bamum in the street. Instead of giving him money, Bamum de-
cided to employ him. Taking him back to the museum, he gave the man
live bricks and told him to make a slow circuit of several blocks. At certain
points he was to lay down a brick on the sidewalk, always keeping one
brick in hand. On the return journey he was to replace each brick on the
street with the one he held. Meanwhile he was to remain serious of counte-
nance and to answer no questions. Once back at the museum, he was to
enter, walk around inside, then leave through the back door and make the
same bricklaying circuit again.
On the man’s first walk through the streets, several hundred people
watched his mysterious
movements. By his fourth circuit, onlookers
swarmed around him, debating what he was doing. Every time he entered
the museum he was followed by people who bought tickets to keep watch»
ing him. Many of them were distracted by the museum’s collections, and
stayed inside. By the end of the first day, the brick man had drawn over a
'll|l» \\"AS|' SVI) ‘l'|l|".
l*’ltI'\t,.‘li
A wasp named Pin Tail
was long in quest of
some (Iced that would
make him forever
famous. So one day he
entered the king's
palace and slung the
little prince, who was in
hell. The prince awoke
with loud cries. The
king and his coumers
rushed in to see what
had happened. The
prince was yelling as
the warp stung him
again and again. The
cozmiers tried to catch
the warp, and each in
turn was stung. The
whole myalh0u.s'1zhnld
rushed in, the news
soon spread, and
people flocked lo the
palace. The city was in
an uproar, all l)m'iue.\'.\‘
Sll.S'[l€N(l(.’d. Said the
wasp to itself before it
expired from its efforts.
“A name without/J1me
is like/ire wilhuul
flame. There is Iwthirrg
like attracting notzce at
any cost.
"
INDIAN 1-ABLE
LAW 6
I
45
[Sum wlmt I'm milwl
uf. lgvt my (/(mm of
rmown.
Pu rim Am«,rIN(>.
l-1‘)ZAl55(»
'l‘tH.
I «)1 RI‘ l\R'H-I‘
A work that way Volume
tartly ;)u'.\mIml In u
prmce was bound to
seem in mime wuy
sprevizzl. '1'/iv arlirr
hinz.s’e[fm[g/it also /rvv
to attract the £rIl(m!i(1I!
vftlze court zhmugh his
he}2m’i'o:.u: in l/?1.\'ari'.\'
izrzig/11:31:! Smlmmi Wm
"wall knmw: hall: for
his prr.x‘mzuI ¢'ccenIri(i-
mas and for his rv/Jmu~
(ion at
11 good prlirmir.
"
b’emu.\‘e Pope Leo X
“fmmd pI¢'u.\m‘r' In
.\‘llC/I .s‘rran_+;r*, /mrrn
hmined imlivitluu/.5‘.
"
/w marlrl Sozfumu N
krzighl, mtm'n},{ the
mm to gr) c‘ump/('(e‘l_\/
(N11 oflizk miml. Van
Ma:zci3:'r_;"m4n(1 it odd
that the {7l’Ol1U(,‘I.$ of
('o.v9wli.\' Kort?! '5' r*Xp<'1'z~
nwmy in momlz and
foot pmnring wart‘
bz)u_;;h1 by norablar
permm "Iaevuu.\‘c of
their 0rl:I1'ry."yz'! Kvlvl
wax only adding a van‘
anon to vimx'lur experi-
nwmtv by Tirmn, Ugu
(la Cnrpi zmtl I’a/ma
Grm-‘om’, wfm, &('t'r)r4l«
mg to Baiychini painter]
um}: riiesr fizigcvis‘
“hr-,rrIu.s'x> ihcy wi.~:he(/
to imitate the rmrthotl
14.3111 Iw [he .S'1lpn'Im.‘
Creator,
" Vim Mumlvr
46
‘
LAW 6
thousand people into the museum. A few days later the police ordered him
to cease and desist from his walks——the crowds were blocking traffic. The
bricklaying stopped but thousands of New Yorkers had entered the mu-
seum, and many of those had become P. T. Barnum converts.
Barnum would put a band of musicians on a balcony overlooking the
street, beneath a huge banner proclaiming FREE MUSIC FOR THE MILLIONS.
What generosity, New Yorkers thought, and they flocked to hear the free
concerts. But Barnum took pains to hire the worst musicians he could find,
and soon afier the band struck up, people would hurry to buy tickets to the
museum, where they would be out of earshot of the band’s noise, and of
the booing of the crowd.
One of the first oddities Barnum toured around the country wasjoice
Heth, a woman he claimed was 161 years old, and whom he advertised as a
slave who had
once been George Washington’s
nurse. After several
months the crowds began to dwindle, so Barnum sent an anonymous letter
to the papers, claiming that Heth was a clever fraud. ‘joice Heath,” he
wrote, “is not a human being but an automaton, made up of whalebone,
indie-rubber, and numberless springs.” Those who had not bothered to see
her before were immediately curious, and those who had already seen her
paid to see her again, to find out whether the rumor that she was a robot
was true.
In 1842, Barnum purchased the carcass of what was purported to be a
mermaid. This creature resembled a monkey with the body of a fish, but
the head and body were perfectly joined—it was truly a wonder. After
some research Barnum discovered that the creature had been expertly put
together injapan, where the hoax had caused quite a stir.
He nevertheless planted articles in newspapers around the country
claiming the capture of a mermaid in the Fiji Islands. He also sent the pa—
pers woodcut prints ofpaintings showing mermaids. By the time he showed
the specimen in his museum, a national debate had been sparked over the
existence of these mythical creatures. A few months before Batnum’s cam~
paign, no one had cared or even known about mermaids; now everyone
was talking about them as if they were real. Crowds flocked in record num»
bers to see the Fiji Mermaid, and to hear debates on the subject.
A few years later, Barnum toured Europe with General Tom Thumb. a
five-year—old dwarf from Connecticut whom Bamum claimed
was
an
elevenvyear-old English boy, and whom he had trained to do many re-
markable acts. During this tour Bamum’s name attracted such attention
that Queen Victoria, that paragon of sobriety, requested a private audience
with him and his talented dwarf at Buckingham Palace. The English press
may have ridiculed Bamum, but Victoria was royally entertained by him,
and respected him ever after.
Interpretation
Barnum understood the fundamental truth about attracting attention:
Once people’s eyes are on you, you have a special legitimacy. For Barnum,
creating interest meant creating a crowd; as he later wrote, “Every crowd
has a silver lining.” And crowds tend to act in conjunction. If one person
stops to see your beggarman laying bricks in the street, more will do the
same. They will gather like dust bunnies. Then, given a gentle push, they
will enter your museum or watch your show. To create a crowd you have to
do something different and odd. Any kind of curiosity will serve the pur-
pose, for crowds are magnetically attracted by the unusual and inexplica-
ble. And once you have their attention, never let it go. If it veers toward
other people, it does so at your expense. Barnum would ruthlessly suck at~
tention from his competitors, knowing what a valuable commodity it is.
At the beginning of your rise to the top, then, spend all your energy on
attracting attention. Most important: The quality of the attention is irrele
vant. No matter how badly his shows were reviewed, or how slanderously
personal were the attacks on his hoaxes, Barnum would never complain. If
a newspaper critic reviled him particularly badly, in fact, he made sure to
invite the man to an opening and to give him the best seat in the house. He
would even write anonymous attacks on his own work, just to keep his
name in the papers. From Bamum’s vantage, attentionwwhether negative
or positive——was the main ingredient of his success. The worst fate in the
world for a man who yearns fame, glory, and, of course, power is to be
ignored.
Ifthe cou.m'er happens to engage in arms in some public spectacle
such asjausting
.
.
. he will ensure that the home he has is beautifully
caparisoned, that he himselfis suitably attired, with appropriate
mentors and ingenious mines to attract the eyes qfthe onlookers
in his direction as surely as the ladeswne attracts iron.
Halzlr1.s.wn> (Irz.tl2T,grli01zr2, I 4 78- I 529
KEYS TO POWER
Burning more brightly than those around you is a skill that no one is born
with. You have to learn to attract attention, “as surely as the lodestone at~
tracts iron.” At the start ofyour career, you must attach your name and rep-
utation to a quality, an image, that sets you apart from other people. This
image can be something like a characteristic style of dress, or a personality
quirk that amuses people and gets talked about. Once the image is estalr
lished, you have an appearance, a place in the sky for your star.
It is a common mistake to imagine that this peculiar appearance of
yours should not be controversial, that to be attacked is somehow bad.
Nothing could be further from the truth. To avoid being a flash in the pan,
and having your notoriety eclipsed by another, you must not discriminate
between different types of attention; in the end, every kind will work in
your favor. Barnum, we have seen, welcomed personal attacks and felt
no need to defend himself. He deliberately courted the image of being a
humbug.
reports (/1111 (}r7s'sa<'rr
attracted the attention
of ljmpumr Clmrlcs V
by wearing ufamu.v1it‘
paper <,'()si‘1un:e. In
doing so he was adopt»
mg the tactics tl.$‘€(/ by
Di:zocrr1Ie.s'. who. in
order to gain (ZC(‘L’.l‘S' In
Altczmmler the Great. is
suit! to have appeared
di.rgL1isc(1 as the rmkt-cf
Ht'r.':ule.x wlzm the
monarch was xittizzg in
jzrdgnzciiz.
!‘H§€ <,‘()UR’l’ mrris‘i‘.
MARTIN VVARNKE.
l993
LAW6
.1
47
LAW 6
The court of Louis XIV contained many talented writers, artists, great
beauties, and men and women of impeccable virtue, but no one was more
talked about than the singular Due de Lauzun. The duke was short, almost
dwarfish, and he was prone to the most insolent kinds of behavior-—he
slept with the king’s mistress, and openly insulted not only other courtiers
but the king himself. Louis, however, was so beguiled by the duke’s eccen~
tricities that he could not beat his absences from the court. It was simple:
The strangeness of the duke’s character attracted attention. Once people
were enthralled by him, they wanted him around at any cost.
Society craves larger-than-life figures, people who stand above the
general mediocrity. Never be afraid, then, of the qualities that set you apart
and draw attention to you. Court controversy, even scandal. It is better to
be attacked, even slandered, than ignored. All professions are ruled by this
law, and all professionals must have a bit of the showman about them.
The great scientist Thomas Edison knew that to raise money he had to
remain in the public eye at any cost. Almost as important as the inventions
themselves was how he presented them to the public and courted attention.
Edison would design w'sual1y dazzling experiments to display his dis~
coveries with electricity. He would talk of future inventions that seemed
fantastic
at
the time-—robots,
and
machines
that
could photograph
thought—-and that he had no intention of wasting his energy on, but that
made the public talk about him. He did everything he could to make sure
that he received more attention than his great rival Nikola Tesla, who may
actually have been more brilliant than he was but whose name was far less
known. In 1915, it was rumored that Edison and Tesla would bejoint recip-
ients of that year’s Nobel Prize in physics. The prize was eventually given to
a pair of English physicists; only later was it discovered that the prize com-
mittee had actually approached Edison, but he had turned them down, re-v
fusing to share the prize with Tesla. By that time his fame was more secure
than Tesla’s, and he thought it better to refuse the honor than to allow his
rival the attention that would have come even from sharing the prize.
If you find yourself in a lowly position that offers little opportunity for
you to draw attention, an effective trick is to attack the most visible, most
famous, most powerful person you can find. When Pietro Aretino, a young
Roman servant boy of the early sixteenth century, wanted to get attention
as a writer of verses, he decided to publish a series of satirical poems rid}
culing the pope and his affection for a pet elephant. The attack put Aretino
in the public eye immediately. A slanderous attack on a person in a posi-
tion ofpower would have a similar effect. Remember, however, to use such
tactics sparingly after you have the public’s attention, when the act can
wear thin.
Once in the limelight you must constantly renew it by adapting and
varying your method of courting attention. If you don’t, the public will
grow tired, will take you for granted, and will move on to a newer star. The
game requires constant vigilance and creativity. Pablo Picasso never al
lowed himself to fade into the background; if his name became too at
tached to a particular style, he would deliberately upset the public with a
new series of paintings that went against all expectations. Better to create
something ugly and disturbing, he believed, than to let viewers grow too fa-
miliar with his work. Understand: People feel superior to the person whose
actions they can predict. If you show them who is in control by playing
against their expectations, you both gain their respect and lighten your hold
on dreir fleeting attention.
I m a g e
:
The Limelight. The
actor who steps into this bxil»
liant light attains a heightened
presence. All eyes are on him. There
is room for only one actor at a time in
the limelight’s narrow beam; do what-
ever it takes to make yourself its focus.
Make your gestures
so large,
amus-
ing, and scandalous that the
light stays
on you while the
other actors are left in
the
shadows.
Authority: Be ostentatious and
be seen.
.
.
. What is not seen is
as though it did not exist.
.
.
. It
was light that first caused all cre-
ation to shine forth. Display fills
up many blanks, covers up defi-
ciencies, and gives everything
a second life, especially when it
is
backed by
genuine
merit.
(Baltasar
Gracién,
16014658)
LAW 6
349
LAW 6
PART II: CREATE AN AIR OF MYSTERY
In a world gmwing increasingly banal aindpfamiliai; what seems enig-
matic instantly draws attention. Never make it too clear what you are
doing or about to do. Do not show allyour canis, /in air ofmystery height-
ens your presence; it also creates anticipation--everyone will be watching
you to see what happens next. Use mystery to beguile, seduce, evenfrighten.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
Beginning in 1905, rumors started to spread throughout Paris of a young
Oriental girl who danced in a private home, wrapped in veils that she grad-
ually discarded. A local journalist who had seen her dancing reported that
“a woman from the Far East had come to Europe laden with perfume and
jewels, to introduce some of the richness of the Oriental colour and iife into
the satiated society of European cities.” Soon everyone knew the dam:er’s
name: Mata Han‘.
Early that year, in the winter, small and select audiences would gather
in
a salon filled with Indian statues and other relics while an orchestra
played music inspired by Hindu andJavanese melodies. After keeping the
audience waiting and wondering, Mata Hari would suddenly appear, in a
startling costume: a white cotton brassiere covered with India.n~type jewels;
jeweled bands at the waist supporting a sarong that revealed as much as it
concealed; bracelets up the arms. Then Mata Hari would dance, in a style
no one in France had seen before, her whole body swaying as if she were in
a trance. She told her excited and curious audience that her dances told
stories from Indian mythology and javanese folktales. Soon the cream of
Paris, and ambassadors from far—off lands, were competing for invitations
to the salon, where it was rumored that Mata. Hari was actually performing
sacred dances in the nude.
The public wanted to know more about her. She told journalists that
she was actually Dutch in origin, but had grown up on the island ofjava.
She would also talk about time spent in India, how she had learned sacred
Hindu dances there, and how Indian women “can shoot straight, ride
horseback, and are capable of doing logarithms and talk philosophy.” By
the summer of 1905, although few Parisians had actually seen Mata Hari
dance, her name was on everyone’s lips.
As Mata Hari gave more interviews, the story of her origins kept
changing: She had grown up in India, her grandmother was the daughter
of ajavanese princess, she had lived on the island of Sumatra where she
had spent her time “horsebaxzk riding, gun in hand, and risking her life.”
No one knew
certain about her, butjournalists did not mind these
changes in her biography. They compared her to an Indian goddess, a
creature from the pages of Baudelaire—whatever their imagination wanted
to see in this mysterious woman from the East.
In August of 1905, Mata Hari performed for the first time in public.
Crowds thronging to see her on opening night caused a riot. She had now
become
a cult figure, spawning many imitations. One reviewer wrote,
“Mata Hari personifies all the poetry of India, its mysticism, its voluptuous-
ness, its hypnotizing charm.” Another noted, “If India possesses such unex-
pected treasures, then all Frenchmen will emigrate to the shores of the
Ganges.”
Soon the fame of Mata Hari and her sacred Indian dances spread be-
yond Paris. She was invited to Berlin, Vienna, Milan. Over the next few
years she performed throughout Europe, mixed with the highest social cir-
cles, and earned an income that gave her an independence rarely enjoyed
by a woman of the period. Then, near the end of World War I, she was ar-
rested in France, tried, convicted, and finally executed as a German spy.
Only during the trial did the truth come out: Mata Hari was not from java
or India, had not grown up in the Orient, did not have a drop of Eastern
blood in her body. Her real name was Margaretha Zelle, and she came
from the stolid northern province of Friesland, Holland.
Interpretation
When Margaretha Zelle arrived in Paris, in 1904, she had half a franc in
her pocket. She was one of the thousands of beautiful young girls who
flocked to Paris every year, taking work
as artists’ models, nightclub
dancers, or vaudeville performers at the Folies Bergére. After a few years
they would inevitably be replaced by younger girls, and would often end
up on the streets, turning to prostitution, or else returning to the town they
came from, older and chastened.
Zelle had higher ambitions. She had no dance experience and had
never performed in the theater, but as a young girl she had traveled with
her family and had witnessed local dances in Java and Sumatra. Zelle
clearly understood that what was important in her act was not the dance it-
self, or even her face or figure, but her ability to create an air of mystery
about herself. The mystery she created lay not just in her dancing, or her
costumes, or the stories she would tell, or her endless lies about her origins;
it lay in an atmosphere enveloping everything she did. There was nothing
you could say for sure about her——she was always changing, always sur-
prising her audience with new costumes, new dances, new stories. This air
of mystery left the public always wanting to know more, always wondering
about her next move. Mata Hari was no more beautiful than many of the
other young girls who came to Paris, and she was not a particularly good
dancer. What separated her from the mass, what attracted and held the
public’s attention and made her famous and wealthy, was her mystery.
People are enthralled by mystery; because it invites constant interpreta-
tion, they never tire of it. The mysterious cannot be grasped. And what
cannot be seized and consumed creates power.
LAW 6
f51
52
LAW 6
KEYS TO POWER
In the past, the world was filled with the terrifying and unknowable—
diseases, disasters, capricious despots, the mystery of death itself. What we
could not understand we reimagined as myths and spirits. Over the cen-
turies, though, we have managed, through science and reason, to illumi-
nate the darkness; what was mysterious and forbidding has grown familiar
and comfortable. Yet this light has a price: in a world that is ever more
banal, that has had its mystery and myth squeezed out of it, we secretly
crave enigmas, people
or things that cannot be instantly interpreted,
seized, and consumed.
That is the power of the mysterious: It invites layers of interpretation,
excites our imagination, seduces us into believing that it conceals some-
thing marvelous. The world has become so familiar and its inhabitants so
predictable that what wraps itself in mystery will almost always draw the
limelight to it and make us watch it.
Do not imagine that to create an air of mystery you have to be grand
and awe~inspirlng. Mystery that is woven into your day-to-day demeanor,
and is subtle, has that much more power to fascinate and attract attention.
Remember: Most people are upfront, can be read like an open book, take
little care to control their words or image, and are hopelessly predictable.
By simply holding back, keeping silent, occasionally uttering arnbiguous
phrases, deliberately appearing inconsistent, and acting odd in tlie subtlest
of ways, you will emanate an aura of mystery. The people around you will
then magnify that aura by constantly dying to interpret you.
Both artists and con artists understand the vital link between being
mysterious and attracting interest. Count Victor Lustig, the aristocrat of
swindlers, played the game to perfection. He was always doing things that
were different, or seemed to make no sense. He would show up at the best
hotels in a limo driven by ajapanese chauffeur; no one had ever seen a
Japanese chauffeur before, so this seemed exotic and strange. Lustig would
dress in the most expensive clothing, but always with something—a medal,
a flower, an arrnband—out of place, at least in conventional terms. This
was seen not as tasteless but as odd and intriguing. In hotels he would be
seen receiving telegrams at all hours, one afier the other, brought to him by
his Japanese chauffeur—telegrams he would tear up with utter noncha-
lance. (In fact they were fakes, completely blank.) He would sit alone in the
dining room, reading a large and impressive-looking book, smiling at peo-
ple yet remaining aloof. Vlfithin a few days, of course, the entire hotel
would be abuzz with interest in this strange man.
All this attention allowed Lustig to lure suckers in with ease. They
would beg for his confidence and his company. Everyone wanted to be
seen with this mysterious aristocrat. And in the presence of this distracting
enigma, they wouldn’t even notice that they were being robbed blind.
An air of mystery can make the mediocre appear intelligent and pro-
found. It made Mata Hari, a woman of average appearance and intelli-
gence, seem like a goddess, and her dancing divinely inspired. An air of
mystery about an artist makes his or her artwork immediately more intrigu-
ing, a trick Marcel Duchamp played to great effect. It is all very easy to
clo—-say little about your work, tease and titillate with alluring, even contra~
dictory comments, then stand back and let others try to make sense of it all.
Mysterious people put others in a kind of inferior position—-that of try-
ing to figure them out. To degrees that they can control, they also elicit the
fear surrounding anything uncertain or unknown. All great leaders know
that an aura of mystery draws attention to them and creates an intimidating
presence. Mao Tse-rung, for example, cleverly cultivated an enigmatic
image; he had no worries about seeming inconsistent or contradicting him~
self-—fl1e very contradictoriness of his actions and words meant that he a.l~
ways had the upper hand. No one, not even his own wife, ever felt they
understood him, and he therefore seemed larger than life. This also meant
that the public paid constant attention to him, ever anxious to witness his
next move.
If your social position prevents you from completely wrapping your
actions in mystery, you must at least learn to make yourself less obvious.
Every now and then, act in a way that does not mesh with other people’s
perception of you. This way you keep those around you on the defensive,
eliciting the kind of attention that makes you powerful. Done right, the ore
ation of enigma. can also draw the kind of attention that strikes terror into
your enemy.
During the Second Punic War (219402 13.0.), the great Carthaginian
general Hannibal was wreaking havoc in his march on Rome. Hannibal
was known for his cleverness and duplicity.
Under his leadership Carthage’s army, though smaller than those of
the Romans, had constantly outmaneuvered them. On
one occasion,
though, Hann1‘bal’s scouts made a horrible blunder, leading his troops into
a marshy terrain with the sea at their back. The Roman army blocked the
mountain passes that led inland, and its general, Fabius, was ecstatic-at
last he had Hannibal trapped. Posting his best sentries on the passes, he
worked on a plan to destroy Hannibal’s forces. But in the middle of the
night, the sentries looked down to see a mysterious sight: A huge proces-
sion of lights was heading up the mountain. Thousands and thousands of
lights. If this was Hannibal’s army, it had suddenly grown a hundredfold.
The sentries argued heatedly about what this could mean: Reinforce-
ments from the sea? Troops that had been hidden in the area? Ghosts? No
explanation made sense.
As they watched, fires broke out all over the mountain, and a horrible
noise drified up to them from below, like the blowing of a million horns.
Demons, they thought. The sentries, the bravest and most sensible in the
Roman army, fled their posts in a panic.
By the next day, Hannibal had escaped from the marshland. What was
his trick? Had he really conjured up demons? Actually what he had done
was order bundles of twigs to be fastened to the horns of the thousands of
oxen that traveled with his troops as beasts of burden. The twigs were then
LAW6
3
53
lit, giving the impression of the torches of a vast army heading up the
mountain. When the flames burned down to the oxen’s skin, they stam-
peded in all directions, bellowing like mad and setting fires all over the
mountainside. The key to this device’s success was not the torches, the
fires, or the noises in themselves, however, but the fact that Hannibal had
created a puzzle that captivated the sentries’ attention and gradually terri-
fied them. From the mountaintop there was no way to explain this bizarre
sight. If the sentries could have explained it they would have stayed at their
posts.
If you find yourself trapped, cornered, and on the defensive in some
situation, try a simple experiment: Do something that cannot be easily ex-
plained or interpreted. Choose a simple action, but carry it out in a way
that unsettles your opponent, a way with many possible interpretations,
making your intentions obscure. Don’t just be unpredictable (although this
tactic too can be successful—see Law 17); like Hannibal, create a scene that
cannot be read. There will seem to be no method to your madness, no
rhyme or reason, no single explanation. If you do this right, you will in-
spire fear and trembling and the sentries will abandon their posts. Call it
the “feigned madness of Hamlet” tactic, for Hamlet uses it to great effect in
Shakespeare‘s play, frightening his stepfather Claudius through the mys-
tery of his behavior. The mysterious makes your forces seem larger, your
power more terrifying.
Image: The Dance of
the
\/'cils~-—-thcz
veils
envelop the dancer.
What they
reveal
causes
excitement,
What they conceal
heightens interest. The
essence of mystery.
Authority: If you do not declare yourself immediately, you arouse
expectation.
.
.
. Mix a little mystery with everything, and the very
mystery stirs up veneration. And when you explain, be not too ex-
plicit.
.
.
. In this manner you imitate the Divine way when you
cause men to wonder and watch. (Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658)
.9‘)
LAW 6
R EV F. RSAL
In the beginning of your rise to the top, you must attract attention at all
cost, but as you rise higher you must constantly adapt. Never wear the pub-
lic out with the same tactic. An air of mystery works wonders for those who
need to develop an aura of power and get themselves noticed, but it must
seem measured and under control. Mata Hari went too far with her fabri-
cations; although the accusation that she was a spy was false, at the time it
was a reasonable presumption because all her lies made her seem suspi-
cious and nefarious. Do not let your air of mystery be slowly transformed
into a reputation for deceit. The mystery you create must seem a game,
playful and unthreatening. Recognize when it goes too far, and pull back.
There are times when the need for attention must be deferred, and
when scandal and notoriety are the last things you want to create. The at-
tention you attract must never offend or challenge the reputation of those
above you—not, at any rate, if they are secure. You will seem not only pal-
try but desperate by comparison. There is an art to knowing when to draw
notice and when to withdraw.
Lola Montez was one of the great practitioners of the art of attracting
attention. She managed to rise from a middle—class Irish background to
being the lover of Franz Liszt and then the mistress and political adviser of
King Ludwig of Bavaria. In her later years, though, she lost her sense of
proportion.
In London in 1850 there was to be a performance of Shakespeare’s
Macbeth featuring the greatest actor of the time, Charlesjohn Kean. Every-
one of consequence in English society was to be there; it was rumored that
even Queen Victoria and Prince Albert were to make a public appearance.
The custom of the period demanded that everyone be seated before the
queen anived. So the audience got there a little early, and when the queen
entered her royal box, they observed the convention of standing up and
applauding her. The royal couple waited, then bowed. Everyone sat down
and the lights were dimmed. Then, suddenly, all eyes turned to a box op-
posite Queen Victoria’s: A woman appeared from the shadows, taking her
seat later than the queen. It was Lola Montez. She wore a diamond tiara on
her dark hair and a long fur coat over her shoulders. People whispered in
amazement as the ermine cloak was dropped to reveal a low-necked gown
of crimson velvet. By turning their heads, the audience could see that the
royal couple deliberately avoided looking at Lola’s box. They followed
Victoria’s example, and for the rest of the evening Lola Montez was ig-
nored. After that evening no one in fashionable society dared to be seen
with her. All her magnetic powers were reversed. People would flee her
sight. Her future in England was finished.
Never appear overly greedy for attention, then, for it signals insecurity,
and insecurity drives power away. Understand that there are times when it
is not in your interest to be the center of attention. When in the presence of
a king or queen, for instance, or the equivalent thereof, bow and retreat to
the shadows; never compete.
LAW 6
I
55
56
LAW
GET OTHERS TO DO THE
WORK FOR YOU, BUT,
ALWAYS TAKE THE CREDIT
JUDGMENT
Use the wisdom, knowledge, and legwork of other people
tofurtheryour own cause. Not only will such assistance
save you valuable time and energy, it will give you a
godlike aura of qfficiency and speed. In the end your
helpers will be forgotten and you will be remembeml.
Never do yourselfwhat others can doforyou.
TRANSGRESSION AND OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In 1883 a young Serbian scientist named Nikola Tesla was working for the
European division of the Continental Edison Company. He was a brilliant
inventor, and Charles Batchelor, a plant manager and a personal friend of
Thomas Edison, persuaded him he should seek his fortune in America, giv-
ing him a letter of introduction to Edison himself. So began a life of woe
and tribulation that lasted until Tesla’s death.
When Tesla met Edison in New York, the famous inventor hired him
on the spot. Tesla worked eighteen-hour days, finding ways to improve the
primitive Edison dynarnos. Finally he offered to redesign them completely.
To Edison this seemed a monumental task that could last years without
paying off, but he told Tesla, “’I'here’s fifty thousand dollars in it for you-—xf
you can do it.” Tesla labored day and night on the project and after only a
year he produced a greatly improved version of the dynamo, complete
with automatic controls. He went to Edison to break the good news and re-
ceive his $50,000. Edison was pleased with the improvement, for which he
and his company would take credit, but when it came to the issue of the
money he told the young Serb, “Tesla, you don’t understand our American
lmmori,” and offered a small raise instead.
Tesla’s obsession was to create an alternating-current system (AC) of
electricity. Edison believed in the direct—current system (DC), and not only
refused to support Tesla’s research but later did all he could to sabotage
him. Tesla turned to the great Pittsburgh magnate George Westinghouse,
who had started his own electricity company. Westinghouse completely
funded Tesla’: research and offered him a generous royalty agreement on
future profits. The AC system Tesla developed is still the standard today-—
but after patents were filed in his name, other scientists came forward to
take credit for the invention, claiming that they had laid the groundwork
for him. His name was lost in the shuffle, and the public came to associate
the invention with Westinghouse himself.
A year later, Westinghouse
was caught in
a mkeover bid from
_}. Pierpont Morgan, who made him rescind the generous royalty contract
he had signed with Tesla. Westinghouse explained to the scientist that his
company would not survive if it had to pay him his full royalties; he per-
suaded Tesla to accept a buyout of his patents for $216,000-—a large sum,
no doubt, but far less than the $12 million they were worth at the time. The
financiers had divested Tesla of the riches, the patents, and essentially the
credit for the greatest invention of his career.
The name of Guglielmo Marconi is forever linked with the invention
of radio. But few know that in producing his invention-——he broadcast a sig-
nal across the English Channel in 1899--Marconi made use of a patent
Tesla had filed in 1897, and that his work depended on Tesla’.-i research.
Once again Tesla received no money and no credit. Tesla invented an in-
duction motor as well as the AC power system, and he is the real “father of
radio.” Yet none of these discoveries bear his name. As an old man, he
lived in poverty.
THE T()RT()lSE. 'l'Hl-I
l7I.F.l"llA\$T
AND Till’.
l[|l‘P()l‘U'l‘A\’|l B
One day lite rorloise
met the elephant. who
trumpeted, "Our ofmy
way, you wmkling—
I might step on you!”
The tortoise was not
afraid and stayed
where he was, so the
elephant stepped on
him, but could not
crush him. “Do not
boast, Mr. Elephant, 1
am as strong as you
are.’
" said the tortoise,
bu! the elephant just
laughed. So the tortoise
asked him :0 come
to his hill the nexi
morning.
The next day, before
sunrise, the tortoise ran
down the hill to (he
river, where he met the
hippopotamus, who
waxjust on his way
back into the water
after his rtoclurmzl
_feading. “Mr Hippo!
Shall we have a rug~of-
war? I box I’m as
strong as you are!”
said {he tortoise. The
hippopotamus laughed
at this ridiculous idea,
but agreed. The tortoise
produced a long rope
and told /he hippo to
hold it in his mouth
until the tortoise
shouted “Hey!”
Then the turlaiie run
back up the hill where
he found the elephant,
who was getting impa-
tient. He gave the
clcpham Ihe arher end
of the rape and said,
“When Isay ‘Hey!’
pull, and you'll see
which afus is the
strongest." Then he ran
halfway back down the
LAW 7
-
57
hill, to nplai'1' wlivrfl hp
muldn ‘I be smrv. am]
.s'hmm’d. “lI(,'_v./" T/14*
clephunl and [he
/xip[mpv!urrm.\‘ pulled
mizlpullezl. hut rm/‘llwr
um/(I Iimlge I/14'
urlw/——Ilu'y were of
e-qua! xrrmgrli. '1'/zev
bath ngrwrl that rim
t0rI0i.s‘H wax as xtrmzg:
ax I/zr’_\' wen’.
Never (In what orlwri‘
am (In for you. The tur-
rm'\'e let nllirrs do the
work for him while he
go! [ire 4 redil.
Z.-sxRr.i\N mm E:
in be sure, if Ihr lumler
reiivs on i/i(’ .st'citrz'Iy of
lite c:irria_ce, utilizes lite
legs Iaftlte Sl.\' /I()75(‘.§',
and trinkets Wang Lirmg
hold 15??!’ rrms; than he
will not tin‘ l1iII1A‘(‘lf
and willfirzd if vu.s'_v to
overtake .sw:'ft rIlZtl)l(!l.s‘.
.'Vnw .w1p[1<2.s'ing hr’
di.icura'€d 1/“! ml V1111-
rage n_/‘the carriage,
gzn-1: up the us’
It! legs’
nf the Imrscs mm’ the
,s'k1ilo_fl:Vurt,g- Liang,
und ulzg/11011 10 nm
after Illt,’ zmimals; then
even llmugiz his legs‘
wart: (IS quit’/c as Lou
C1153‘. he would M.-at he
in time In ovcrlu/LU the
animals‘. In fact, l]'g:onrl
Izrznvux and .s‘tIUng
vzlrriagm are taken mm
rm-, then now Immi-
mcn um! Imrtrlwrmmn
will be gum] vnouglz Io
z'zm'l: Ilw uizimulx.
l'lAI\~l'[~l«|‘7l7,
(‘nIr\|,s|. vn1J,<>s0I'm,R,
11111:!) (‘I .N‘l‘lV){V’ n.('.
58
LAW
7
In 1917, during his later impoverished years, Tesla was told he was to
receive the Edison Medal of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers.
He turned the medal down. “You propose,” he said, “to honor me with a
medal which I could pin upon my coat and strut for a vain hour before the
members of your Institute. You would decorate my body and continue to
let starve, for failure to supply recognition, my mind and its creative prod
ucts, which have supplied the foundation upon which the major portion of
your Institute exists.”
Interpretation
Many harbor the illusion that science, dealing with facts as it does, is be
yond the petty rivalries that trouble the rest of the world. Nikola Tesla was
one of those. He believed science had nothing to do with politics, and
claimed not to care for fame and riches. As he grew older, though, this ru-
ined his scientific work. Not associated with any particular discovery, he
could attract no investors to his many ideas. While he pondered great in-
ventions for the future, others stole the patents he had already developed
and got the glory for themselves.
He wanted to do everything on his own, but merely exhausted and im-
poverished himselfin the process.
Edison was Tesla’s polar opposite. He wasn’t actually much of a scien~
tific thinker or inventor; he once said that he had no need to be a mathe-
matician because he could always hire
one. That was Fdisoifs main
method. He was really a businessman and publicist, spotting the trends and
the opportunities that were out there, then hiring the best in the field to do
the work for him. If he had to he would steal from his competitors. Yet his
name is much better known than Tesla’s, and is associated with more in-
ventions.
The lesson is twofold: First, the credit for an invention or creation is as
important, if not more important, than the invention itself. You must secure
the credit for yourself and keep others from stealing it away, or from piggy—
backing on your hard work. To accomplish this you must always be vigilant
and ruthless, keeping your creation quiet until you can be sure there are no
vultures circling overhead. Second, learn to take advantage of other peo-
ple’s work to Further your own cause. Time is precious and life is short. If
you try to do it all on your own, you run yourself ragged, waste energy, and
burn yourself out. It is far better to conserve your forces, pounce on the
work others have done, and find a way to make it your own.
Everybody steals in commerce and industry.
I ‘ma stolen a lot myself
But I know how to steal.
'l‘horn/Ls‘ I1’//lisrm, I847’ I931
KEYS TO POWER
The world of power has flue dynamics of the jungle: There are those who
live by hunting and killing, and there are also vast numbers of creatures
(hyenas, vultures) who live oil" the hunting of others. These latter, less
imaginative types are often incapable of doing the work that is essential for
the creation of power. They understand early on, though, that if they wait
long enough, they can always find another animal to do the work for them.
Do not be naive: At this very moment, while you are slaving away on some
project, there are vultures circling above trying to figure out a way to sur-
vive and even thrive off your creativity. It is useless to complain about this,
or to wear yourself ragged with bitterness, as Tesla did. Better to protect
yourself and join the game. Once you have established a power base, be-
come a vulture yourself, and save yourself a lot of time and energy.
Of the two poles of this game, one can be illustrated by the example of
the explorer Vasco Nunez de Balboa. Balboa had an obsessionw-the dis-
covery of El Dorado, a legendary city of vast riches.
Early in the sixteenth century, after countless hardships and brushes
with death, he found evidence of a great and wealthy empire to the south
of Mexico, in present—day Peru. By conquering this empire, the Incan, and
seizing is gold, he would make himself the next Cortes. The problem was
that even as he made this discovery, word of it spread among hundreds of
other conquistadors. He did not understand that half the game was keeping
it quiet, and carefiilly watching those around him. A few years after he dis-
covered the location of the Incan empire, a soldier in his own army, Fran-
cisco Pizarro, helped to get him beheaded for treason. Pizarro went on to
take what Balboa had spent so many years trying to find.
The other pole is that of the artist Peter Paul Rubens, who, late in his
career, found himself deluged with requests for paintings. He created a sys-
tem: In his large studio he employed dozens of outstanding painters, one
specializing in robes, another in backgrounds, and so on. He created a vast
production line in which a large number of canvases would be worked on
at the same time. When an important client visited the studio, Rubens
would shoo his hired painters out for the day. While the client watched
from a balcony, Rubens would work at an incredible pace, with unbeliev-
able energy. The client would leave in awe of this prodigious man, who
could paint so many masterpieces in so short a time.
This is the essence of the Law: Loam to get others to do the work for
you while you take the credit, and you appear to be of godlike strength and
power. If you think it important to do all the work yourself, you will never
get far, and you will suffer the fate of the Balboas and Teslas of the world.
Find people with the skills and creativity you lack. Either hire them, while
putting your own name on top of theirs, or find a way to take their work
and make it your own. Their creativity thus becomes yours, and you seem
a genius to the world.
There is another application of this law that does not require the para-
sitic use of your contemporaries’ labor: Use the past, a vast storehouse of
fill \ll.l\l) lll’\
.4 /mt wl(.*.Ilm1IIm'Ihr'r
right. and wm m'<‘u.s'-
mum] In .31 m/c’/zin;: up
tlrv ewrlh in .\’z'ur<'I; of
femrl. ulihmzgll Mimi.
still umziltuuzl In
.vr‘m!r I1 rlmry mm! diii~
gt'ml_v. I)’/‘whm IN!’ wax
ir to Hit’ imln.\‘/rmu.»
I/(ml? Another’ \Imrp-
sig/IMI /WI) wlm x‘[mn'rI
luv’ I('mIz'r'f<’t'I rwwr
P1i‘l)l~’t'1rl {mm I1r.rLs‘ir!L’.
mad cir;oymt'. mrlmm
.\'r'r¢1!r'him,I. f}Y(’f!‘lliI of
1/11‘ vi/zcr".\‘ /u/‘am; Fm‘ us
u/rm us‘ I/It‘ blind hm
it t'aIr'/ml up It (7ur'/u_»-
mm, he/' m,m'/7_fII/
mmpumrm (lcmurml
H.
mm c 2.
GoH1im.nLlvssnm.
172‘)
l7':4l
LAW 7
59
60‘
LAW 7
knowledge and wisdom. Isaac Newton called this “standing on the shoul-
ders of giants.” He meant that in making his discoveries he had built on the
achievements of others. A great part of his aura of genius, he knew, was at-
tributable to his shrewd ability to make the most of the insights of ancient,
medieval, and Renaissance scientists. Shakespeare borrowed plots, charac-
terizations, and even dialogue from Plutarch, among other writers, for he
knew that nobody surpassed Plutarch in the writing of subtle psychology
and witty quotes. How many later writers have in their turn borrowed
from-~plagz'anlzed——Shakespeare?
We all know how few of today’s politicians write their own speeches.
Their own words would not win them a single vote; their eloquence and
wit, whatever there is of it, they owe to a speech writer. Other people
do the work, they take the credit. The upside of this is that it is a. kind
of power that is available to everyone. Learn to use the knowledge of the
past and you will look like a genius, even when you are really just a clever
borrower,
Writers who have delved into human nature, ancient masters of strat-
egy, historians of human stupidity and folly, kings and queens who have
leamed the hard way how to handle the burdens of power—-their knowl-
edge is gathering dust, waiting for you to come and stand on their shoul-
ders. Their wit can be your wit, their skill can be your skill, and they will
never come around to tell people how unoriginal you really are. You can
slog through life, making endless mistakes, wasting time and energy trying
to do things from your own experience. Or you can use the armies of the
past. As Bismarck once said, “Fools say that they learn by experience. I
prefer to profit by others’ experience.”
Image: The Vulture. Of all the creatures in
the jungle,
he
has it the
easiest.
The
hard work of others becomes his work;
their failure to survive becomes his
nourishment. Keep an eye on
the Vulture—while you are
hard at work, he is cir-
cling above. Do not
fight him,join
him.
Authority: There is much to be known, life is short, and life is not life
without knowledge. It
is therefore
an excellent device to acquire
knowledge from everybody. Thus, by the sweat of 2mother’s brow, you
win the reputation of being an oracle. (Baltasar Gracién, 1601-1658)
REVERSAL
There are times when taking the credit for work that others have done is
not the wise course: If your power is not firmly enough established, you
will seem to be pushing people out of the limelight. To be a. brilliant ex-
ploiter of talent your position must be unshakable, or you will be accused
of deception.
Be sure you know when letting other people share the credit serves
your purpose. It is especially important to not be greedy when you have a
master above you. President Richard Nixon’s historic visit to the People’s
Republic of China was originally his idea, but it might never have come off
but for the deft diploma/cy of Henry Kissinger. Nor would it have been as
successful without Kissinger’s skills. Stilh when the time
came to take
credit, Kissinger adroitly let Nixon take the lion’s share. Knowing that the
truth would come out later, he was careful not to jeopardize his standing in
the short term by hogging the limelight. Kissinger played the game ex~
partly: He took credit for the work of those below him while graciously
giving credit for his own labors to those above. That is the way to play
the game.
LAW 7
Q0:
LAW
MAKE OTHER PEOPLE
COME TO YOU—
USE BAIT IF NECESSARY
JUDG MENT
1/Wzen youforce the otherperson to act, you me the one in
control. It is always better to makeyour opponent come to
you, abandoning his own plans in the pmcess. Lure him
wit};fabulous gm‘ns——then attack. You hold the amls.
OBSERVANCl:‘ OF THE LAW
At the Congress of Vienna in 1814, the major powers of Europe gathered to
carve up the remains of Napoleon’s fallen Empire. The city was full of gai-
ety and the balls were the most splendid in memory. Hovering over the
proceedings, however, was the shadow of Napoleon himself. Instead of
being executed or exiled far away, he had been sent to the island of Elba,
not far from the coast of Italy.
Even imprisoned
on
an island,
a
man
as bold and
creative
as
Napoleon Bonaparte made everyone nervous. The Austrians plotted to kill
him on Elba, but decided it was too risky. Alexander I, Rnssia’s tempera»
mental czar, heightened the anxiety by throwing a {it during the congress
when a part of Poland was denied him: “Beware, I shall loose the mon-
ster!" he threatened. Everyone knew he meant Napoleon. Of all the states
men gathered in Vienna, only Talleyrand, Napoleon’s former foreign
minister, seemed calm and unconcerned. It was as if he knew something
the others did not.
Meanwhile, on the island of Elba, Napoleon's life was a mockery of his
previous glory. As Elba’s “king,” he had been allowed to form a court-—
there was a cook, a wardrobe mistress, an official pianist, and a. handful of
courtiers. All this was designed to humiliate Napoleon, and it seemed to
work.
That winter, however, there occurred a. series of events so strange and
dramatic they might have been scripted in a play. Elba was surrounded by
British ships, their cannons covering all possible exit points. Yet somehow,
in broad daylight on 26 February 1815, a ship with nine hundred men on
board picked up Napoleon and put to sea The English gave chase but the
ship got away. This almost impossible escape astonished the public
throughout Europe, and terrified the statesmen at the Congress of Vienna.
Although it would have been safer to leave Europe, Napoleon not only
chose to return to France, he raised the odds by marching on Paris with a
tiny army, in hopes of recapturing the throne. His strategy worked——people
of all classes threw themselves at his feet. An army under Marshal Ney sped
from Paris to arrest him, but when the soldiers saw their beloved former
leader, they changed sides. Napoleon was declared emperor again. Volun-
teers swelled the ranks of his new army. Delirium swept the country. In Paris,
crowds went wild. The king who had replaced Napoleon fled the country.
For the next hundred days, Napoleon ruled France. Soon, however, the
giddiness subsided. France was bankrupt, its resources nearly exhausted,
and there was little Napoleon could do about this. At the Battle ofWaterloo,
injune of that year, he was finally defeated for good. This time his enemies
had learned their lesson: They exiled him to the barren island of Saint I-Ie~
lena, off the west coast of Africa. There he had no more hope of escape.
Interpretation
Only years later did the facts of Napoleon's dramatic escape from Elba
come to light. Before he decided to attempt this bold move, visitors to his
court had told him that he was more popular in France than ever, and that
LAW 8
63
M
LAW 8
the country would embrace him again. One of these visitors was Austria’s
General Keller, who convinced Napoleon that if he escaped, the European
powers, England included, would welcome him back into power. Napoleon
was tipped off that the English would let him go, and indeed his escape oc-
curred in the middle of the afternoon, in full view of English spyglasses.
What Napoleon did not know was that there was a man behind it all,
pulling the strings, and that this man was his former minister, Talleyrand.
And Talleyrand was doing all this not to bring back the glory days but to
crush Napoleon once and for all. Considering the emperor’s ambition un-
settling to Europe’s stability, he had turned against him long ago. When
Napoleon was exiled to Elba, Talleyrand had protested. Napoleon should
be sent farther away, he argued, or Europe would never have peace. But
no one Listened.
Instead of pushing his opinion, Talleyrand bided his time. Working
quietly, he eventually won over Castlereagh and Metternich, the foreign
ministers of England and Austria.
Together these men baited Napoleon into escaping. Even Koller’s visit,
to whisper the promise of glory in the exile’s ear, was part of the plan. Like
a master cardplayer, Talleyrand figured everything out in advance. He
knew Napoleon would fall into the trap he had set He also foresaw that
Napoleon would lead the country into a war, which, given France’s wea.k~
ened condition, could only last a few months. One diplomat in Vienna,
who understood that Talleyrand was behind it all, said, “He has set the
house ablaze in order to save it from the plague.”
When I havz laid baitfor deer,
I don? shout at thejirst doe that comes to sniff,
but wait until the whole herd has gathered round.
Otto mm Bismarck, IR] 5-I898
KEYS TO POWER
How many times has this scenario played itself out in history: An aggres~
sive leader initiates a series of bold moves that begin by bringing him
much power. Slowly, however, his power reaches a peak, and soon every-
thing turns against him. His numerous enemies band together; trying to
maintain his power, he exhausts himself going in this direction and that,
and inevitably he collapses. The reason for this pattern is that the aggres-
sive person is rarely in full control. He cannot see more than a couple of
moves ahead, cannot see the consequences of this bold move or that one.
Because he is constantly being forced to react to the moves of his ever-
growing host of enemies, and to the unforeseen consequences of his own
rash actions, his aggressive energy is turned against him.
In the realm of power, you must ask yourself, what is the point of chas-
ing here and there, trying to solve problems and defeat my enemies, if I
never feel in control? Why am I always having to react to events instead of
directing them? The answer is simple: Your idea of power is wrong. You
have mistaken aggressive action for effective action. And most often the
most effective action is to stay back, keep calm, and let others be frustrated
by the trips you lay for them, playing for long-term power rather than
quick victory.
Remember: The essence of power is the ability to keep the initiative,
to get others to react to your moves, to keep your opponent and those
around you on the defensive. When you make other people come to you,
you suddenly become the one controlling the situation. And the one who
has control has power. Two things must happen to place you in this posi-
tion: You yourself must learn to master your emotions, and never to be in-
fluenced by anger; meanwhile, however, you must play on people’s natural
tendency to react angrily when pushed and baited. In the long run, the
ability to make others come to you is a weapon far more powerful than any
tool of aggression.
Study how Talleyrand, the master of the art, performed this delicate
trick. First, he overcame the urge to try to convince his fellow statesmen
that they needed to banish Napoleon far away. It is only natural to want to
persuade people by pleading your case, imposing your will with words. But
this often turns against you. Few of Talleyrand’s contemporaries believed
Napoleon was still a threat, so that if he had spent a lot of energy trying to
convince them, he would only have made himself look foolish. Instead, he
held his tongue and his emotions in check. Most important of all, he laid
Napoleon a sweet and irresistible trap. He knew the man’s weakness, his
impetuosity, his need for glory and the love of the masses, and he played
all this to perfection. When Napoleon went for the bait, there was no dan-
ger that he might succeed and turn the tables on Talleyrand, who better
than anyone knew France’s depleted state. And even had Napoleon been
able to overcome these difficulties, the likelihood of his success would have
been greater were he able to choose his time and place of action. By setting
the proper trap, Talleyrand took the time and place into his own hands.
All of us have only so much energy, and there is a moment when our
energies are at their peak. ‘When you make the other person come to you,
he wears himself out, wasting his energy on the trip. In the year 1905, Rus-
sia ancl japan were at war. The Japanese had only recently begun to mod
emize their warships,
so that the Russians had a stronger navy, but by
spreading false information the Japanese marshal Togo Heihachiro baited
the Russians into leaving their docks in the Baltic Sea, making them believe
they could wipe out theJapanese fleet in one swift attack. The Russian fleet
could not reachjapan by the quickest route——through the Strait of Gibral—
tar and then the Suez Canal into the Indian Ocean"-because these were
controlled by the British, and japan was an ally of Great Britain. They had
to go around the Cape of Good Hope, at the southern tip of Africa, adding
over more than six thousand miles to the voyage. Once the fleet passed the
Cape, theJapanese spread another false story: They were sailing to launch
a counterattack. So the Russians made the entirejourney tojapan on conr
bat alert. By the time they arrived, their seamen were tense, exhausted, and
overworked, while the Japanese had been waiting at their ease. Despite the
LAW 8
65
66
LAW 8
odds and their lack of experience in modem naval warfare, the Japanese
crushed the Russians.
One added benefit of making the opponent come to you, as the _]a.pa—
nese discovered with the Russians, is that it forces him to operate in your
territory. Being on hostile ground will make him nervous and often he will
rush his actions and make mistakes. For negotiations or meetings, it is al-
ways wise to lure others into your territory, or the territory of your choice.
You have your bearings, while they see nothing familiar and are subtly
placed on the defensive.
Manipulation is
a dangerous game. Once
someone suspects he is
being manipulated, it becomes harder and harder to control him. But
when you make your opponent come to you, you create the illusion that he
is controlling the situation. He does not feel the strings that pull hirmjust as
Napoleon imagined that he himself was the master of his daring escape and
return to power.
Everything depends on the sweetness of your bait. If your trap is at»
tractive enough, the turbulence of your enemies’ emotions and desires will
blind them to reality. The greedier they become, the more they can he led
around.
The great nineteenth-century robber baron Daniel Drew was a master
at playing the stock market. When he wanted a particular stock to be
bought or sold, driving prices up or down, he rarely resorted to the direct
approach. One of his tricks was to hurry through an exclusive club near
Wall Street, obviously on his way to the stock exchange, and to pull out his
customary red bandanna to wipe his perspiring brow. A slip of paper
would fall from this bandanna that he would pretend not to notice. The
club’s members were always trying to foresee Drew’s moves, and they
would pounce on the paper, which invariably seemed to contain an inside
up on a stock. Word would spread, and members would buy or sell the
stock in droves, playing perfectly into Drew’s hands.
If you can get other people to dig their own graves, why sweat your-
self? Pickpockets work this to perfection. The key to picking a pocket is
knowing which pocket contains the wallet. Experienced pickpockets often
ply their trade in train stations and other places where there is a. clearly
marked sign reading BEWARE OF PICKPOCKE’l‘S. Passersby seeing the sign in-
variably feel for their wallet to make sure it is still there. For the watching
pickpockets, this is like shooting fish in a barrel. Pickpockets have even
been known to place their own BEWARE OF PICKPOCKETS signs to ensure
their success.
V/Vhen you are making people come to you, it is sometimes better to let
them know you are forcing their hand. You give up deception for overt ma-
nipulation. The psychological ramifications are profound: The person who
makes others come to him appears powerful, and demands respect.
Filippo Brunelleschi, the great Renaissance artist and architect, was a
great practitioner of the art of making others come to him as a sign of his
power. On one occasion he had been engaged to repair the dome of the
Santa Maria del Fiore cathedral in Florence. The commission was impor-
lam and prestigious. But when the city officials hired
a second man,
Lorenzo Ghibem‘, to work with B1-unelleschi, the great artist brooded in se~
cret. He knew that Ghiberti had gotten the job through his connections,
and that he would do none of the work and get half the credit. At a critical
moment of the construction, then, Brunelleschi suddenly developed a mys-
terious illness. He had to stop work, but pointed out to city officials that
they had hired Ghiberti, who should have been able to continue the work
on his own. Soon it became clear that Ghiberti was useless and the ofiicials
came begging to Brunelleschi. He ignored them, insisting that Ghiberti
should finish the project, until finally they realized the problem: They fired
Ghiberti.
By some miracle, Bnmelleschi recovered within days. He did not have
to throw a tantrum or make a fool of himself; he simply practiced the art of
“making others come to you.”
If on one occasion you make it a point of dignity that others must
come to you and you succeed, they will continue to do so even after you
stop trying.
Image: The Honcyed
Bear
Trap. The bear hunter
does not chase his prey; a bear
that knows it is hunted is nearly
impossible to catch and is fero-
Ciuus if cornered. Instead,
the
hunter lays
traps baited
with
honey.
He
does
not
exhaust
himself and risk his life in
pursuit. He baits, then waits.
Authority:
Good
warriors
make
others
come to them, and do not go to others. This
is the principle of emptiness and fullness
of others and self. When you induce oppo-
nents to come to you, then their force is
always
empty;
as
long
as
you
do
not
go to them. your force is always full. Attack
ing emptiness with fullness is like throwing
stones
on
eggs.
(Zhang
Yu.
eleventh
century commentator
on
The Art 0/’ W11}
LAW 8
67
68
LAW
8
REVERSAL
Although it is generally the wiser policy to make others exhaust themselves
chasing you, there are opposite cases where strildng suddenly and aggres-
sively at the enemy so demoralizes him that his energies sink. Instead of
making others come to you, you go to them, force the issue, take the lead.
Fast attack can be an awesome weapon, for it forces the other person to
react without the time to think or plan. With no time to think, people make
errors ofjudgment, and are thrown on the defensive. This tactic is the ob-
verse of waiting and baiting, but it serves the same function: You make
your enemy respond on your terms.
Men like Cesare Borgia and Napoleon used the element of speed to in-
timidate ancl control. A rapid and unforeseen move is terrifying and de-
moralizing. You must choose your tactics depending on the situation. If
you have time on your side, and know that you and your enemies are at
least at equal strength, then deplete their strength by making them come to
you. If time is against you—-your enemies are weaker, and waiting will only
give them the chance to recover—-give them no such chance. Strike quickly
and they have nowhere to go. As the boxer Joe Louis put it, “He can run,
but he can’t hide.”
LA‘W
WIN THROUGH YOUR
ACTIONS, NEVER
THROUGH ARGUMENT
JUDGMENT
Any momentary triumph you think you have gained
through argument is really a Pyrrhic victory: The 'resmt~
ment and ill will yau stir up is stronger and lasts longer
than any momentum‘ change ofopiuion. It is much more
powerful to get others to agree with you through your
actions, without saying a word. Demonstrate, do not
explicate.
69
llll
\(
l l\\ \\l>
Ill?
\l/.l| It
A rrzwr hm! .vz'n’e'rI /1 is
mm rfnr .wHh" Ihirly
,\"<'ut.\ um! was kmzwn
um! 1IdI21I/'r(lfrrr Im
Inyulty. II‘uth/}lIm'\'\,
mu! I/l'\UlHm In (ind.
His /u1m'\'z’\. /lHIt'L't‘«'/.
hurl Hltfdt’ him lNtIl2_V
1'tmn{m in the r mm.
M-Im s']1rr*ud s(r;riu.\ of
I113’ rlu]1ii<‘iIt‘ mm‘
,'m;li<Iy '.Hiuy trtrrknl
on the ssrlim: may in
and dtly .-mi ecmii he (no
faint‘ so (l'('.\1m.s~r the
{mzmwtt vizier mu}
/iImN_v urrlcrcri the mm:
who Kurd wrwrl hfm so
waif in be [ml to rlemli.
In this malln, I/IUYL’
(‘UI1(f(’l)1IlL’(/ ll) rim]/I
wen’ rial up and
(:‘mm'n into rim pun
wlwrc I/1:’ mlmn Iwpt
/til‘ iim'c'r.vIl1ur)(in;,'
rlog.\. T/to r/ng.:.\‘ mm/ll
prrmzpily lmr 1111:
w'z'u'm In pzvrvv.
Bzjlmw l><'m_g tlumm m
111:4 rlrxgx. I'zmvm»w, Um
vi.:Ir'r 115319;! for om’ §<'E.\‘!
rergruzu
‘I vxtmld like
It'll thlfct‘ r(‘.\‘pfI(*.
" 11¢’
mic]. ".w mm I am; pay
my (f¢'IvI.\'. milmr any
nw/In rim‘ It) nu’.
/mu/w i/nu.» llmt [I('H])f(’
/mm‘ pm In my um’.
HlI1l.\‘/IHIL‘ (mi my gnmlx
unzrmy llw IIIHII/7r’r\‘ of
my /lumilv and m v rho’/—
.'IP‘(’Il mu! up/min! u
gmmliuu I‘r»r1/mm."
/lflvr n'w*i\ mg tlgI1:i7—
mum’ Jim! me vizier
wrmlzi not 11')‘ m r'§r‘rI;>r'.
r/w.\'z1iIrm grmum‘ this
!'(‘{}1I(‘.\.I.
The vizier imrriwi
immc, mlh*t1:’;l one
lumdntrl gold pin cs.
/hm pun! IF t’i.‘vif m the
lumrvmrm wlm Irmlwsf
after the mlmn
70
LAW
51
’['RAl\'S(.')RF.SSlON OF THE LAW
In 131 1313., the Roman consul Publius Crassus Dives Mucianus, laying
siege to the Greek town of Pergamus, found himself in need of a battering
ram to force through the town’s walls. He had seen a couple of hefty ship’s
masts in a shipyard in Athens a few days before, and he ordered that the
larger of these be sent to him immediately. The military engineer in Athens
who received the order felt certain that the consul really wanted the
smaller of the masts. He argued endlessly with the soldiers who delivered
the request: The smaller mast, he told them, was much better suited to the
task. And indeed it would be easier to transport.
The soldiers warned the engineer that their master was not a man to
argue with, but he insisted that the smaller mast would be the only one that
would work with a machine that he was constructing to go with it. He drew
diagram after diagram, and went so far as to say that he was the expert and
they had no clue what they were talking about. The soldiers knew their
leader and at last convinced the engineer that it would be better to swallow
his expertise and obey.
After they left, though, the engineer thought about it some more. What
was the point, he asked himself, in obeying an order that would lead to fail-
ure? And so he sent the smaller mast, confident that the consul would see
how much more effective it was and reward him justly.
When the smaller mast arrived, Mucianus asked his soldiers for an ex-
planation. They described to him how the engineer had argued endlessly
for the smaller mast, but had finally promised to send the larger one. Mu-
cianus went into a rage. He could not concentrate on the siege, or consider
the importance of breaching the walls before the town received reinforce»
merits. All he could think about was the impudent engineer, whom he or-
dered to be brought to him immediately.
Arriving a few days later, the engineer gladly explained to the consul,
one more time, the reasons for the smaller mast He went on and on, using
the same arguments he had made with the soldiers. He said it was wise to
listen to experts in these matters, and if the attack was only tried with the
battering ram he had sent, the consul would not regret it Mucianus let him
finish, then had him stripped naked before the soldiers and flogged and
scourged with rods until he died.
Interpretation
The engineer, whose name has not been recorded by history, had spent his
life designing masts and pillars, and was respected as the finest engineer in
a city that had excelled in the science. He knew that he was right. A smaller
ram would allow more speed and carry more force. Larger is not necessar-
ily better. Of course the consul would see his logic, and would eventually
understand that science is neutral and reason superior. How could the con-
sul possibly persist in his ignorance if the engineer showed him detailed di-
agrams and explained the theories behind his advice?
The military engineer
was the quintessence of the Arguer,
at type
found everywhere among us. The Arguer does not understand that words
are never neutral, and that by arguing with a superior he impugns the intel
ligence of one more powerful than he. He also has no awareness of the per-
son he is dealing with. Since each man believes that he is right, and words
will rarely convince him otherwise, the arguer’s reasoning falls on deaf
ears. When cornered, he only argues more, digging his own grave. Once
he has made the other person feel insecure and inferior in his beliefs, the
eloquence of Socrates could not save the situation.
It is not simply a question of avoiding an argument with those who
stand above you. We all believe we are masters in the realm of opinions
and reasoning. You must be careful, then: Learn to demonstrate the cor-
rectness of your ideas indirectly.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In 1502, in Florence, Italy, an enormous block of marble stood in the
works department of the church of Santa Maria del Fiore. It had once been
a magnificent piece of raw stone, but an unskillful sculptor had mistakenly
bored a hole through it where there should have been a figure’s legs, gen-
erally mutilating it. Piero Soderini, Florence’s mayor, had contemplated
trying to save the block by commissioning Leonardo da Vinci to work on
it, or some other master, but had given up, since everyone agreed that the
stone had been ruined. So, despite the money that had been wasted on it, it
gathered dust in the dark halls of the church.
This was where things stood until some Florentine friends of the great
Michelangelo decided to write to the artist, then living in Rome. He alone,
they said, could do something with the marble, which was still magnificent
raw material. Michelangelo traveled to Florence, examined the stone, and
came to the conclusion that he could in fact carve a fine figure from it, by
adapting the pose to the way the rock had been mutilated. Soderini argued
that this was a waste of time——nobody could salvage such a disasterwbut
he finally agreed to let the artist work on it. Michelangelo decided he
would depict a. young David, sling in hand.
Weeks later,
as Michelangelo was putting the final touches on the
statue, Soderini entered the studio. Fancying himself it bit of a connoisseur,
he .-studied the huge work, and told Michelangelo that while he thought it
was magnificent, the nose, he judged, was too big. Michelangelo realized
that Soderini was standing in 2 place right under the giant figure and did
not have the proper perspective. Without a word, he gestured for Soderini
to follow him up the scaffolding. Reaching the nose, he picked up his
as well as a bit of marble dust that lay on the planks. With Sodetini
just a few feet below him on the scaffolding. Michelangelo started to tap
lightly with the chisel, letting the bits of dust he had gathered in his hand to
fall little by little. He actually did nothing to change the nose, but gave
every appearance of working on it. After a few minutes of this charade he
stood aside: “Look at it now.” “I like it better,” replied Soderini, “you’ve
made it come alive.”
¢lu;;_\‘. I in l);:[e'rr’(é‘ lhzy
man [/19 one izlirzrlred
gold _vi1>L'r'$ and srtili.
“Le! me («wk o:f:cr1}2(‘
dogs for ten da_v.\'.“ The
humslrmn (1__1;!e¢’¢1', and
for lbw !1(’Xl rm zlavx zin-
vizx'ier mrrtl for rlw
z’2m.x‘!.s‘ wilh grmi II!{(‘l2~
iiarr, _:;ru(Jmi/1gIhc/21
well lllIl1_f€l’diIlj,' them
lxanrlrn/1ze'I\'. By Jim (‘ltd
of:/ze Inn (lays rhcy
were rating out of lzir
hrlntl.
On the eleventh (lay lhv
vizzrr war called before
1/11’ Sultan, the churgm
were rcpmzted. and the
sultan wutcliecl as the
vizier was tied up and
thrown to lhff dugr Ye!
win»: the 1703.313 saw
him, tltrzr rsm up to him
with it-agging 11152.»: I¥1c_Y
rzihbferl ¢I}_'f2/clfomtlclv at
his rlrazzldens and
{vegan playirrgz mi}: 121'";
The sultan mid the
other wit/1e.«:r1',s* were
amazed, and flu‘ rulmn
asked 111:: vizier why Jhe
dog: had spare/1 in‘;
life. The vizier replica‘.
"I /zawz lvukvd after
I/1(’.\‘€ (logy fur ten dnyi:
T/w mlmn has .\1‘€Il llw
rm:/It_for lu‘m.rz'//T I
have [naked ziftcr you
for thirty ymzrx. and
Whit! is the result,’ I am
mmlermwrl to (heath on
[hf .rm*r1_1(I/I ufzIc‘L'l(.wI»
lions‘ bruu_(;hr by my
cm>mit*x
" Thu sulnm
h1u.vlu'rI with rlaatnn
He not only ]l’(lI'(.l()ll(f(l
the I/"ier but gave him
a fins‘ Si’! z)fr‘l'n[l14'.s' and
imndnl (war In him the
mm who had .s'I(1mim'r:d
iris regzzirairbte. The noble
vizier set Ifwuz }l"t‘1’ and
mnnmmu’ [0 mm: them
wish kirxdzicxsz
IHE §l'n'n E R1:_\E:
THE BOOK U!‘ .~\!<r\m(
Vvl3DU‘v'l AM) (v\:lLl:.
HI)K'H-J,NJil 1'1-,\'mi(v
LAW 9
‘
71
’l'llK ‘5r'§H§K\ Ul’ AM KSIS
\-‘Vhrn Aprzer had been
dcpmred in the way I
have described, /inmrm
mine to the throne. He
Lrelorxgerl to the di.xrm:t
of Sui: and was 41
nativr of the town
called Siuph At first
the lfgypzians wem
inclined to be contemp-
tuour, and did not
think much ofhim
hccuuse of his humble
and lmdirtinguislzed
origin,‘ but later on he
cleverly brought them
to heel. wizhout having
I'(’(:t)urSc‘ so harsh
rrzeaxures.
Amongst his z'zmrmwr-
able treamrer. he hm! 1!
gold foothath, Whi(‘h he
and his guests used on
m,-:,'a.s‘i()rz to wmh their
feet tn. This hr’ broke
up, and with the mate-
rial had a status‘ nuzrlze
to one of the gods.
\v}z1ch he then re: up in
what he thought the
most suimble spot in
the cil‘_v. The Egywiarzr
('uIz.9‘lantl}? cmnmg
upon the statue. Irzatm’
it with profototd rever-
Price, and as soon as
Amu.s‘t'.s‘ heard offhe
effect (I had upon them,
he Caller! at meeting and
rcvealml the fun that
the deeply rwetrcul
.rmtu,e was 07:01’ a fool-
bulh. which zlwy
washer! their few and
pixxezl and vamitcd in.
He wmr on to say that
/its own care was much
the sami’, in that once
he had been only an
nnlinury person and
was now their l<:'ng;.vo
tlml jets! as Ihey Izod
come to revere Hm
IftlI1.S'f:)rmZ£§f0€)!b£l(l1,
so {hay hmi boiler pay
72
LAW 9
Interpretation
Michelangelo knew that by changing the shape of the nose he might ruin
the entire sculpture. Yet Soderini was a patron who prided himself on his
aesthetic judgment. To offend such a man by arguing would not only gain
Michelangelo nothing, it would put future
commissions in jeopardy.
Michelangelo
was
too
clever
to
argue.
His
solution
was
to change
Soden‘m"s perspective (literally bringing him closer to the nose) without
making him realize that this was the cause of his misperception.
Fortunately for posterity, Michelangelo found a way to keep the per
faction of the statue intact while at the same time making Soderini believe
he had improved it. Such is the double power of winning through actions
rather than argument: No one is offended, and your point is proven.
KEYS T0 POWER
In the realm of power you must learn to judge your moves by their long»
term effects on other people. The problem in trying to prove a point or
gain a. victory through argument is that in the end you can never be certain
how it affects the people you’re arguing with: They may appear to agree
with you politely, but inside they may resent you. Or perhaps something
you said inadvertently even offended thern—-words have that insidious
ability to be interpreted according to the other person’s mood and insecuri-
ties. Even the best argument has no solid foundation, for we have all come
to distrust the slippery nature of words. And days after agreeing with some
one, we ofien revert to our old opinion out of sheer habit.
Understand this: Words are a dime a dozen. Everyone knows that in
the heat of an argument, we will all say anything to support our cause. We
will quote the Bible, refer to unverifiable statistics. Who can be persuaded
by bags of air like that? Action and demonstration are much more power-
ful and meaningful. They are there, before our eyes, for us to see-——“Yes,
now the statue’s nose does lookjust right.” There are no offensive words,
no possibility of misinterpretation. No one can argue with a demonstrated
proof. As Baltasar Graciim remarks, “The midi is generally seen, rarely
heard.”
Sir Christopher Wren was England’s version of the Renaissance man.
He had mastered the sciences of mathematics, astronomy, physics, and
physiology. Yet during his extremely long career as England’s most Cele‘
brated architect he was often told by his patrons to make impractical
changes in his designs. Never once did he argue or offend. He had other
ways of proving his point.
In 1688 Wren designed a magnificent town hall for the city of West-
minster. The mayor, however. was not satisfied; in fact he was nervous. He
told Wren he was afraid the second {floor was not secure, and that it could
all come crashing down on his office on the first floor. He demanded that
Wren add two stone columns for extra support. Wren, the consummate en-
gineer, knew that these columns would serve no purpose, and that the
mayor’s fears were baseless. But build them he did, and the mayor was
grateful. It was only years later that workmen on a high scaffold saw that
the columns stopped just short of the ceiling.
They were dummies. But both men got what they wanted: The mayor
could relax, and Wren knew posterity would understand that his original
dedgn worked and the columns were unnecessary.
The power of demonstrating your idea is that your opponents do not
get defensive, and are therefore more open to persuasion. Making them lit-
erally and physically feel your meaning is infinitely more powerful than are
gument.
A heclder once interrupted Nikita. Khrushchev in the middle of a
speech in which he was denouncing the crimes of Stalin. “You were a col-
league of Stalirfs,” the heekler yelled, “why didn’t you stop him then?”
Khrushschev apparently could not see the heckler and barked out, “VVho
said that?” No hand went up. No one moved a muscle. After a few seconds
of tense silence, Khrushchev finally said in a quiet voice, “Now you know
why I didn’t stop him.” Instead of just arguing that anyone facing Stalin
was afraid, knowing that the slightest sign of rebellion would mean certain
death, he had made them feel what it was like to face Stalin———had made
them feel the paranoia, the fear of speaking up, the terror of confronting
the leader, in this case Khrushchev. The demonstration was visceral and no
more argument was necessary.
The most powerful persuasion goes beyond action into symbol. The
power of a symbol——a flag, a mythic story, a monument to some emotional
event--is that everyone understands you without anything being said. In
1975, when Henry Kissinger was engaged in some frusti-ating negotiations
with the Israelis over the return of part of the Sinai desert that they had
seized in the 1967 war, he suddenly broke off a tense meeting and decided
to do some sightseeing. He paid a visit to the ruins of the ancient fortress
of Masada, known to all Israelis as the place where seven hundred Jewish
warriors committed mass suicide in A.I). 73 rather than give in to the
Roman troops besieging them. The Israelis instantly understood the mes-
sage of Kissingefs visit: He was indirectly accusing them of courting mass
suicide. Although the visit did not by itself change their minds, it made
them think far more seriously than any direct warning would have. Syrn~
bols like this one carry great emotional significance.
When aiming for power, or trying to conserve it, always look for the
indirect route. And also choose your battles carefully. If it does not matter
in the long run whether the other person agrees with you-«or if time and
their own experience will make them understand what you mean——then it
is best not even to bother with a demonstration. Save your energy and
walk away.
honor and respect to
him, too. In rhis way
the Egyptians were
jwrsuatled to accept
him as their master.
ms; HISTORIES,
HERODOTIJS.
FIFTH CENHIRY B13.
GOD .-\\T) A\i§R.i\I|i\,\1
The Mtlxl High God
hurl promised Jim: He
would not take Abra-
ham it soul ltnlexs the
man wanted to (lie and
asked Him to do so.
When A brahum is‘ life
was drawing to a Clare,
and God determined (0
.reL'2,e him. He rem’ an
angel in the guise of a
dccrepiz old man who
was‘ almost entirely
inmpru:im1e(I. The old
man Slapped outside
Ahralzw/1': door and
.m2'clIoIz1'r1z. “Oh Ahrae
(mm, 1 would like
szmierlzzng to ear.
"
A bmlmm was mrzazezl
to hear him say this,
“Die.
" exclaimed Abra-
ham. ‘'1! wtmlzi be
lwtlrtrfnr you than to
go on living in that
condition.
"
Almzlmm always kept
food ready at his home
for pzzssing guests. So
he gave Elm old man a
bowl containing [>mIlz
and men; with Iyrwd
cmmbs. The old mun
sat down to em. II1:
swullrm-‘rad [(1})(N'i(II1sly.
with great effort. and
{lll{.‘(€ when he took
sarm? food it dr0p])(‘([
from his Iumri. scatter-
ing on the gmrmd. “Uh
Abraham,
" he miiil.
LAW 9
73
“help me In «at.
" A firm
ham 100/\’ tlua,/‘rmzl in
his hand and lifwd ii to
me 171:! man '5‘ lips. Bu!
ii slid (lawn lzix l'7i’m'd
and over his chesl.
“Winn i.\‘ your age, 010'
man?
“ I?$'k(7(l A braizmn.
The old man
rnemumwi 41 number a/'
vmrx sIi;,>/111)‘ grmwr
than Abraham Ix‘ uld
am’. T/mt Ah/uluzm
vxc/ninu=,d.' “()lz I.or1i
Our God, mkr mp mm;
You before I reach this
manis‘ age’ and rink mm
the xcznw cmzdirion as
he is in now.
" No
warwr had A Imzfmnz
rpokm thrrstr words’
than Gull tank ;7(2.\‘.\'m—
xiurz nf his soul.
‘me xml‘rI..1-, Rmr:
nu: Im<)1<m—'ARMm-
\MS|)()€\i AND mm 1-1.
‘( wk's'H'.M'1! I‘rN'nnI\’
74
LAW 9
Image: The See-
saw. Up and down
and up and down
go the arguers,
getting nowhere
fast. Get off the
seesaw and show
them your mean
ing without kick
ing or pushing.
Leave them at the
top and let gravity
bring them gently
to the ground.
Authority: Never argue. In society nothing must be dis
cussed; give only results. (Benjamin Disraeli, 1804-1881)
REVERSAL
Verbal argument has one vital use in the realm of power: To distract and
cover your tracks when you are practicing deception or are caught in a lie.
In such cases it is to your advantage to argue with all the conviction you
can muster. Draw the other person into an argument to distract them fmm
your deceptive move. When caught in a lie, the more emotional and cer-
tain you appear, the less likely it seems that you are lying.
This technique has saved the hide of many a con artist. Once Count
Victor Lustig, swindle: par excellence, had sold dozens of suckers around
the country a phony box with which he claimed to be able to copy money.
Discovering their mistake, the suckers generally chose not to go the police,
rather than risk the embarrassment of publicity. But one Sherifi Richards,
of Rernsen County, Oklahoma, was not the kind of man to accept being
conned out of$10,000, and one morning he tracked Lustig down to a hotel
in Chicago.
Lustig heard a knock on the door. When he opened it he was looking
down the barrel of a gun. “What seems to be the problem?” he calmly
asked. “You son of a bitch,” yelled the sheriff, “I’m going to kill you. You
conned me with that damn box of yours!” Lustig feigned confusion. “You
mean it’s not working?” he asked. “You know it’s not working,” replied the
sheriff. “But that’s impossible,” said Lustig. “There’s no way it couldn’t be
working. Did you operate it properly?” “I did exactly what you told me to
do,” said the sheriff. “No, you must have done something wrong,” said
Lustig. The argument went in circles. The barrel of the gun was gently low-
cred.
Lustig next went to phase two in the argument tactic: He poured out a
whole bunch of technical gobbledygook about the borfis operation, com-
pletely beguiling the sheriff, who now appeared less sure ofhimself and ar-
gued less forcefully. “Look,” said Lusfig, “I’ll give you your money back
right now. I’ll also give you written instruclions on how to work the ma-
chine and I’ll come out to Oklahoma to make sure it’s working properly.
There’s no way you can lose on that.” The sheriff reluctantly agreed. To
satisfy him totally, Lustig took out a hundred one-hundred—dollar bills and
gave them to him, telling him to relax and have a fun weekend in Chicago.
Calmer and a little confused, the sheriff finally left Over the next few days
Lustig checked the paper every morning. He finally found what he was
looking for: A short arficle reporting Sheriff Richa.rcls’s arrest, trial, and
conviction for passing counterfeit notes. Lustig had won the argument; the
sheriff never bothered him again.
LAWS)
;
7..
LAW
10
INFECTH3N:AVOID7UIE
LHVPLAPPY'A$€D UTQLLHCKH7
}UDGMENT
You can diefrom someone else’s mimy—emotizmal states
are as infections as diseases. I/bu may jiael you me help
ing the drowning man but you are 071532 precipitating
your own disaster The unfortunate sometimes draw mis-
fortune on themselves; they will also draw it on you. As-
sociate with the happy andfmtvmate instead.
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
Born in Limerick, Ireland, in 1813, Marie Gilbert came to Paris in the
18405 to make her fortune as a dancer and performer. Taking the name
Lola Montez (her mother was of distant Spanish descent), she claimed to
be a flamenco dancer from Spain. By 1845 her career was languishing, and
to survive she became a courtesa.n—-quicldy one of the more successful in
Paris.
Only one man could salvage Lola’s dancing career: Alexandre Du-
jaxier, owner of the newspaper with the largest circulation in France, and
also the newspaper’s drama critic. She decided to woo and conquer him.
Investigating his habits, she discovered that he went riding every morning.
An excellent horsewoman herself, she rode out one morning and “acciden~
tally” ran into him. Soon they were riding together every day. A few weeks
later Lola moved into his apartment.
For a while the two were happy together. With Duja.rier’s help, Lola
began to revive her dancing career. Despite the risk to his social standing,
Dujarier told friends he would marry her in the spring. (Lola had never
told him that she had eloped at age nineteen with an Englishman, and was
still legally married.) Although Dujarier was deeply in love, his life started
to slide downhill.
His fortunes in business changed and influential friends began to avoid
him. One night Dujarier was invited to a party, attended by some of the
wealthiest young men in Paris. Lola wanted to go too but he would not
allow it. They had their first quarrel, and Dujarier attended the party by
himself. There, hopelessly drunk, be insulted an influential drama critic,
jean-Baptiste Rosemond de Beauvallon, perhaps because of something the
critic had said about Lola. The following morning Beauvallon challenged
him to a duel. Beauvallon was one of the best pistol shots in France. Du-
jarier tried to apologize, but the duel took place, and he was shot and
killed. Thus ended the life of one of the most promising young men of
Paris society. Devastated, Lola left Paris.
In 1846 Lola. Montez found herself in Munich, where she decided to
woo and conquer King Ludwig of Bavaria. The best way to Ludwig, she
discovered, was through his aide-de-camp, Count Otto Von Rechberg, a
man with a fondness for pretty girls. One day when the count was break-
fastirig at an outdoor cafe, Lola rode by on her horse, was “accidentally”
thrown from the saddle, and landed at Rechberg’s feet. The count rushed
to help her and was enchanted. He promised to introduce her to Ludwig.
Rechberg arranged an audience with the king for Lola, but when she
arrived in the anteroom, she could hear the king saying he was too busy to
meet a favorseeking stranger. Lola pushed aside the sentries and entered
his room anyway. In the process, the front of her dress somehow got torn
(perhaps by her, perhaps by one of the sentries), and to the astonishment of
all, most especially the king, her bare breasts were brazenly exposed. Lola
was granted her audience with Ludwig. Fifty—five hours later she made her
debut on the Bavarian stage; the reviews were terrible, but that did not stop
Ludwig from arranging more performances.
'lllI. \l 'l .‘\\l) ‘IIIl-,
iI.\\\l’\\ll l:
A I1utf<mmlilr«'If
azrriczl by (I (‘row In the
top ofu tall ('41H1[)tlIlll(’,
and byfrzl/mg Into a
crevice sum evdrd in
escaping Its drvad fall’.
It then lmrnilglzi the
wall to .shelter‘ it. by
appealing in it by the
grace of (lad, and
/7f(ll.i'lI2g1I.t height. aml
the l)€t,ll4!_\;' um! noble
lune ofirr bells. “/ilai,"
it went on, “us llmw
not hem able to drop
lnvieatli the green
lmznchcs of my old
Father and to lie in the
fallow earth cnve'r'('d by
hit fallen lt’tll7£’,.S, ([0
you. at least, not abm1—
Jon mrr. When I found
mysr>Ifln the hunk of
the cruel (row I made 41
wow. rim! 1} l l:‘S(‘d]}L’(l I
would end my life in :2
little hole.
"
A! there wzrrzls, the
wall, movwl Wllh
tomprlrsirm, was
rwztcnl to rlmlrrr the
nut in the spot wluzre it
had fallm. Within (1
slmn time, Ill? nut burst
open: 11.3‘ mom :'c'a(:Izc.rl
In between the new
.
of the .xl(me.\' and began
1:) push them apart; its
ShU0{.\‘ p}‘€.S’.\‘t’(l up
lowurd the .$I\ y. 'l'lIt’_\-‘
won rose above the
hit/[I/l‘.II‘£,’, and as the
Iwiiiml rows grrw
rhirkrr they began to
thrust the walls apart
and force the ancient
.s'tmn7.r from their 0111
gzlaaar. Tlzcoz lltr’ will,
too late and in vain.
l)(!W{lll(’Ll (/14: rzzurc of
[Ar (l£’.$'I)'HL'll(IIl, and in
short lime it fell in min.
LEONARDO DA Vim l.
145} lSl9
LAW 10
T7
In luv mm limo Smmn
Yllrrirlultr wax u grim
1/0110!‘ I rwtmnb¢-:- that
I Izupjrz-:ze>11 Io may: 1211!:
one day at I/1:’ 12mm’ of
1! rich Mu’ (‘()I7)‘l4II![Ili!’(’{
Ilv told his /mriynz
when cIi.»<'u.r.mu,v wuvs
to cure him that am»
mi-um mu‘ m jlrnvi/Ir’
m’<'u.\iml.\' for me to
eujnv /on mmpmzy.' He
could then fix‘ his cgvrw
(:1: tin! fr4*.vi1:1<*.s'.r afmy
rmnaimlatlcv and his
Iliutiglm. on me over-
,/iuwing <‘lm*rf'uIIut\:r
rmzi vi},/or o_/"my ymtrxg
man/marl: layfilling all
his‘ .m:.s'm' with the
flower nfm ymuh his
m/ulilion might
im/)rm>42 lI('_!i>rgu1 In
add that I7liIE(' znighi
gt‘! lV(}YS€.
Mu,\1'.\;r.:~u«:.
1533
1392
Mmzy rhin;,:.s are said If)
he injk‘L'!lrm.s', .S/m’pi-
m’S.\‘ can he m(};'¢tt'm4.s.
mu! yawning us‘ well. In
Ilzrjqe-xru/c untrvgy.
when tin: mmny ix
agfluiml mu! .\‘}mws an
im'IimIIim1 I0 rmli, (In
no) miml in 1.114‘ l'('fl)'(.
MtIl<(' a slum‘ of
cumplolt’ w1hnru3.r.s‘, and
my enemy wil/ be mkm
by mm and will I?('('I7Int’
mlu.w¢l. You iIlfl't.'1 than
spirit. You nut infer‘!
mm: with H cr:mfrz'r'.
rIr£(I1/~‘./ikt‘.\[3ir('I. with
Imwzlrxm, or (‘W311
Iwukrw.s:r.
:\ il()l)K oi
l~1\'l?R)Vi}>.
l‘<’liY‘\\«1¢)'l'(l Mi sum.
xv H-,\lI.Iv.’\r'lIt 4') «mm:
78
LAW 10
Ludwig was, in his
own words, “bewitched” by Lola. He started
to appear in public with her on his arm, and then he bought and furnished
an apartment for her on one of Munich’s most fashionable boulevards. Al»
though he had been known as a miser, and was not given to flights of
fancy, he started to shower Lola with
and to write poetry for her. Now
his favored mistress, she catapulted to fame and fortune overnight.
Lola began to lose her sense of proportion. One day when she was out
riding, an elderly man rode ahead of her, a bit too slowly for her liking.
Unable to pass him, she began to slash him with her riding crop. On an-
other occasion she took her dog, unleashed, out for a stroll. The dog at»
tacked a passerby, but instead of helping the men get the dog away, she
whipped him with the leash. Incidents like this infuriated the stolid citizens
of Bavaria, but Ludwig stood by Lola and even had her naturalized as a
Bavarian citizen. The kings entourage tried to wake him to the dangers of
the affair, but those who criticized Lola were summarily fired.
While Bavarians who had loved their king now outwardly disre—
spected him, Lola was made a countess, had a new palace built for herself,
and began to dabble in politics, advising Ludwig on policy. She was the
most powerful force in the kingdom. Her influence in the king’s cabinet
continued to grow, and she treated the other ministers with disdain. As a
result, riots broke out throughout the realm. A once peaceful land was vir~
rually in the grip of civil war, and students everywhere were chanting,
“Raus mit Lola!”
By February of 1848, Ludwig was finally unable to withstand the pres-
sure. With great sadness he ordered Lola. to leave Bavaria immediately.
She left, but not until she was paid off. For the next five weeks the Bevan‘-
ans’ wrath was turned against their formerly beloved king. In March of that
year he was forced to abdicate.
Lola Montez moved to England. More than anything she needed re-
spectability, and despite being married (she still had not arranged a divorce
from the Englishman she had wed years before), she set her sights on
George Trafford Heald, a promising young army olficer who was the son of
an influential hamster. Although he was ten years younger than Lola, and
could have chosen a wife among the prettiest and wealthiest young girls of
English society, Heald fell under her spell. They were married in 1849.
Soon arrested on the charge of bigamy, she skipped bail, and she and
Heald made their way to Spain. They quarreled horribly and on one occa-
sion Lola slashed him with a. knife. Finally, she drove him away. Returning
to England, he found he had lost his position in the army. Ostracized from
English society, he moved to Portugal, where he lived in poverty. After a
few months his short life ended in a boating accident.
A few years later the man who published Lola Montez’s autobiogra-
phy went bankrupt
In 1853 Lola moved to California, where she met and married a man
named Pat Hull. Their relationship was as stormy as all the others, and she
left Hull for another man. He took to drink and fell into a deep depression
that lasted until he died, four years later, still a relatively young man.
At the age of forty—one, Lola gave away her clothes and finery and
turned to God. She toured America, lecturing on religious topics, dressed
in white and wearing a halolike white headgear. She died two years later, in
1861.
Interpretation
Lola Montez attracted men with her wiles, but her power over them went
beyond the sexual. It was through the force of her character that she kept
her lovers enthralled. Men were sucked into the maelstrom she churned up
around her. They felt confused, upset, but the strength of the emotions she
stirred also made them feel more alive.
As is often the case with infection, the problems would only arise over
time. Lola’s inherent instability would begin to get under her lovers’ skin.
They would find themselves drawn into her problems, but their emotional
attachment to her would make them want to help her. This was the crucial
point of the clisease--for Lola Montez could not be helped. Her problems
were too deep. Once the lover identified with them, he was lost. He would
find himself embroiled in quarrels. The infection would spread to his fam-
ily and friends, or, in the case of Ludwig, to an entire nation. The only so
lution would be to cut her off, or suller an eventual collapse.
The infecting-character type is not restricted to women; it has nothing
to do with gender. It stems from an inward instability that radiates outward,
drawing disaster upon itself. There is almost a desire to destroy and unset
tle. You could spend a lifetime studying the pathology of infecting charac-
ters, but don’t waste your time—just learn the lesson. When you suspect
you are in the presence of an infector, don’t argue, don’t try to help, don’t
pass the person on to your friends, or you will become enmeshed. Flee the
ix1fector’s presence or suffer the consequences.
Yami Cassius has a lean and hungry look. He thinks too much.
.
.
.
I do not know the man I should avoid so soon as that spare Cassius,
.
.
r
Such men as he he never at heart is ease while: they behold a greater
than themselves, and therefore are they very dangmusv
Julius Caesar. William .5’/mlms/Morn, I564-I616
KEYS TO POWER
Those misfortunates among us who have been brought down by circum-
stances beyond their control deserve all the help and sympathy we can
give them. But there are others who are not born to misfortune or unhappi~
ness, but who draw it upon themselves by their destructive actions and un-
settling effect on others. It would be a great thing if we could raise them up,
change their patterns, but more often than not it is their patterns that end
up getting inside and changing us. The reason is siinple-humans are ex-
tremely susceptible to the moods, emotions, and even the ways of thinking
of those with whom they spend their time.
The incurably unhappy and unstable have a particularly strong infect»
Regard nofr:<;(i.xl1 man
as ('n!tun»'ri, ilzusrgh you
may raiam n glfin/I
man as wi.s'e;rJm1
(,‘.S'lt‘{,’IIl no ignorant
abA'Iuint'r a /my anrelirr.
Do not rmzsorr with
fools. on/mcially those
who m/zsidorlII(,II11~
rclw-s wixu. And be not
s'e1_f-xaIi.sfi('(t with your
own igrmmrzce. L6!
vnur llI7é‘rt‘l)IlV.VL’ In‘
only with men ofguod
nt/11t!e:f0r it In by such
tI.\'.\‘0(‘IIl[l()Vl that nwn
themselves‘ atmm to
goon’ rzymzc. Du you
not observe how
wsarne-oil it rm'rrg£e(l
wirlr ru.a'c.r or r‘E0lc‘f.\'
and how. when it has
been for .t‘()I)I£' little in
associarimr with msm‘
or rztslrrrs, it Cfflllif? to
{If sesame-oi} (am! is
called ail r;gfrm‘z'.r or oil
of w'r1i'e1.v?
A MIRRUR FOR Hum r-:8,
KAI l(A'Hs hm
lSK/‘\NDAR.
r~.r.i-vrwrn (‘l,N'l um
LAW 10
79
50
LAW
10
mg power because their characters and emotions are so intense. They often
present themselves as victims, making it difficult, at first, to see their mis-
eries as self-inflicted. Before you realize the real nature of their problems
you have been infected by them.
Understand this: In the game of power, the people you associate with
are critical. The risk of associating with infeclors is that you will waste valu
able time and energy trying to free yourself. Through a kind of guilt by as-
sociation, you will also suffer in the eyes of others. Never underestimate the
dangers of infection.
There are many kinds of infector to be aware of, but one of the most
insidious is the sufferer from chronic dissatisfaction. Cassius, the Roman
conspirator againstJulius Caesar, had the discontent that comes from deep
envy. He simply could not endure the presence of anyone of greater talent.
Probably because Caesar sensed the man’s interminable soumess, he
passed him up for the position of first praetorship, and gave the position to
Brutus instead. Cassius brooded and broorled, his hatred for Caesar be
coming pathological. Brutus himself, a. devoted republican, disliked Cae-
sar’s dictatorship; had he had the patience to wait, he would have become
the first man in Rome after Ca.esar‘s death, and could have undone the evil
that the leader had wrought. But Cassius infected him with his own rancor,
bending his ear daily with tales of Caesafs evil. He finally won Brutus over
to the conspiracy. It was the beginning of a great tragedy. How many mis-
fortunes could have been avoided had Brutus learned to fear the power of
infection.
There is only one solution to infection: quarantine. But by the time
you recognize the problem it is often too late. A Lola Montez oveiwhelms
you with her forceful personality. Cassius intrigues you with his confiding
nature and the depth of his feelings. How can you protect yourself against
such insidious viruses? The answer lies in judging people on the effects
they have on the world and not on the reasons they give for their prob-
Image: A Virus. Unseen, it
lems. Infectors can be recognized by the misfortune they draw on them-
enters
your
pores
without
selves, their turbulent past, their long line of broken ‘relationships, their un«
warning, spreading silently and
stable careers, and the very force of their character, which sweeps you up
slowly. Before you are aware of
and makes you lose your reason. Be forewarned by these signs of an infec-
the infection, it is deep inside you.
tor; learn to see the discontent in their eye. Most important of all, do not
take pity. Do not enmesh yourself in trying to help. The infector will re
main unchanged, but you will be unhinged.
The other side of infection is equally valid, and perhaps more readily
understood: There are people who attract happiness to themselves by their
good cheer, natural buoyancy, and intelligence. They are a source of plea:
sure, and you must associate with them to share in the prospeiity they draw
upon themselves.
This applies to more than good cheer and success: All positive quali~
ties can infect us. Talley:-and had many strange and intimidating traits, but
most agreed that he surpassed all Frenchmen in gmciousness, aristocratic
charm, and wit. Indeed he came from one of the oldest noble families in
the country, and despite his belief in democracy and the French Republic,
he retained his courtly manners. His contemporary Napoleon was in many
ways the opposite~—~a peasant from Corsica, tacitum and ungracious, even
violent.
There was no one Napoleon admired more than Talleyrand. He en-
vied his minister’s way with people, his wit and his ability to charm
women, and as best he could, he kept Talleyrand around him, hoping to
soak up the culture he lacked. There is no doubt that Napoleon changed as
his rule continued. Many of the rough edges were smoothed by his con-
stant association with Talleyrand.
.
Use the positive side of this emotional osmosis to advantage. If, for ex-
ample, you are miserly by nature, you will never go beyond a certain limit;
only generous souls attain greatness. Associate with the generous, then,
and they will infect you, opening up everything that is tight and restricted
in you. If you are gloomy, gravitate to the cheerful. Ifyou are prone to iso
lation, force yourselfto befriend the gregarious. Never associate with those
who share your defects——~they will reinforce everything that holds you
back. Only create associations with positive aflinities. Make this a rule of
life and you will benefit more than from all the therapy in the world.
Authority: Recognize the fortu~
nate
so
that you
may choose
their company, and the 1mfortu—
nate
so
that
you
may
avoid
them. Misfortune is usually the
crime of folly, and among those
who suffer from it there is no
malady more contagious: Never
open your door to the least of
misfortunes, for, if you do, many
others will follow in its train.
.
.
.
Do not die of another’s misery.
{Baltasar Grecian, 1601-1658)
REVERSAL
This law admits of no reversal. Its application is universal. There is nothing
to be gained by associating with those who infect you with their misery;
there is only power and good fortune to be obtained by associating with
the fortunate. Ignore this law at your peril.
LAW 10
:81
LAW
11
LEARN TO KEEP PEOPLE
DEPENDENT ON YOU
_]U DGMI:‘.NT
To maintain your independence you must always be
needed and wanted. The more you are relied on, the more
fieedom you have. Make people depend on you for their
happiness and jimspenly and you have nothing tofear.
Never teach them enough so that they can do without yau.
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
Sometime in the Middle Ages, a mercenary soldier (a condottiere), whose
name has not been recorded, saved the town of Siena from a foreign ag~
gressor. How could the good citizens of Siena reward him? No amount of
money or honor could possibly compare in value to the preservation of a
city’s liberty. The citizens thought of making the mercenary the lord of the
city, but even that, they decided, wasn’t recompense enough. At last one of
them stood before the assembly called to debate this matter and said, “Let
us kill him and then worship him as our patron saint.” And so they did.
The Count of Carmagnola was one of the bravest and most successful
of all the condottieri. In 1442, late in his life, he was in the employ of the city
of Venice, which was in the midst of a long war with Florence. The count
was suddenly recalled to Venice. A favorite of the people, he was received
there with all kinds of honor and splendor. That evening he was to dine
with the doge himself, in the doge’s palace. On the way into the palace,
however, he noticed that the guard was leading him in a different direction
from usual. Crossing the famous Bridge of Sighs, he suddenly realized
where they were taking him—to the dungeon. He was convicted on
a
trurnped~up charge and the next day in the Piazza San Marco, before a
horrified crowd who could not understand how his fate had changed s
drastically, he was beheaded.
'
interpretation
Many of the great tomlottieri of Renaissance Italy suffered the same fate as
the patron saint of Siena and the Count of Carrnagnolaz They won battle
after battle for their employers only to find themselves banished, impris-
oned, or executed. The problem was not ingratitude; it was that there were
so many other candottieri as able and valiant as they were. They were re-
placeable. Nothing was lost by killing them. Meanwhile, the older among
them had grown powerful themselves, and wanted more and more money
for their services. How much better, then, to do away with them and hire a
younger, cheaper mercenary. That was the fate of the Count of Carma-
gnola, who had started to act impudently and independently. He had taken
his power for granted without making sure that he was truly indispensable.
Such is the fate (to a less violent degree, one hopes) of those who do
not make others dependent on them. Sooner or later someone comes along
who can do the job as well as they can-—someone younger, fresher, less ex-
pensive, less threatening.
Be the only one who can do what you do, and make the fate ofthose who
hire you so entwined with yours that they cannot possibly get rid of you.
Otherwise you will someday be forced to cross your own Bridge of Sighs.
()BSliRVANCF. O F THE LAVV
When Otto von Bismarck became a deputy in the Prussian parliament in
1847, he was thirty~two years old and without an ally or friend. Looking
llH‘l“t?IHiR>i<
Two Imrw.» were rurr}
—
[rig two /omlx. The /‘rum
Ham’ mm! we'll, /ml
I/15‘ rear Iinrvu wm
lazy. The’ mm lwgun In
pi/t‘ Ilw rmr Ilnrwlx
load on Ilzrglrnm
Hm’,\‘<*: W/Mn (hvv /(ml
rI'arn‘fl*rt‘<*(/ ll 4/”, INF
rmr Iio1'sr>_/mzmt 1'!
MW going, and hr mu!
to the [rum I[nr\r':
“'l})1lum1 xwmm’ Tin’
PTIUIY’ V0!’ /7_\", I/I(' NH‘I‘(’
you lmw to .\I1t?2'1:“
W/Imz they 1’L’(l(‘/IF!’ /In‘
m\‘z1r/1. mo owwr xnirl.
"Wiw .\/um/:/ I Iuzldm
Iwn /)Ul'.\(’.\ w/mu I
(‘ll/‘IV u/I rm (my? I /md
harm‘ gin’ I/l(‘ um’ all
Ilwfmul zr wuun‘, uml
rm rlw r/zmul nil/u»
mixer; :11 [um I xlmll
haw I/If’ }1irlr."Am/ so
/24’ III(/
1 Ami x.
Li«¢>Tmsmy.
l32X—l9lU
LAW
1 1
‘Z?
ilil t.~Vl' IHM \M\l.l\'l",l)
RX lll\l\l.|.l~'
Then the Woman
llmglwrl and set the (m
a bowl ofllle wurm
wlure rmlk um] saizl, “0
Cut. you am as clever
at a man. but remem-
ber that your lmrguin
was amt Imulr with me
film: or the’ Dog. and 1'
(lo Mm‘ know wins! they
will do when they wine
harm:
" “Wl2aI i.\ that to
rrwI"'.\'uirl my Car. “lfl
haw my plmw in {he
(‘ave by t/In’/ire and my
warm wlzilv milk three
mmax
11 day, I do not
mm what the Man or
the Dog can do."
.
, ./Ilml /rum that day
to tl1l.\, liersr Bzelmal.
threw proper Mm out
uffivc will always
throw I/aingx m a Cu:
wlwnevw Ilwy nine!
lam. and all proper
l)og.r will (‘ham him up
a tree, But the Cu:
kvepx lulv .u'<l¢> of my
bargain mu, I/0 will kill
mire, and he will be
Irina’ to Ilulrlm when he
it in the lmu.<,1’. fast as
lung nx (Hwy do not pull
liix (ail too hard. Bu!
Wl1(’Il he has done that.
am! hetmrm times. and
when the mmm gets up
1121.’! me ntglll mm:-.9, lzre
l.\‘ the (‘In Ihm walk: by
iz£7n.s'£'lfi am! all p!ru'e.y
are alike to him, Tlzm
he goes" out I!) the Wet
Wild W’m1r1.s‘ or up the
Wcl Wild 'I‘n'es or on
the Wet Wild Roofs,
wuvira,i' luix wild mil
rmrl walking by his
will! (one.
ms; so Monies.
RL'l}\‘v\RD KIPLINU,
l86S— l 936
54
LAW
11
around him, he decided that the side to ally himself with was not the par
liament’s liberals or conservatives, not any particular minister, and cer-
tainly not the people. It was with the king, Frederick William IV. This was
an odd choice to say the least, for Frederick was at a low point of his power.
A weak, indecisive man, he consistently gave in to the liberals in pa1:lia~
merit; in fact he was spineless, and stood for much that Bismarck disliked,
personally and politically. Yet Bismarck courted Frederick night and day.
When other deputies attacked the king for his many inept moves, only Bis-
marck stood by him.
Finally, it all paid off: In 1851 Bismarck was made a minister in the
king’s cabinet. Now he went to work. Time and again he forced the king’s
hand, getting him to build up the military, to stand up to the liberals, to do
exactly as Bismarck wished. He worked on Frederick’s insecurity about his
manliness, challenging him to be firm and to rule with pride. And he
slowly restored the king’s powers until the monarchy was once again the
most powerful force in Prussia.
When Frederick died, in
1861, his brother William assumed the
throne. William disliked Bismarck intensely and had no intention of keep
ing him around. But he also inherited the same situation his brother had:
enemies galore, who wanted to nibble his power away. He actually consid-
ered abdicating, feeling he lacked the strength to deal with this dangerous
and precarious position. But Bismarck insinuated himself once again. He
stood by the new king, gave him strength, and urged him into firm and de
cisive action. The king grew dependent on Bismarck’s strong-arm tactics to
keep his enemies at bay, and despite his antipathy toward the man, he soon
made him his prime minister. The two quarreled often over policy———
Bismarck was much more conservative——but the king understood his own
dependency. Whenever the prime minister threatened to resign, the king
gave in to him, time after time. It was in fact Bismarck who set state policy.
Years later, Bismarck’s actions as Pn1ssia’s prime minister led the vari
ous German states to be united into one country. Now Bismarck finagled
the king into letting himself be crowned emperor of Germany. Yet it was
really Bismarck who had reached the heights of power. As rigl1t—hand man
to the emperor, and as imperial chancellor zmd knighted prince, he pulled
all the levers.
lnterpretalion
Most young and ambitious politicians looking out on the political landscape
of 18405 Germany would have tried to build a power base among those
with the most power. Bismarck saw different. Joining forces with the pow-
erful can be foolish: They will swallow you up, just as the (loge of Venice
swallowed up the Count of Carmagnola. No one will come to depend on
you if they are already strong. If you are ambitious, it is much wiser to seek
out weak rulers or masters with whom you can create a relationship of do
pendency. You become their strength, their intelligence, their spine. What
power you hold! If they got rid of you the whole edifice would collapse.
Necessity rules the world. People rarely act unless compelled to. If you
create no need for yourself, then you will be done away with at first oppor-
tunity. If, on the other hand, you understand the Laws of Power and make
others depend on you for their welfare, if you can counteract their weak»
ness with your own “iron and blood,” in Bisrn-arck’s phrase, then you will
survive your masters
as Bismarck did, You will have all the benefits of
power without the thorns that come from being a master.
Thus a wise prince will think ofways to keep his citizens ofevery sort
and under every circumstance dependent on the state and on him;
and than they will always be trustworthy.
Nitculé ll/l(tt'hi(tzIellz'., 1 469-152 7
KEYS TO POWER
The ultimate power is the power to get people to do as you wish. When you
can do this without having to force people or hurt them, when they will»
ingly grant you what you desire, then your power is untouchable. The best
way to achieve this position is to create a. relationship of dependence. The
master requires your services; he is weak, or unable to function without
you; you have enmeshed yourself in his work so deeply that doing away
with you would bring him great difficulty, or at least would mean valuable
time lost in training another to replace you. Once such a relationship is es-
tablished you have the upper hand, the leverage to make the master do as
you wish. It is the classic case of the man behind the throne, the servant of
the king who actually controls the king. Bismarck did not have to bully ei-
ther Frederick or William into doing his bidding. He simply made it clear
that unless he got what he wanted he would walk away, leaving the king to
twist in the wind. Both kings soon danced to Bismarck’s tune.
Do not be one of the many who mistakenly believe that the ultimate
form of power is independence. Power involves a relationship between
people; you will always need others as allies, pawns, or even as weak mas
ters who serve as your front. The completely independent man would live
in a cabin in the woods«—~he would have the freedom to come and go as he
pleased, but he would have no power. The best you can hope for is that
others will grow so dependent on you that you enjoy a kind of reverse in-
dependence: Their need for you frees you.
Louis XI (1423-1483), the great Spider King of France, had a weak-
ness for astrology. He kept a court astrologer whom he admired, until one
day the man predicted that a lady of the court would die within eight days.
When the prophecy came true, Louis was terrified, thinking that either the
man had murdered the woman to prove his accuracy or that he was so
versed in his science that his powers threatened Louis himself. In either
case he had to be killed.
One evening Louis summoned the astrologer to his room, high in the
castle. Before the man arrived, the king told his servants that when he gave
HI). I-.!.’\|
I'|tl.|. \\l)
Illll. \l\li
/tn exzmvugar1/ _vozm,r,v
Vine, vainly uIr1In1inu.»'
of irztlepvnttmrt 0. and
font! ofmmblmg 4:!
large, rtr.\pi.xe<l the
uflizmce Ufa slate/Iv elm
that grew mrar, and
courier) iwr cmbrtzzcsu.
Having rixcn to wme
small height without
any kind oj'.mppnrt.
she shot forth /n,-v~
,'lim.ry hranrhr-.\‘ to u
very rmcomnum and
supw-/izmzis lmglli:
cullilig on her m'igI1~
hour to take notice’ how
(rule site wtmtmi his
a.v.ri.vmm:e. "Poor [IljllI-
natni rhrub.
"
n';7.‘i(*rl
the «rim. "how inconsis-
ram‘ is thy mmlud.’
lV(:uIrl.s'I (hm! In‘ truly
iudepeudmr, thou
.rlmuz'r!.\'t mn>fuIl_v
apply those /nicer to
the e>nlurg<'nImt uflhy
stem. which [hon
lavislzrvr in vain upon
i(IHlt‘L‘€.3‘StH‘)' _f'r)/iz1g4.'. I
shortly shut! /.tt’hU/LI
thee gruvelling on the
gmmm‘; ye! co1mtu«
mmceti, indvvrl, by
many of the lmmtm
race, who, itztctxicalxfd
will! twziry. haw:
de.vpi.s‘ctl cmnrmly; and
who. 10 support for u
mo.-nent their empty
boast ofin(l(r[wmImm’.
have cxlmumri the
very mzmrr» oftt in f'rii'~
olous exp:-nses.
"
l‘AI'tl.FS.
Rmarur Dom! s V1,
1703-1764
LAW
11
85
86
LAW
1 l
the signal they were to pick the astrologer up, carry him to the window,
and hurl him to the ground, hundreds of feet below.
The astrologer soon arrived, but before giving the signal, Louis de-
cided to ask him one last question: “You claim to understand astrology and
to know the fate of others, so tell me what your fate will be and how long
you have to live.”
“I shall diejust three days before Your Majesty," the astrologer replied.
The kings signal was never given. The man’s life was spared. The Spider
King not only protected his astrologer for as long as he was alive, he lav-
ished him with gifts and had him tended by the finest court doctors.
The astrologer survived Louis by several years, disproving his power
of prophecy but proving his mastery of power.
This is the model: Make others dependent on you. To get rid of you
might spell disaster, even death, and your master dares not tempt fate by
finding out. There are many ways to obtain such a position. Foremost
among them is to possess a talent and creative skill that simply cannot be
replaced.
During the Renaissance, the major obstacle to a pajntefls success was
finding the right patron. Michelangelo did this better than anyone else: His
patron was Popejulius H. But he and the pope quarreled over the building
of the pope’s marble ‘comb, and Michelangelo left Rome in disgust To the
amazement of those in the pope’s circle, not only did the pope not fire him,
he sought him out and in his own haughty way begged the artist to stay.
Michelangelo, he knew, could find another patron, but he could never find
another Michelangelo.
You do not have to have the talent of 3. Michelangelo; you do have to
have a skill that sets you apart from the crowd. You should create a situa-
tion in which you can always latch on to another master or patron but your
master cannot easily find another servant with your particular talent. And
if, in reality, you are not actually indispensable, you must find a way to
make it look as if you are. Having the appearance ofspecialized knowledge
and skill gives you leeway in your ability to deceive those above you into
thinking they cannot do without you. Real dependence on your master’s
part, however, leaves him more vulnerable to you than the faked variety,
and it is always within your power to make your skill indispensable.
This is what is meant by the intertwining of fates: Like creeping ivy,
you have wrapped yourself around the source of power, so that it would
cause great trauma to cut you away. And you do not necessarily have to en-
twine yourself around the master; another person will do, as long as he or
she too is indispensable in the chain.
One day Harry Colin, president of Columbia Pictures, was visited in
his office by a gloomy group of his executives. It was 1951, when the witch-
hunc against Communists in Hollywood, carried on by the US. Congress’s
House Un-American Activities Committee, was at its height. The execu-
tives had bad news: One of their employees, the screenwriterjolm Howard
Lawson, had been singled out as a Communist. They had to get rid of him
night away or suffer the wrath of the committee.
Harry Cohn was no bleeding—heart liberal; in fact, he had always been
a diehard Republican.
His favorite politician was Benito Mussolini, whom he had once vis-
ited, and whose framed photo hung on his wall. If there was someone he
hated Cohn would call him a “Communist bastard.” But to the executives’
amazement Cohn told them he would not fire Lawson. He did not keep the
screenwriter on because he was a good Writer—there were many good
writers in Hollywood. He kept him because of a chain of dependence:
Lawson was Humphrey Bogart’s writer and Bogart was Columbia’s star. If
Cohn messed with Lawson he would ruin an immensely profitable rela-
tionship. That was worth more than the terrible publicity brought to him
by his defiance of the committee.
Henry Kissinger managed to survive the many bloodlettings that went
on in the Nixon White House not because he was the best diplomat Nixon
could find—there were other fine negotiators»--and not because the two
men got along so well: They did not. Nor did they share their beliefs and
politics. Kissinger survived because he entrenched himself in
so many
areas of the political structure that to do away with him would lead to
chaos. Michelangelds power was intensive, depending on one skill, his abil-
ity as an artist; Kissinger’s was extensive. He got himself involved in so
many aspects and departments of the administration that his involvement
became a card in his hand. It also made him many allies. If you can
arrange
such
a position
for yourself, getting
rid
of you
becomes
dangerous—all sorts of interdependencies will unravel. Still, the intensive
form of power provides more freedom than the extensive, because those
who have it depend on
no particular master, or particular position of
power, for their security.
To make others dependent on you, one route to take is the secret-
intelligence tactic. By knowing other people’s secrets, by holding informa-
tion that they wouldn’t want broadcast, you seal your fate with theirs. You
are untouchable. Ministers of secret police have held this position through»
out the ages: They can make or break a king, or, as in the case of Edgar
Hoover, a president. But the role is so full of insecurities and paranoia that
the power it provides almost cancels itself out. You cannot rest at ease, and
what good is power if it brings you no peace?
One last warning: Do not imagine that your master’s dependence on
you will make him love you. In fact, he may resent and fear you. But, as
Machiavelli said, it is better to be feared than loved. Fear you can control;
love, never. Depending on an emotion as subtle and changeable as love or
friendship will only make you insecure. Better to have others depend on
you out of fear of the consequences of losing you than out of love of your
company.
LAW II
187
885
Image: Vines with Many Thorns. Below, the roots grow deep
and wide. Above, the vines push through bushes, entwine themselves
LAW
11
around trees and poles and window ledges. To get rid of them
would cost such toil and blood, it is easier to let them climb.
Authority: Make people depend on
you. More
is
to be gained from
-
such dependence than courtesy. He
who has slaked his thirst, immedi-
ately turns his back
on the well,
no longer needing it. When depen~
dence disappears,
so does civifity
and
decency,
and
then
respect.
The first lesson which experience
should teach you is to keep hope
alive but
never satisfied, keeping
even a royal patron ever in need of
you. (Baltasar Gracién, 16014658)
REVERSAL
The weakness of making others depend on you is that you are in some
measure dependent on them. But trying to move beyond that point means
getting rid of those above you—it means standing alone, depending on no
one. Such is the monopolistic drive of a_]. P. Morgan or ajohn D. Rocke-
feller———to drive out all competition, to be in complete control. If you can
corner the market, so much the better.
No such independence comes without a price. You are forced to isolate
yourself. Monopolies often turn inward and destroy themselves from the in-
ternal pressure. They also stir up powerful resentment, making their ene-
mies bond together to fight them. The drive for complete control is often
ruinous and fruitless. Interdependence remains the law, independence a
rare and often fatal exception. Better to place yourself in a. position of mu-
tual dependence, then, and to follow this critical law rather than look for its
reversal. You will not have the unbearable pressure ofbeing on top, and the
master above you will in essence be your slave, for kewill depend on you.
12
USE SELECTIVE HONESTY
AND GENEROSITY TO
DISARM YOUR VICTIM
JUDGMENT
One sincere and honest move will cover over dozens of
dishonest
ones, Open-hearted gestures of honesty and
generosity bring down the guard 97” even tke most suspi-
cious people. Once your selective honesty ojaens a hole in
ikeir mmm; you can deceive and manipulate them at
will. A timely g~zfi——-a Wojan ho1:se——zm'll serve the same
purpose.
189
HI \\«.I-.54 H xnmu
Ull IHH-.li (2|l\ll|,\|,\\
['hlI1C‘(’.Y1‘0 (ii1m'p])<'
Barri of Milan, wi1o.~;e
drum in M95 fill! /mt
willziu 1/w s’z'vmm’ntI1
((‘ILlllV_\«’
.
.
.
W115‘ a fort’-
rumzer nftllul \'[7£'tIl£l/
1_ypv n/Uturlarumual
II(lH’I§{(U(’I'. my (‘our-
riw or "mvuiir-r"
im/mxmr.
.
.
. llis real
puriml 0/ izlurv In-gut:
c1j'Ie.rInr mover! in
AnI.m»rrium, l'I'wr€ hr
lM.l‘Ul'l1¢'(I (hr min 0/
Medico Univcrsale,
ntainrtium-'<I 41 ;:v('uI
reimw, and draw’
almn1 in u mm-I: wiz/z
six lmr.\'e.u
,
.
. l’:rr;'eieI.v
.\‘In'mm’:I (0 him. and
mnw invali(l.\‘ /mil
I/’2t’I?l.\‘(‘[1’Af.\ mrrivri in
.\‘t'dllIl c'fmiI'.\‘ 1//I film wit)’
/lmm Purix In his ])/Ht‘!
in Ams/vnlum. Burn
rank no /lctyvtnml for
his cun.\'uIluI[m1.x: Ho
rim:-i/um-d _z:rvm xmm
among rile /mar zmzl
was ncwr krmwrl lo
rmrvrw any 121112142‘)-
zlu-oug/: Ill1‘]:(L\'I 1/I’
hills of c.t'cfmI:grr. /3: 11¢’
c (m(lI'H((,‘([ to live wirlz
s‘m'I1.splcIulru'. m'n,'r-
ilwlccszr, 21 was [H‘l’\‘!:I72(’1’
rim! ht’ pa.
ml lhs‘
p/u'lu.m/Jlwrr
,\trm(é.
Mir/rlwily I/ILV‘ /suiwjlic»
Im rlimpjwtlrml frmn
Am,m'r¢1un1, Then 1'!
was (lI\'::ov<,'r'mI that In’
11.41:! lmicwi witir lam:
mmwy and rlimnolzrlx
(hm /mt! [mew plurcul
in /11’: r'I1m'gv.
-in» w)w1«R<n
rm
¢‘HAR1.v\\,\7\.
(Fm-Ln. or FR/\!~«(‘I W0,
W3‘)
90
0
LAW12
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
Sometime in 1926, a tall, dapperly dressed man paid a visit to Al Capone,
the most feared gangster of his time. Speaking with an elegant Continental
accent, the man introduced himself as Count Victor Lustig. He promised
that if Capone gave him $50,000 he could double it. Capone had more
than enough funds to cover the “investment,” but he wasn’t in the habit of
entrusting large sums to total strangers. He looked the count over: Same-
thing about the man was different-—-his classy style, his manna-r—and so
Capone decided to play along. He counted out {he bills personally and
handed them to Lustig. “Okay, Count,” said Capone. “Double it in sixty
days like you said.” Lustig left with the money, put it in a safe—deposit box
in Chicago, then headed to New York, where he had several other money-
making schemes in progress.
The $50,000 remained in the bank box untouched. Lustig made no ef-
fort to double it. Two months later he retumed to Chicago, took the money
from the box, and paid Capone another visit. He looked at the gangstefs
stony~faced bodyguards, smiled apologetically, and said, “Please accept my
profound regrets, Mr. Capone. I’m sorry to report that the plan failed
.
.
. I
failed.”
Capone slowly stood up. He glowered at Lustig, debating which part
of the river to throw him in. But the count reached into his coat pocket,
withdrew the $50,000, and placed it on the desk. “Here, sir, is your money,
to the penny. Again, my sincere apologies. This is most embarrassing.
Things didn’t work out the way I thought they would. I would have loved
to have doubled your money for you and for myself»-—Lord knows I need
it--but the planjust didn’t materialize.”
Capone sagged back into his chair, confused. “I know you’re a con
man, Count,” said Capone. “I knew it the moment you walked in here. I
expected either one hundred thousand dollars or nothing. But this
.
.
. get-
ting my money back
.
.
. well.” “Again my apologies, ML Capone,” said
Lustig, as he picked up his hat and began to leave. “My God! You’re hon-
est!” yelled Capone. “If you’re on the spot, here’s five to help you along.”
He counted out five one—thousand~dollar bills out of the $50,000. The
count seemed stunned, bowed deeply, mumbled his thanks, and left, tak-
ing the money.
The $5,000 was what Lustig had been after all along.
Interpretation
Count Victor Lustig, a man who spoke several languages and prided him-
self on his refinement and culture, was one of the great con arfists of mod-
ern times. He
was known for his audacity, his fearlessness, and, most
important, his knowledge of human psychology. He could size up a man in
minutes, discovering his weaknesses, and he had radar for suckers. Lustig
knew that most men build up defenses against crooks and other trouble-
makers. The con artists job is to bring those defenses down.
One sure way to do this is through an act of apparent sincerity and
honesty. Who will distrust a person literally caught in the act of being hon-
est? Lustig used selective honesty many times, but with Capone he went a
step further. No normal con man would have dared such a con; he would
have chosen his suckers for their meekness, for that look about them that
says they will take their medicine without complaint. Con Capone and you
would spend the rest of your life (whatever remained of it) afraid. But
Lustig understood that a man like Capone spends his life rrfistrusting oth-
ers. No one around him is honest or generous, and being so much in the
company of wolves is exhausting, even depressing. A man like Capone
yearns to be the recipient of an honest or generous gesture, to feel that not
everyone has an angle or is out to rob him.
Lusiig’s act of selective honesty disarmed Capone because it was so
unexpected. A con artist loves conflicting emotions like these, since the
person caught up in them is so easily distracted and deceived.
Do not shy away from practicing this law on the Capones of the world.
With a well-timed gesture of honesty or generosity, you will have the most
brutal and cynical beast in the kingdom eating out of your hand.
Everything turns gray when I don ’t have at least one mark an the horizon.
Life then seems empty and depressing. I cannot understand honest mm.
They lead desperate lives, full ofbaredom.
(mm: ‘.1110: Lu.«u,«;, ISO!)
:94?
KEYS ’l‘(.) P()\/\"l:lR
The essence of deception is distraction. Distracting the people you want to
deceive gives you the time and space to do something they won’: notice.
An act of kindness, generosity, or honesty is often the most powerful form
of distraction because it disanns other people’s suspicions. It tums them
into children, eagerly lapping up any kind of a.ft'ectiona.te gesture.
In ancient China this was called “giving before you take”--the giving
makes it hard for the other person to notice the taldng. It is a device with
infinite practical uses. Brazenly taking something from someone is danger-
ous, even for the powerful. The victim will plot revenge. It is also danger-
ous simply to ask for what you need, no matter how politely: Unless the
other person sees some gain for themselves, they may come to resent your
neediness. Learn to give before you take. It softens the ground, takes the
bite out of a future request, or simply creates a distraction. And the giving
can take many forms: an actual gift, at generous act, a kind favor, an “l1on~
est” admission-—whatever it takes.
Selective honesty is best employed on your first encounter with some
one. We are all creatures of habit, and our first impressions last a long time.
If someone believes you are honest at the start of your relationship it takes
a lot to convince them otherwise. This gives you room to maneuver.
jay Gould, like Al Capone,
was
a man who distrusted everyone.
By the time he
was thirty—three
he
was already
a multimillionaire,
mostly through deception and strong-arming. In the late 1860s, Gould in-
vested heavily in the Erie Railroad, then discovered that the market had
L/SW12
91
92,
LAW l2
been flooded with a vast amount of phony stock certificates for the com»
party. He stood to lose a fortune and to suffer a lot of embarrassment.
In the midst of this crisis, a man named Lordjohn Gordon- Gordon of-
fered to help. Gordon—Gordon, a Scottish lord, had apparently made
a
small fortune investing in railroads.
By hiring
some handwriting experts 'Gordon—Gordon
was able to
prove to Gould that the culprits for the phony stock certificates were actu-
ally several top executives with the Erie Railroad itself. Gould was grateful.
Gordon«Gordon then proposed that he and Gould join forces to buy up a
controlling interest in Erie. Gould agreed. For a while the venture ap-
peared to prosper. The two men were now good friends, and every time
Gordon—Gordon came to Gould asking for money to buy more stock,
Gould
gave it
to him. In
1873, however,
Gordon-Gordon suddenly
dumped all of his stock, making a fortune but drastically lowering the value
of Gould’s own holdings. Then he disappeared from sight.
Upon investigation, Gould found out that Gordon-Gordon’s real name
was john Crowningsfield, and that he was the bastard son of a merchant
Seaman and a London barmaid. There had been many clues before then
that Goi-donvGordon was a con man, but his initial act of honesty and sup
port had so blinded Gould that it took the loss of millions for him to see
through the scheme.
A single act of honesty is often not enough. What is required is a repu-
tation for honesty, built on a. series of acts-—but these can be quite inconse-
quential. Once this reputation is established, as with first impressions, it is
hard to shake.
~
In ancient China, Duke Wu of Chéng decided it was time to take over
the increasingly powerful kingdom of Ho. Telling no one of his plan, he
married his daughter to Hu’s ruler. He then called a oouncil and asked his
ministers, “I am considering a military campaign. Which country should
we invade?” As he had expected, one of his ministers replied, “H11 should
be invaded.” The duke seemed angry, and said, “Hu is a sister state now.
Why do you suggest invading her?” He had the minister executed for his
impolitic remark. The ruler of Hu heard about this, and considering other
tokens of Wu’s honesty and the marriage with his daughter, he took no pre-
cautions to defend himself from Chéng. A few weeks later, Chéng forces
swept through Hu and took the country, never to relinquish it.
Honesty is one of the best ways to disarm the wary, but it is not the
only one. Any kind of noble, apparently selfless act will serve. Perhaps the
best such act, though, is one of generosity. Few people can resist a gift, even
from the most hardened enemy, which is why it is often the perfect way to
disarm people. A gift brings out the child in us, instantly lowering our dc»
lenses. Although we often view other people’s actions in the most cynical
light, we rarely see the Machiavellian element of a gift, which quite often
hides ulterior motives. A gift is the perfect object in which to hide a decep—
live move.
Over three thousand years ago the ancient Greeks traveled across the
sea to recapture the beautiful Helen, stolen away from them by Paris, and
to destroy Paris’s city, Troy. The siege lasted ten years, many heroes died,
yet neither side had come close to victory. One day, the prophet Calchas
assembled the Greeks.
“Stop battering away at these walls!” he told them. “You must find
some other way,
some
ruse. We cannot take
Troy by force alone. We
must find some cunning
stratagem.”
The
cun—
ning
Greek
leader
Odysseus then came up
with the idea of building
a giant wooden
horse,
hiding soldiers inside it,
then offering it to the
Trojans
as
a gift.
Neoptolemus,
son
of
Achilles, was disgusted
with this idea; it
was
unmanly. Better for
thousands to die on the
battlefield than to gain
victory
so deceitfully.
But the soldiers, faced
with a choice between
another ten years of
manliness, honor, and
death, on the one hand
and
a quick victory on
the other, chose the
horse, which was promptly built. The trick was successful and Troy fell.
One gift did more for the Greek cause than ten years of fighting.
Selective kindness should also be part of your arsenal of deception. For
years the ancient Romans had besieged the city of the Faliscans, always un~
successfully. One day, however, when the Roman general Camillus was
encamped outside the city, he suddenly saw a man leading some children
toward him. The man was a Faliscan teacher, and the children, it turned
out, were the sons and daughters of the noblest and wealthiest citizens of
the town. On the pretense of taking these children out for a walk, he had
led them straight to the Romans, offering them as hostages in hopes of in-
gratiating himself with Camillus, the city’s enemy.
Camillus did not take the children hostage. He stripped the teadier,
tied his hands behind his back, gave each child a rod, and let them whip
him all the way back to the city. The gesture had an immediate effect on
the Faliscans. Had Camillus used the children as hostages, some in the city
would have voted to surrender. And even if the Faliscans had gone on
fighting, their resistance would have been halfhearted. Camillus’s refusal to
take advantage of the situation broke down the Faliscans’ resistance, and
they surrendered. The general had calculated correctly. And in any case he
had had nothing to lose: He knew that the hostage ploy would not have
ended the war, at least not right away. By turning the situation around, he
earned his enemy’s trust and respecg disarming them. Selective kindness
will often break down even the most stubborn foe: Aiming right for the
heart, it corrodes the will to fight back.
Remember: By playing on people’s emotions, calculated acts of kind-
ness can turn a Capone into a gullible child. As with any emotional ap-
proach, the tactic must be practiced with caution: If people see through it,
their disappointed feelings of gratitude and warmth will become the most
violent hatred and distrust Unless you can make the gesture seem sincere
and heartfelt, do not play with fire.
I m a g e: T h e
Trojan Horse.
Your guile is
hidden inside
a magnificent
gift that proves
irresistible to
your opponent.
The walls open.
Once inside,
wreak havoc.
LAW 12
1
93
94
LAW 12
Authority: When Duke Hsien
of Chin was about to raid Yii,
he presented
to them
a jade
and
a
team of horses. When
Earl Chih
was about to raid
Cl1’ou~yu,
he presented
to
them grand
chariots.
Hence
the saying: “When you
are
about
to
take.
you
should
give." (Han-feivtzn, Chinese
philosopher, third century B.C.}
REVERSAL
When you have a history of deceit behind you, no amount of honesty, gen-
erosity, or kindness will fool people. In fact it will only call attention to it-
self. Once people have come to see you as deceitful, to act honest all of a
sudden is simply suspicious. In these cases it is better to play the rogue.
Count Lustig, pulling the biggest can of his career, was about to sell
the Eiffel Tower to an unsuspecting indusixialist who believed the govern-
ment was auctioning it off for scrap metal. The industrialist was prepared
to hand over a huge sum of money to Lustig, who had successfully imper-
sonated a government official. At the last minute, however, the mark was
suspicious. Something about Lustig bothered him. At the meeting in which
he was to hand over the money, Lustig sensed his sudden distrust.
Leaning over to the industrialist, Lustig explained, in a low whisper,
how low his salary was, how difficult his finances were, on and on. After a
few minutes of this, the industlialist realized that Lustig was asking for a
bribe. For the first time he relaxed. Now he knew he could trust Lustig:
Since all government officials were dishonest, Lustig had to be real. The
man forked over the money. By acting dishonest, Lustig seemed the real
McCoy. In this case selective honesty would have had the opposite effect.
As the French diplomat Talleyrand grew older, his reputation as a mas-
ter liar and deceiver spread. At the Congress of Vienna (1814-1815), he
would spin fabulous stories and make impossible remarlm to people who
knew he had to be lying. His dishonesty had no purpose except to cloak
the moments when he really was deceiving them. One day, for example,
among friends, Talleyrand said with apparent sincerity, “In business one
ought to show one’s hand.” No one who heard him could believe their
ears: A man who never once in his life had shown his cards was telling
other people to show theirs. Tactics like this made it impossible to distin-
guish Talleyi-and’s real decepfions from his fake ones. By embracing his
reputation for dishonesty, he preserved his ability to deceive.
Nothing in the realm of power is set in stone. Overt deceptiveness will
sometimes cover your tracks, even making you admired for the honesty of
your dishonesty.
13
WHEN ASKING FOR HELP,
APPEAL TO PEOPLE’S
SELF-INTEREST,
NEVER TO THEIR MERCY
OR GRATITUDE
JUDGMENT
Ifyou need to cum to an allyfor help, do not bother to re-
mind him ofyour past assistzmm and goad deeds. He
willfind a way to
you. Instead,
uncover some-
thing in your request, arr in your ailiance with him, that
will lzenqit him, and emphasize it out ofall prnportian.
Hz: will mspond enthusiastically when he sees smnetkéng
to be gainedfor himself
‘95
Illl’ |’l‘,/\."~‘A,'\'| »\'\l)
'I‘l||'.A|’|‘l
-Tl{l}l'l
A peasant had in his
garden an apple-tree.
which bore no fruit, but
only served as a perch
for (he sparrows‘ and
grasshoppers. He
rc.wlvc'd to our il down,
and, taking his ax in
lmml, made a hold
stmkre at its roots. The
grasslxappzm and spar-
rows emreated him not
I!) cut down the tree
that .\‘h€l((‘I’(,'d them, but
to spare it, and they
would sing (0 him and
ltghlen his labors. He
paid no nrrmlzrm I0
their request, bu! gave
the tree Ll second and [1
third blow with his ax.
When he reached I/1e
hollow Uflhe true, he
found a hive full of
honey. Having tasted
the honeym11xb, he
threw down his ax, am},
looking on the tree as
sacred, took great care
ofit.
.S'clf—tn1ere.s'r alone
ntoves sorne men.
I—'Am,r:s,
Air.
P.
sixru CEl\'TURY 13 <:.
96
3
LAW
13
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
In the early fourteenth century, a young man named Castruccio Castracani
rose from the rank of common soldier to become lord of the great city of
Lucca, Italy. One of the most powerful families in the city, the Poggios,
had been instrumental in his climb (which succeeded through treachery
and bloodshed), but after he came to power, they came to feel he had for»
gotten them. His ambition outweighed any gratitude he felt. In 1325, while
Castruccio was away fighting Lucca’s main rival, Florence, the Poggios
conspired with other noble families in the city to rid themselves of this
troublesome and ambitious prince.
Mounting an insurrection, the plotters attacked and murdered the gov-
ernor whom Castruccio had left behind to rule the city. Riots broke out,
and the Castmccio supporters and the Poggio supporters were poised to do
battle, At the height of the tension, however, Stefano di Poggio, the oldest
member of the family, intervened, and made both sides lay down their
arms.
A peaceful man, Stefano had not taken part in the conspiracy. He had
told his family it would end in a useless bloodbath. Now he insisted he
should intercede on the family’s behalf and persuade Castruccio to listen to
their complaints and satisfy their demands. Stefano was the oldest and wis-
est member of the clan, and his family agreed to put their trust in his diplcw
macy rather than in their weapons.
When news of the rebellion reached Castruccio, he hurried back to
Lucca. By the time he arrived, however, the fighting had ceased, through
Stefa.no’s agency, and he was surprised by the city’s calm and peace. Ste-
fano di Poggio had imagined that Castruccio would be grateful to him for
his part in quelling the rebellion, so he paid the prince a visit. He explained
how he had brought peace, then begged for Castruccio’s mercy. He said
that the rebels in his family were young and impetuous, hungry for power
yet inexperienced; he recalled his family’s past generosity to Castzuccio.
For all these reasons, he said, the great prince should pardon the Poggios
and listen to their complaints. This, he said, was the only just thing to do,
since the family had willingly laid down their arms and had always sup-
ported him.
Castmccio listened patiently. He seemed not the slightest bit angry or
resentful. Instead, he told Stefano to rest assured that justice would prevail,
and he asked him to bring his entire family to the palace to talk over their
grievances and come to an agreement. As they took leave of one another,
Castruccio said he thanked God for the chance he had been given to show
his clemency and kindness. That evening the entire Poggio family came to
the palace. Castruccio immediately had them imprisoned and a few days
later all were executed, including Stefano.
Interpretation
Stefano di Poggio is the embodiment of all those who believe that the jus-
tice and nobility of their cause will prevail, Certainly appeals to justice and
gratitude have occasionally succeeded in the past, but more often than not
they have had dire consequences, especially in dealings with the Castruc
cios of the world. Stefano knew that the prince had risen to power through
treachery and ruthlessness. This was a man, after all, who had put a close
and devoted friend to death. When Castruccio was told that it had been a
terrible wrong to kill such an old friend, he replied that he had executed
not an old friend but a new enemy.
A man like Castruccio knows only force and self—interest. When the re-
bellion began, to end it and place oneself at his mercy was the most dan—
gerous possible move. Even once Stefano di Poggio had made that fatal
mistake, however, he still had options: He could have offered money to
Castruccio, could have made promises for the future, could have pointed
out what the Poggios could still contribute to Castruccio’s power-their in-
fluence with the most influential families of Rome, for example, and the
great marriage they could have brokered.
Instead Stefano brought up the past, and debts that carried no obliga-
tion. Not only is a man not obliged to be grateful, gratitude is often a terri-
ble burden that he gladly discards. And in this case Castruccio rid himself
of his obligations to the Poggios by eliminating the Poggios.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In 4-33 B.C., just before the Peloponnesian War, the island of Corcyra (later
called Corfu) and the Greek city~state of Corinth stood on the brink of con-
flict. Both parties sent ambassadors to Athens to try to win over the Atheni~
ans to their side. The stakes were high, since whoever had Athens on his
side was sure to win. And whoever won the war would certainly give the
defeated side no mercy.
Corcyra spoke first. Its ambassador began by admitting that the island
had never helped Athens before, and in fact had allied itself with Athens’s
enemies. There were no ties of friendship or gratitude between Corcyra
and Athens. Yes, the ambassador achnitted, he had come to Athens now
out of fear and concern for Corcyra’s safety. The only thing he could offer
was an alliance of mutual interests. Corcyra had a navy only surpassed in
size and strength by Athens’s own;
an alliance between the two states
would create a formidable force, one that could intimidate the rival state of
Sparta. That, unfortunately, was all Oorcyra had to offer.
The representative from Corinth then gave
a brilliant, passionate
speech, in sharp contrast to the dry, colorless approach of the Corcyran.
He talked ofeverything Corinth had done for Athens in the past. He asked
how it would look to Athens’s other allies if the city put an agreement with
a former enemy over one with
a present friend, one that had served
Athens’s interest loyally: Perhaps those allies would break their agreements
with Athens if they saw that their loyalty was not valued. He referred to
Hellenic law, and the need to repay Corinth for all its good deeds. He fi-
nally went on to list the many services Corinth had performed for Athens,
and the importance of showing gratitude to one’s friends.
After the speech, the Athenians debated the issue in an assembly. On
Most men are so thor-
oughly xubjeciive that
nothing really intermls
zhem bu! 1hmn.reIw.v.
T/zr,-y always think of
their own casn at man
as (war any remark is
made, and their whole
auenukm is erzgrmxscd
and abvorbed by the
Inerest clmnre rr:fr:r-
mure to anything which
uffct/s them personally,
be it never so rcrnoze.
/\R1‘liUR
S(:xmm«‘r~:uALrr-.12.
l7XX—l8tI(l
LAW I3
97
‘)5’:
LAW
13
the second round, they voted overwhelmingly to ally with Corcyra and
drop Corinth.
Interpretation
History has remembered the Athenians nobly, but they were the preemi-
nent realists of classical Greece. With them, all the rhetoric, all the emo-
tional appeals in the world, could not match a good pragmatic argument,
especially one that added to their power.
What the Corinthian ambassador did not realize was that his refer-
ences to Corinth’s past generosity to Athens only irritated the Athenians,
subtly asking them to feel guilty and putting them under obligation. The
Athenians couldn’t care less about past favors and friendly feelings. At the
same time, they knew that if their other allies thought them ungrateful for
abandoning Corinth, these city-states would still be unlikely to break their
ties to Athens, the preeminent power in Greece. Athens ruled its empire by
force, and would simply compel any rebellious ally to return to the fold.
When people choose between talk about the past and talk about the
future, a pragmatic person will always opt for the future and forget the past.
As the Corcyrans realized, it is always best to speak pragmatically to a
pragmatic person. And in the end, most people are in fast pragmatic-—they
will rarely act against their own self-interest.
It has always been a rule that the weak should be subject to the strong;
and besides, we consider that we am worthy of our power. Up till the
present moment you, too, used to think that we were; but now. after
calculating your own interest, you are beginning to talk in terms ofright
and wrong. Conréderatiores ofthis kind have never yet turned people aside
[mm the opportunities ofagrandizemeni offered by superior strength.
A thenmrr. r.’pre.rwata.£ir»s' lo Sf1Irrifi.
quulmi in The Pcloponnesian War, '£‘hur._wiz'dn.i,
(2. 4(15» 395 14.1.’.
KEYS TO POWER
In your quest for power, you will constantly find yourself in the position of
asking for help from those more powerful than you. There is an art to ask-
ing for help, an art that depends on your ability to understand the person
you are dealing with, and to not confuse your needs with theirs.
Most people
never succeed at this, because they
are completely
trapped in their own wants and desires. They start from the assumption
that the people they are appealing to have a selfless interest in helping
them. They talk as if their needs mattered to these peopleowho probably
couldn’t care less. Sometimes they refer to larger issues: a great cause, or
grand emotions such as love and gratitude. They go for the big picture
when simple, everyday realities would have much more appeal. What they
do not realize is that even the most powerful person is locked inside needs
of his own, and that if you make no appeal to his selfdnterest, he merely
sees you as desperate or, at best, a waste of time.
In the sixteenth century, Portuguese missionaries tried for years to con
vert the people ofjapan to Catholicism, while at the same time Portugal
had a monopoly on trade between japan and Europe. Although the mis-
sionaries did have some success, they never got far among the ruling elite;
by the beginning of the seventeenth century, in fact, their proselytizing had
completely antagonized the Japanese emperor Ieyasu. When the Dutch
began to arrive in japan in great numbers, Ieyasu was much relieved. He
needed Europeans for their know-how in guns and navigation, and here at
last were Europeans who cared nothing for spreading religion——the Dutch
wanted only to trade. Ieyasu swiftly moved to evict the Portuguese. From
then on, he would only deal with the practicalminded Dutch.
Japan and Holland were vastly different cultures, but each shared a
timeless and universal concern: selfiinterest. Every person you deal with is
like another culuire, an alien land with a past that has nothing to do with
yours. Yet you can bypass the differences between you and him by appeal-
ing to his self—interest. Do not be subtle: You have valuable knowledge to
share, you will fill his coffers with gold, you will make him live longer and
happier. This is a language that all of us speak and understand.
A key step in the process is to understand the other person’s psychol~
ogy. Is he vain? Is he concerned about his reputation or his social standing?
Does he have enemies you could help him vanquish? Is he simply mod»
vated by money and power?
When the Mongols invaded China in the twelfth century, they threab
erred to obliterate a culture that had thrived for over two thousand years.
Their leader, Genghis Khan,
saw nothing in China. but a country that
lacked pasturing for his horses, and he decided to destroy the place, IeveI~
ing all its cities, for “it would be better to exterminate the Chinese and let
the grass grow.” It was not a soldier, a. general, or a king who saved the
Chinese from devastation, but a man named Yelu Ch’u—Ts’ai. A foreigner
himself, Ch’u«Ts’ai had come to appreciate the superiority of Chinese cul-
ture. He managed to make himself a trusted adviser to Genghis Khan, and
persuaded him that he would reap riches out of the place if, instead of de
straying it, he simply taxed everyone who lived there. Khan saw the wis-
dom in this and did as Ch’u—Ts‘a.i advised.
When Khan took the city of Kaifeng, after a long siege, and decided to
massaxtre its inhabitants (as he had in other cities that had resisted him),
Ch’u~Ts’ai told him that the finest craftsmen and engineers in China had
fled to Kaifeng, and it would be better to put them to use. Kaifeng was
spared. Never before had Genghis Khan shown such mercy, but then it
really wasn’t mercy that saved Kaifeng. Ch‘u—Ts’ai knew Khan well. He was
a barbaric peasant who cared nothing for culuire, or indeed for anything
other than warfare and practical results. Ch’u—Ts’ai chose to appeal to the
only emotion that would work on such a man: greed.
Self-interest is the lever that will move people. Once you make them
see how you can in some way meet their needs or advance their cause,
their resistance to your requests for help will magically fall away. At each
step on the way to acquiring power, you must train yourself to think your
LAW 13
99
1 00
LAW
13
way inside the other persorfs mind, to see their needs and interests, to get
rid of the screen of your own feelings that obscure the truth. Master this an
and there will be no limits to what you can accomplish.
Image: A Cord that
Binds. The cord of
mercy and grati-
tude is threadbare.
and will break at
the first shock.
Do
not throw
such
a lifeline.
T h e
c o r d
0 f
mutual self-inter-
est is woven of
many fibers and
cannot easily
be
severed. It will serve
you well for years.
Authority: The shortest and best way to make your for
tune is to let people see clearly that it is in their interests
to promote yours. (jean de La Bruyere. l645—169(i)
REVERSAI.
Some people will see an appeal to their selfiinterest as ugly and ignoble.
They actually prefer to be able to exercise charity, mercy, and justice,
which are their ways of feeling superior to you: When you beg them for
help, you emphasize their power and position. They are strong enough to
need nothing from you except the chance to feel superior. This is the wine
that intoxicates them. They are dying to fund your project, to introduce
you to powerful people———provided, of course, that all this is done in public,
and for a good cause (usually the more public, the better). Not everyone,
then, can be approached through cynical self—interest. Some people will be
put off by it, because they dorft want to seem to be motivated by such
things. They need opportunities to display their good heart,
Do not be shy. Give them that opportunity. It’s not as if you are con»
ning them by asking for help——it is really their pleasure to give, and to be
seen giving. You must distinguish the differences among powerful people
and figure out what makes them tick. When they ooze greed, do not appeal
to their charity. When they want to look charitable and noble, do not ap-
peal to their greed.
LAW
14
P()SElAS.AfiFRIEPJD,
VVCHRKQAS.A.SPY’
JUDGMENT
Knowing about your rival is critical. Use spies’ to gather
valuable infmrmation that will keep you a step ahead.
Better stz'll: Play the spy yourself. In polite social encoun~
ters, learn topmbe. Ask indirect questions to get people to
reveal their weaknesses and intentions. There is no occa-
sion that is not an ojiponfunityfor artful spying.
107
I02
LAW
14
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
Joseph Duveen was undoubtedly the greatest art dealer of his time—from
1904 to 194-0 he almost single—handedly rnonopolized America’s million-
aire art-collecting market. But one prize plum eluded him: the industrialist
Andrew Mellon. Before he died, Duveen was determined to make Mellon
a client.
Duveen’s friends said this was an impossible dreani. Mellon was a stiff,
taciturn man. The stories he had heard about the congenial, talkative Du-
veen rubbed him the wrong way—-he had made it clear he had no desire to
meet the man. Yet Duveen told his doubting friends, “Not only will Mellon
buy from me but he will buy only from me.” For several years he tracked
his prey, learning the man’s habits, tastes, phobias. To do this, he secretly
put several of Mellon’s staff on his own payroll, worming valuable informa-
tion out of them. By the time he moved into action, he knew Mellon about
as well as Mellon’s wife did.
In 1921 Mellon was visiting London, and staying in a palatial suite on
the third floor of Claridge’s Hotel. Duveen booked himself into the suite
just below Mellon’s, on the second floor. He had arranged for his valet to
befriend Mellon’s valet, and on the fateful day he had chosen to make his
move, Mellon’s valet told Duveen’s valet, who told Duveen, that he had
just helped Mellon on with his overcoat, and that the industrialist was mak-
ing his way down the corridor to ring for the lift.
Duveen’s valet hurriedly helped Duveen with his own overcoat. Sec»
onds later, Duveen entered the lift, and lo and behold, there was Mellon.
“How do you do, Mr. Mellon?” said Duveen, introducing himself. “I am on
my way to the National Gallery to look at some pictures.” How uncanny-
that was precisely where Mellon was headed. And so Duveen was able to
accompany his prey to the one location that would ensure his success. He
knew Mellon’s taste inside and out, and while the two men wandered
through the museum, he dazzled the magnate with his knowledge. Once
again quite uncannily, they seemed to have remarkably similar tastes.
Mellon was pleasantly surprised: This was not the Duveen he had ex-
pected. The man was charming and agreeable, and clearly had exquisite
taste. When they returned to New York, Mellon visited Duveen’s exclusive
gallery and fell in love with the collection. Everything, surprisingly enough,
seemed to be precisely the kind of work he wanted to collect. For the rest
of his life he was Duveen’s best and most generous client.
Interpretation
A man as ambitious and competitive as Joseph Duveen left nothing to
chance. What’s the point of winging ig ofjust hoping you may be able to
charm this or that client? It’s like shooting ducks blindfolded. Arm yourself
with a little knowledge and your aim improves.
Mellon was the most spectacular of Duveen’s catches, but he spied on
many a millionaire. By secretly putting members of his clients’ household
staffs on his own payroll, he would gain constant access to valuable infor-
mation about their masters’ comings and goings, changes in taste, and
other such tidbits of information that would put him a step ahead. A rival
of Duveen’s who wanted to make Henry Frick a client noticed that when-
ever he visited this wealthy New Yorker, Duveen was there before him, as
if he had a sixth sense. To other dealers Duveen seemed to be everywhere,
and to know everything before they did. His powers discouraged and dis-
heartened them, until many simply gave up going after the wealthy clients
who could make a dealer rich.
Such is the power of artful spying: It makes you seem all—powerful,
clairvoyant. Your knowledge of your mark can also make you seem charm-
ing, so well can you anticipate his desires. No one sees the source of your
power, and what they cannot see they cannot fight.
Rulers see through spies, as cows through smell, Bmhmins through
scriptures and the rest of the people through their normal eyes.
Kantily/1, Indian philmoplm; third amtury 3.1:.
KEYS TO POWER
In the realm of power, your goal is a degree of control over future events.
Part of the problem you face, then, is that people won’t tell you all their
thoughts, emotions, and plans. Controlling what they say, they often keep
the most critical parts of their character hidden—their weaknesses, ulterior
motives, obsessions. The result is that you cannot predict their moves, and
are constantly in the dark. The trick is to find a way to probe them, to find
out their secrets and hidden intentions, without letting them know what
you are up to.
This is not as difficult as you might think. A friendly front will let you
secretly gather information on friends and enemies alike. Let others con-
sult the horoscope, or read tarot cards: You have more concrete means of
seeing into the future.
The most common way of spying is to use other people, as Duveen
did. The method is simple, powerful, but risky: You will certainly gather in-
formation, but you have little control over the people who are doing the
work. Perhaps they will ineptly reveal your spying, or even secretly turn
against you. It is far better to be the spy yourself, to pose as a friend while
secretly gathering information.
The French politician Talleyrand was one of the greatest practitioners
of this art. He had an uncanny ability to worm secrets out of people in pa-
lite conversation. A contemporary of his, Baron de Vitrolles, wrote, “Wit
and grace marked his conversation. He possessed the art of concealing his
thoughts or his malice beneath a transparent veil of insinuations, words
that imply something more than they express. Only when necessary did he
inject his own personality.” The key here is Talleyrand’s ability to suppress
himself in the conversation, to make others talk endlessly about themselves
and inadvertently reveal their intentions and plans.
LAW
14
103
Ifyon have reaxon to
suspect that a [lemon :5
Iellingyuu a lie, Io/Ik ax
(hmzgh you lzzlicved
ewry word he said.
Thix willgive him
coumgr: to gr; on; he
will become more
Vt’/1(,’mI'Nl in Im
a.s:m‘ltons, and in the
and betray hitnreljj
Again, ifyou perceive
thal a person iv trying
to ¢:zmL'ruI so-nmlhing
from you, but with only
partial Sl.(f‘l‘t?A‘.\', look as
though you did not
believe him. The uppo»
sition on your part will
provoke him into lead-
ing out his re:\‘¢'rve of
mu/1 and bringing the
whole force of it to
Imrr upon your
l'rIcrez1u7r':y.
A R Fl II ;x
S\"llOPl-INlIAI.‘l£R,
l78X»lX6(l
104
LAW
14
Throughout Talleyrand’s life, people said he was a superb conversa-
tionalist—yet he actually said very little. He never talked about his own
ideas; he got others to reveal theirs. He would organize friendly games of
charades for foreign diplomats, social gatherings where, however, he
would carefully weigh their words, cajole confidences out of them, and
gather information invaluable to his work as France’s foreign minister. At
the Congress of Vienna (1814-1815) he did his spying in other ways: He
would blurt out what seemed to be a secret (actually something he had
made up), then watch his listeners’ reactions. He might tell a gathering of
diplomats, for instance, that a reliable source had revealed to him that the
czar of Russia was planning to arrest his top general for treason. By watch-
ing the diplomats’ reactions to this madealp story, he would know which
ones were most excited by the weakening of the Russian army—~perhaps
their goverments had designs
on Russia? As Baron
Von Stetten said,
“Monsieur Talleyrand fires a pistol into the air to see who willjump out the
window.”
During social gatherings and innocuous encounters, pay attention.
This is when people’s guards are down. By suppressing your own personal-
ity, you can make them reveal things. The brilliance of the maneuver is
that they will mistake your interest in them for friendship, so that you not
only learn, you malce allies.
Nevertheless, you should practice this tactic with caution and care. If
people begin to suspect you are worming secrets out of them under the
cover of conversation, they will strictly avoid you. Emphasize friendly
chatter, not valuable information. Your search for gems of information can-
not be too obvious, or your probing questions will reveal more about your
self and your intentions than about the information you hope to find.
A trick to try in spying comes from La Rochefoucauld, who wrote,
“Sincerity is found in very few men, and is often the cleverest of ruses——
one is sincere in order to draw out the confidence and secrets of the other.”
By pretending to bare your heart to another person, in other words, you
make them more likely to reveal their own secrets. Give them a false con‘
fession and they will give you a real one. Another trick was identified by
the philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer, who suggested vehemently contra-
dicting people you’re in conversation with as a way of irritating them, stir—
ring them up so that they lose some of the control over their words. In their
emotional reaction they will reveal all kinds of truths about themselves,
truths you can later use against them.
Another method of indirect spying is to test people, to lay little traps
that make them reveal things about themselves. Chosroes II, a notoriously
clever seventlrcentury king of the Persians, had many ways of seeing
through his subjects without raising suspicion. If he noticed, for instance,
that two of his couruers had become particularly friendly, he would call
one of them aside and say he had information that the other was a traitor,
and would soon be killed. The king would tell the courtier he tmsted him
more than anyone, and that he must keep this information secret. Then he
would watch the two men carefully. If he saw that the second courtier had
not changed in his behavior toward the king, he would conclude that the
first courtier had kept the secret, and he would quickly promote the man,
later taking him aside to confess, “I meant to kill your friend because of
certain information that had reached me, but, when I investigated the mat-
ter, I found it was untrue.” If, on the other hand, the second courtier started
to avoid the king, acting aloof and tense, Chosroes would know that the se
cret had been revealed. He would ban the second courtier from his court,
letting him know that the whole business had only been a test, but that
even though the man had done nothing wrong, he could no longer trust
him. The first courtier, however, had revealed a secret, and him Chosroes
would ban from his entire kingdom.
It may seem an odd form of spying that reveals not empirical informa:
tion but a person’s character. Often, however, it is the best way of solving
problems before they arise.
By tempting people into certain acts, you learn about their loyalty,
their honesty, and so on. And this kind of knowledge is often the most
valuable of all: Armed with it, you can predict their actions in the future.
[ m a g e
:
The
Third
Eye
of
the Spy. In the land of
the two-eyed, the third eye
gives you the omniscience
of a god. You see further than
others, and you see deeper
into them. Nobody is
safe from the eye
but you.
Authority: Now, the reason a brilliant sovereign and a wise general
conquer the enemy whenever they move, and their achievements
surpass those of ordinary men, is their foreknowledge of the enemy
situation. This “foreknowledge” cannot be elicited from spirits, nor
from gods, nor by analogy with past events, not by astrologic calcu
lations. It must be obtained from men who know the enemy sit-
uati0n—-from spies. (Sun-tzu,
The Art if War, fourth century B.C.)
LAW
14
I05
106
LAW H
REVERSAL
Information is critical to power, but just as you spy on other people, you
must be prepared for them to spy on you. One of the most potent weapons
in the battle for information, then, is giving out false information. As Mn-
ston Churchill said, “Truth is so precious that she should always be at»
tended by a bodyguard of lies.” You must surround yourself with such a
bodyguard, so that your truth cannot be penetrated. By planting the infor-
mation of your choice, you control the game.
In 1944 the Nazis’ rocket-bomb attacks on London suddenly escalated.
Over two thousand V-1 flying bombs fell on the city, killing more than five
thousand people and wounding many more, Somehow, however, the Ger-
mans consistently missed their targets. Bombs that were intended for
Tower Bridge, or Piccadilly, would fall well short of the city, landing in the
less populated suburbs. This was because, in fixing their targets, the Ger-
mans relied on secret agents they had planted in England. They did not
know that these agents had been discovered, and that in their place,
English—c0ntrolled agents were feeding them subtly deceptive information.
The bombs would hit farther and farther from their targets every time
they fell. By the end of the campaign they were landing on cows in the
country. By feeding people wrong information, then, you gain a potent ad
vantage. While spying gives you a third eye, disinformation puts out one of
your enemy’s eyes. A cyclops, he always misses his target.
LAW
15
(ZRIJSEIYNDLH
EPJEhAY'TT)T¥&LIJ{
JUDGMENT
All greai leaders since Moses have known that a fe(med
enemy must be crushed completely. (Sometimes they have
learned this the hard way.) Ifmze ember is kgfi alight, no
matter how dimly it smotders, afim will eventually break
out. More is £05: timmgh stopping hagfway than through
mtal annihilation: The enemy will recover; and will seek
revenge. Crush him, not only in body but in spiiit.
f
107
7'/11' remmmzs ofmz
erieniy can ht‘(‘t,‘.Vf1t’
uriiw. like lIm,\'r.’ ofa
4I1rm.\(' or fin‘. Ilclzct’.
ilmw Sitould be ener-
nzinalcd c'mnpIcIr'/y.
.
.
.
One xlmultl never
igrmro rm manry,
k/zow:'ug!1iIn to be
weak. He a’u‘z'omes
<Ilmr;eruur in due
mur.w, It/(P the spark
0/'fir<.' in 14 Izaysluek.
Km,» I’iLYA,
INIH/\N PHiLi)$l)ir‘HFR,
‘IHIRU t‘l<.‘l'I‘\fR\’ tax.
‘|'Hl~.
|‘l(—\P H
wM'\|l§y‘\(1| .1 ‘\
On the day Ramiro
was eaiemzezt.
’
/’Burgr'a/‘ quit Cl'.)'(?ViLi‘,
lreuvmg (he muliluted
hudy an the town
square, and rr1arrIu>r.i
xnu 1/I. Three days lam:
hn zrrrtred :11 Farzo,
Wht‘I'L‘ he rL'c‘m'vezI the
(’IlVU_Vs‘ Uflhe z‘lI_\= of
Ancmw, who assured
him Of!/l(‘ii’ loyalty.
A nmssertger/rurra
Vltvllozzo Vmzlli
ummunced {lull the
little /ldrrzrlic par! of
Siniguglin had .s'w‘rw1-
rlrrrvd to the C(7l1LlOIll€!1'l
/mercenary soldiers]
Only Iiw cimrlrrl, in
drnrgc afilm Genoese
Andrea Daria. still
/XL‘/(1 (ml, and l)nmr
refllxezi to hand it ovrrr
m azzyom: creep:
(Tamra /aimse/1.
/Borgild rml word
Illa! he would l1N1t’(‘.
lhe ne :2 rluy, which
was far! wine: the
1(}A.‘3\
LAW
15
'1‘RANSGRESS[Ol\' OF THE LAW
No rivalry between leaders is more celebrated in Chinese history than the
struggle between Hsiang Yu and Liu Pang. These two generals began their
careers as friends, fighting on the same side. Hsiang Yu came from the no-
bility; large and powerful, given to bouts of violence and temper, a bit dull-
witted, he was yet a mighty warrior who always fought at the head of his
troops. Liu Pang came from peasant stock. He had never been much of a
soldier, and preferred women and wine to fighting; in fact, he was some
thing of a scoundrel. But he was wily, and he had the ability to recognize
the best strategists, keep them as his advisers, and listen to their advice. He
had risen in the army through these strengths.
In 208 13.0., the king of Ch’u sent two massive armies to conquer the
powerful kingdom of Ch’in. One army went north, under the generalship
of Sung Yi, with Hsiang Yu second in command; the other, led by Liu
Pang, headed straight toward Ch’in. The target was the kingdom’s splendid
capital, Hsien-yang. And Hsiang Yu, ever violent and impatient, could not
stand the idea that Liu Pang would get to Hsietryang first, and perhaps
would assume command of the entire anny.
At one point on the northern front, Hsiang’s commander, Sung Yi,
hesitated in sending his troops into battle. Furious, Hsiang entered Sung
Yi’s tent, proclaimed him a traitor, cut off his head, and assumed sole com~
mand of the army. Without waiting for orders, he left the northern front
and marched directly on Hsien—yang. He felt certain he was the better sol-
dier and general than Liu, but, to his utter astonishment, his rival, leading a
smaller, swifter army, managed to reach Hsien-yang first. Hsiang had an
adviser, Fan Tseng, who warned him, “This village headman [Liu Fang]
used to be greedy only for riches and women, but since entering the capital
he has not been led astray by wealth, wine, or sex. That shows he is aiming
high.”
Fan Tseng urged Hsiang to kill his rival before it was too late. He told
the general to invite the wily peasant to a banquet at their camp outside
Hsien-yang, and, in the midst of a celebratory sword dance, to have his
head out off. The invitation was sent; Liu fell for the trap, and came to the
banquet. But I-Isiang hesitated in ordering the sword dance, and by the
time he gave the signal, Liu had sensed a trap, and managed to escape.
“Bah!” cried Fan Tseng in disgust, seeing that Hsiang had botched the plot.
“One cannot plan with
3. simpleton. Liu Pang will steal your empire yet
and make us all his prisoners."
Realizing his mistake, Hsiang hurriedly marched on Hsien-yang, this
time determined to hack off his rival’s head. Liu was never one to fight
when the odds were against him, and he abandoned the city. Hsiang cap~
tured Hsien-yang, murdered the young prince of Ch’in, and burned the
city to the ground. Liu was now Hsiang’s bitter enemy, and he pursued
him for many months, finally cornering him in a walled city. Lacking food,
his army in disarray, Liu sued for peace.
Again Fan Tseng wamed Hsiang, “Crush him now! If you let him go
again, you will be sorry later.” But Hsiang decided to be merciful. He
wanted to bring Liu back to Ch’u alive, and to force his former friend to ac-
knowledge him as master. But Fan proved right: Liu managed to use the
negotiations for his surrender as a distraction, and he escaped with a small
army. Hsiang, amazed that he had yet again let his rival slip away, once
more set out after Liu, this time with such ferocity that he seemed to have
lost his mind. At one point, having captured Liu’s father in battle, Hsiang
stood the old man up during the fighting and yelled to Liu across the line of
troops, “Surrender now, or I shall boil your father alive!” Liu calmly arr
swered, “But we are sworn brothers. So my father is your father also. If you
insist on boiling your own father, send me a bowl of the soup!” Hsiang
backed down, and the struggle continued.
A few weeks later, in the thick of the hunt, Hsiang scattered his forces
unwisely, and in a surprise attack Liu was able to surround his main garri-
son. For the first time the tables were turned. Now it was Hsiang who sued
for peace. Liu’s top adviser urged him to destroy Hsiang, crush his army,
show no mercy. “To let him go would be like rearing a tiger——it will devour
you later,” the adviser said. Liu agreed.
Making a false treaty, he lured Hsiarig into relaxing his defense, then
slaughtered almost all of his army. Hsiang managed to escape. Alone and
on foot, knowing that Liu had put a bounty on his head, he came upon a
small group of his own retreating soldiers, and cried out, “I hear Liu Pang
has offered one thousand pieces of gold and a fief of ten thousand families
for my head. Let me do you a favor.” Then he slit his own throat and died.
Interpretation
Hsiang Yu had proven his ruthlessness on many an occasion. He rarely
hesitated in doing away with a rival if it served his purposes. But with Liu
Pang he acted differently. He respected his rival, and did not want to defeat
him through deception; he wanted to prove his superiority on the battle
field, even to force the clever Liu to surrender and to serve him. Every time
he had his rival in his hands, something made him hesitat&——a fatal sympa~
thy with or respect for the man who, after all, had once been a friend and
comrade in arms. But the moment Hsiang made it clear that he intended to
do away with Liu, yet failed to accomplish it, he sealed his own doom. Liu
would not suffer the same hesitation once the tables were tamed.
This is the fate that faces all of us when we sympathize with our ene
mics, when pity, or the hope of reconciliation, makes us pull back from
doing away with them. We only strengthen their fear and hatred of us. We
have beaten them, and they are humiliated; yet we nurture these resentful
vipers who will one day kill us. Power cannot be dealt with this way. It
must be exterrninated, crushed, and denied the chance to return to haunt
us. This is all the truer with a former friend who has become an enemy.
The law governing fatal antagonisnis reads: Reconciliation is out of the
question. Only one side can win, and it must win totally.
Liu Pang learned this lesson well. After defeating Hsiang Yu, this son
condoitien waizlrd m
/war. ()I1L‘f’ in’ reurhuzl
Sinigriglirx. Ccstire
would he an €‘(Lt‘,V pry);
caught between the
cimrlr-I and tlwir jnruzs
ringizzg rlqv town.
..
.
'/‘hr condottieri were
sure they had milzmry
.s'uperim'ity. believing
that the Ilepurmre of
the Frmch troops lmd
left (.‘c.mre with only
11 mm)!firfsic’.
In. fact. at-rordirsg zo
M(zchiav¢>l1i, ffiarginj
had left (‘arena with
rm tlroustmd r'nfzm:r_x~’~
men and three thou-
sand Iznrse, taking
pairls to spin up his
nzew so thin‘ they would
march along parallel
roams beforz? r:onverg-
mg on Sirtigagliu. Tilt‘
re'u.ynr1 for such a large
force was that he knew.
from a crmfmwiozz
(’x(mr,'Ie<l from Ramiro
([1! Lara), wlml the
condouicri had up
their sleeve. He {lIer(‘—
fore decided re turn
their own imp zrgniozsi
them. This was the
muslerpiece oftrickery
Ihal the historian Paolo
G'imsio later called “thr-
magnijirenr z1i—a»it.“
Al rlzxwn on December
31/1502], Cestlre
rcurluzd the nutxkir/.y of
Siniguglilz.
.
.. Led by
Mit'ltel()lI() Corvllu.
Cesare
ad mrzce guard
of two ltumlrcd laI1fP.\'
look up its prlrltiotl on
the (amt! bridge.
.
.
.
'I‘i:is corztml ofrhe
bridge effectively
prevented the ,c:mr;2z'ra«
tors‘ troops from with-
'
Ilmwlhlg,
.
.
.
Cesare greeted the
condouieri offusivcly
and irzllitezl them to
j()ll’l him.
.
.
. A/Iirlzelorlu
LAW 15
I09
hm! prvpurmi the
!’aIa7.:'.n l2ermIr(lt'no
/or (/m‘a1/u's' l(.~'(', and
the zlu/<4: Em-'izwl the
condotticri ittxizlr‘.
_
.
.
Once imfoorx the men
wvlr (,'HI.x'I1VV nrrzrstvc!
by 5,-uarz'l.s' who crept up
front line rear.
.
.
.
I(‘e.\‘arcI/ gave ttrtiem
_/or rm attack on
Vitellz ‘.5 am! Orsini Ir
.x-ulditvx in the outlying
areas.
.
.
. '1'izuzm'ght,
while zlmir rmopi were
helm; crlmlwd, Miche-
lazm rhrnulrd ()Iuw—
mtto and Vilelli in me
Ilernarrlirm palacrr.
.
.
.
.-‘l1 one JP/l .i’wL>up,
,’I3m_<.;iu/ had got rid of
his former generals and
worxt mtczrlies,
‘rm-: zmnums.
haw (‘i.m;:.Ax.
193‘)
To have zzizinzlete
vmury, you rrnm In:
ruihlexs.
N/\voLmN B<>N,M’ARTr-,,
l 7(i‘)~ 1 821
110
,
LAW15
of a farmer went on to become supreme commander of the armies of Ch’u.
Crushing his next n'val—the king of Ch’u, his own former leader—l1e
crowned himself emperor, defeated everyone in his path, and went down
in history as one of the greatest rulers of China, the immortal Han Kao-tsu,
founder of the Han Dynasty.
Those who seek to achieve things should Show no mercy.
Kuutilyu, Indian plzilnsupher, zhml century 11. (I.
OBSERVANCE OF ‘THE LAW
Wu Chan, born in Ad). 625, was the daughter of a duke, and as a. beautiful
young woman of many charms, she was accordingly attached to the harem
of Emperor T’a.i Tsung.
The imperial harem was a dangerous place, full of young concubines
vying to become the emperor’s favorite. Wu’s beauty and forceful charac-
ter quickly won her this battle, but, knowing that an emperor, like other
powerful men, is a creature of whim, and that she could easily be replaced,
she kept her eye on the future.
Wu managed to seduce the emperor’s dissolute son, Kao Tsung, on the
only possible occasion when she could find him alone: while he was reliev-
ing himself at the royal urinal. Even so, when the emperor died and Ken
Tsung took over the throne, she still suffered the fate to which all wives and
concubines of a deceased emperor were bound by tradition and law: Her
head shaven, she entered a convent, for what was supposed to be the rest
of her life. For seven years Wu schemed to escape. By communicating in
secret with the new emperor, and by befiiencling his wife, the empress, she
managed to get a highly unusual royal edict allowing her to return to the
palace and to the royal harem. Once there, she fawned on the empress,
while still sleeping with the emperor. The empress did not discourage
this—--she had yet to provide the emperor with an heir, her position was
vulnerable, and Wu was a valuable ally.
In 654 Wu Chao gave birth to a child. One day the empress came to
visit, and as soon as she had left, Wu smothered the newborn——her own
baby. When the murder was discovered, suspicion immediately fell on the
empress, who had been on the scene moments earlier, and whose jealous
nature was known by all. This was precisely Wu’s plan. Shortly thereafter,
the empress
was charged with murder and executed. Wu Chao
was
crowned empress in her place. Her new husband, addicted to his life of
pleasure, gladly gave up the reins of government to Wu Chao, who was
from then on known as Empress Wu.
Although now in a position of great power, Wu hardly felt secure.
There were enemies everywhere; she could not let down her guard for one
moment. Indeed, when she was forty-one, she began to fear that her bean~
tiful young niece was becoming the emperor’s favorite. She poisoned the
woman with a clay mixed into her food. In 675 her own son, touted as the
heir apparent, was poisoned as well. The next—eldest son———illegil:'ma.te, but
now the crown prince——was exiled a little later on trumped—up charges.
And when the emperor died, in 683, Wu managed to have the son after
that declared unfit for the throne. All flris meant that it was her youngest,
most ineffectual son who finally ‘became emperor. In this way she contin-
ued to rule.
Over the next five years there were innumerable palace coups. All of
them failed, and all of the conspirators were executed. By 688 there was no
one left to challenge Wu. She proclaimed herself a divine descendant of
Buddha, and in 690 her wishes were finally granted: She was named Holy
and Divine “Emperor” of China.
Wu became emperor because there was literally nobody le-R from the
previous "Pang dynasty. And so she ruled unchallenged, for over a decade
of relative peace. In 705, at the age of eighty, she was forced to abdicate.
Interpretation
All who knew Empress Wu remarked on her energy and intelligence. At
the time, there was no glory available for an ambitious woman beyond a
few years in the imperial harem, then a lifetime walled up in a convent. In
Wu’s gradual but remarkable rise to the top, she was never naive. She
knew that any hesitation, any momentary weakness, would spell her and.
If, every time she got rid of a rival a new one appeared, the solution was
simple: She had to crush them all or be killed herself. Other emperors be
fore her had followed the same path to the top, but Wu-«who, as a woman,
had next to no chance to gain power———had to be more ruthless still.
Empress Wu’s forly—year reign was one of the longest in Chinese his-
tory. Although the story of her bloody rise to power is well known, in
China she is considered one of the period’s most able and effective rulers.
A priest asked the dying Spanish statesman and general Ramon Maria Narvdez
(1800-1868), “Does your Excellencyforgive all your enemies?” “I do not
have toforgive my ene1nies,"anrwmed Narmiez, “I have had them all shat.
”
KEYS TO POWER
It is no accident that the two stories illustrating this law come from China:
Chinese history abounds with examples of enemies who were left alive and
returned to haunt the lenient. “Crush the enemy” is a key strategic tenet of
Surrtzu, the fourth—century—B.C. author of The Art ofl/Wzr. The idea is simple:
Your enemies wish you ill. There is nothing they want more than to elimi-
nate you. If, in your struggles with them, you stop halfway or even three
quarters of the way, out of mercy or hope ofreconciliation, you only make
them more determined, more embittered, and they will someday take re-
venge. They may act friendly for the time being, but this is only because
you have defeated them. They have no choice but to bide their time.
The solution: Have no mercy. Crush your enemies as totally as they
LAW
15
I71
I12
LAW
15
would crush you. Ultimately the only peace and security you can hope for
from your enemies is their disappearance.
Mao Tse—tung, a devoted reader of Sun—tzu and of Chinese history gexr
erally, knew the importance of this law. In i934 the Communist leader and
some 75,000 poorly equipped soldiers fled into the desolate mountains of
western China to escape Chiang K.ai—shek’s much larger army, in what has
since been called the Long March.
Chiang was determined to eliminate every last Communist, and by a
few years later Mao had less than 10,000 soldiers left. By 1937, in fact,
when China was invaded by japan, Chiang calculated that the Commu-
nists were no longer a threat. He chose to give up the chase and conceir
trate on the Japanese. Ten years later the Communists had recovered
enough to rout Chia.ng’s army. Chiang had forgotten the ancient wisdom of
crushing the enemy; Mao had not. Chiang was pursued until he and his en-
tire army fled to the island of Taiwan. Nothing remains of his regime in
mainland China to this day.
The wisdom behind “crushing the enemy” is as ancient as the Bible:
Its first practitioner may have been Moses, who learned it from God Him«
self, when He parted the Red Sea for the Jews, then let the water {low back
over the pursuing Egyptians so that “not so much
as one of them re-
mained.” When Moses returned from Mount Sinai with the Ten Corn-
mandments and found his people worshipping the Golden Calf, he had
every last offender slaughtered. And just before he died, he told his follow-
ers, finally about to enter the Promised Land, that when they had defeated
the tribes of Canaan they should “utterly destroy them
.
.
. make no
covenant with them, and show no mercy to them.”
The goal of total victory is an axiom of modern warfare, and was codi-
fied as such by Carl von Clausewitz, the premier philosopher of war. Ana»
lyzing the campaigns of Napoleon, von Clausewitz wrote, “We do claim
that direct annihilation of the enemy’s forces must always be the dominant
consideration.
.
.
. Once a major victory is achieved there must be no talk of
rest, of breathing space
.
.
. but only of the pursuit, going for the enemy
again, seizing his capital, attacking his reserves and anything else that
might give his country aid and comfort.” The reason for this is that afier
war some negotiation and the division of territory. If you have only won a
partial victory, you will inevitably lose in negotiation what you have
gained by war.
The solution is simple: Allow your enemies no options. Annihilate
them and their territory is yours to carve. The goal of power is to control
your enemies completely, to make them obey your will. You cannot afford
to go halfway. If they have no options, they will be forced to do your bid-
ding. This law has applications far beyond the battlefield. Negotiation is the
insidious viper that will eat away at your victory, so give your enemies
nothing to negotiate, no hope, no room to maneuver. They are crushed
and that is that.
Realize this: In your struggle for power you will stir up rivalries and
create enemies. There will be people you cannot win over, who will re~
main your enemies no matter what. But whatever wound you inflicted on
them, deliberately or not, do not take their hatred personally. just recog»
nize that there is no possibility of peace between you, especially as long as
you stay in power. If you let them stick around, they will seek revenge, as
certainly as night follows day. To wait for them to show their cards is just
silly; as Empress Wu understood, by then it will be too late.
Be realistic: With an enemy like this around, you will never be secure.
Remember the lessons of history, and the wisdom of Moses and Mao:
Never go halfway.
It is not, of course, a question ofmurder, it is a question of banishment.
Sufficiently weakened and then exiled from your court forever, your ene-
mies are rendered harmless. They have no hope of recovering, insinuating
themselves and hurting you. And if they cannot be banished, at least un-
derstand that they are plotting against you, and pay no heed to whatever
friendliness they feign. Your only weapon in such a situation is your own
war-iness. If you cannot banish them immediately, then plot for the best
time to act.
Image: A Viper crushed
beneath your foot but left
alive, will rear up and bite
you with
a double dose of
venom. An enemy that is
left around is like
a half-
deacl viper that you nurse
back to health. Time makes
the venom grow stronger.
Authority: For it must be
noted, that men must either be
caressed or else annihilated;
they will revenge themselves
for small injuries, but cannot
do so for great ones; the injury
therefore that we do to a man
must be such that we need not
fear his vengeance. {Niccolo
Machiavelli,
1469-1527}
LAW
15
;
113
114
LAW 13
RE VE RSAL
This law should very rarely be ignored, but it does sometimes happen that
it is better to let your enemies destroy themselves, if such a thing is possi-
ble, than to make them suffer by your hand. In warfare, for example, a
good general knows that if he attacks an army when it is cornered, its sol-
diers will fight much more fiercely. It is sometimes better, then, to leave
them an escape route, a way out As they retreat, they wear themselves out,
and are ultimately more demoralized by the retreat than by any defeat he
might inflict on the battlefield. When you have someone on the ropes,
then——-but only when you are sure they have no chance of recovery--you
might let them hang themselves. Let them be the agents of their own de-
struction. The result will be the same, and you won‘t feel half as bad.
Finally, sometimes by crushing an enemy, you embitter them so much
that they spend years and years plotting revenge. The Treaty of Versailles
had such an effect on the Germans. Some would argue that in the long run
it would be better to show some leniency. The problem is, your leniency
involves another n'sk—it may embolden the enemy, which still harbors a
" grudge, but now has some room to operate. It is almost always wiser to
crush your enemy. If they plot revenge years later, do not let your guard
down, but simply crush them again.
LAW
16
USE ABSENCE TO
INCREASE RESPECT
AND HONOR
UDGM ENT
Too much cirtulatémz makes theprice go down: The more
you are seem and heardfmm, the more common you ap~
[Jean Ifyou are already established in a group, temporary
withdrawal from it will make you more talked about,
even mom admired. You must learn when to leave. Cre-
ate value thmugh scarcity.
I15
'|‘l|l‘.lJ\\»ll.|. \\l)'l'l|ln
Fl l\\'|'I’\(. .\lt(IK*§
The firm man who MW
:1 (*an1cI_/lcrii
The .\'e¢:r1rnl vnnmred
wit/rm zlixtunw;
The third dared slip a
hnllm mum! il.\' hem}.
Fanxiliariiv in (his
ex1'5ten(,‘r3
.’l/h':I;e.\' ail’ lizingx tame.
for what may seen:
'12-rriixlv or bizarre.
lV][(’l'l IIIICC’ UHF’ fyffh
Have lmrl time lo
<:cz‘[z'nzr1¢i:.n.
Becomes quite
(,‘(lI1N7l()7l[7lLI(7(’. Since
I 'm rm mix thaym’,
I've lrczmi u_['.verx(im:I.r
]m.s'tml by the shore
Who, ,\ponin,g wmzv»
thing for-away a/(mu,
Crmlrln "I resist
the ximms
"A suiI!A sail!
A mighzy mar2—r:f~ war!"
Flive miim.-’es iaiur iris
H packet hoot,
And then u skiff; and
than (I link‘,
/lml finally some mcks
imbhing Izlmur.
I know o_fplmt_y' -\m':l:
7}) whom this rim)»
applies-
Pcople whom dirlcnrce
nmgmfies.
Who, (‘low 10, (Inn '1
amount IO much.
sral.I=,< rm) I-,«nl,r:s‘.
Jlww Ill‘, LA FUNIAINL
|t’)2l—l(a95
116
LAW 16
TRANSGRESSION AND OBSPLRVANCE OF THE LAW
Sir Guillaume de Balaun
was
a troubadour who roamed the South of
France in the Middle Ages, going from castle to castle, reciting poetry, and
playing the perfect knight. At the castle of javiac he met and fell in love
with the beautiful lady of the house, Madame Guillelma dejaviac. He sang
her his songs, recited his poetry, played chess with her, and little by little
she in turn fell in love with him. Guillaume had a friend, Sir Pierre de Bar
jac, who traveled with him and who was also received at the castle. And
Pierre too fell in love with a lady in javiac, the gracious but temperamental
Viemetta.
Then one day Pierre and Viernetta had a violent quarrel. The lady
dismissed him, and he sought out his friend Guillaume to help heal the
breach and get him back in her good graces. Guillaume was about to leave
the castle for a while, but on his return, several weeks later, he worked his
magic, and Pierre and the lady were reconciled. Pierre felt that his love
had increased tenfold—that there was no stronger love, in fact, than the
love that follows reconciliation. The stronger and longer the disagreement,
he told Guillaume, the sweeter the feeling that comes with peace and
rapprochement,
As a troubadour, Sir Guillaume prided himself on experiencing all the
joys and sorrows of love. On hearing his friend's talk, he too wanted know
the bliss of reconciliation after a quarrel. He therefore feigned great anger
with Lady Guillelma, stopped sending her love letters. and abruptly left the
castle and stayed away, even during the festivals and hunts. This drove the
young lady wild.
Guillelma sent messengers to Guillaume to find out what bad hair»
pened, but he turned the messengers away. He thought all this would make
her angry, forcing him to plead for reconciliation as Pierre had. Instead,
however, his absence had the opposite effect: It made Guillelma love him
all the more. Now the lady pursued her knight, sending messengers and
love notes of her own. This was almost unheard of-—-a lady never pursued
her troubadour. And Guillaume did not like it. Guillelma’s forwardness
made him feel she had lost some of her dignity. Not only was he no longer
sure of his plan, he was no longer sure of his lady.
Finally, after several months of not hearing from Guillaume, Guillelma
gave up. She sent him no more messengers, and he began to wonder-per-
haps she was angry? Perhaps the plan had worked after all? So much the
better if she was. He would wait no more.-it was time to reconcile. So he
put on his best robe, decked the horse in its fanciest caparison, chose a
magnificent helmet, and rode ofi" to javiac.
On hearing that her beloved had returned, Guillelma rushed to see
him, knelt before him, dropped her veil to kiss him, and begged forgive-
ness for whatever slight had caused his anger. Imagine his confusion and
despairw-his plan had failed abysmally. She was not angry, she had never
been angry, she was only deeper in love, and he would never experience
the joy of reconciliation after a quarrel. Seeing her now, and still desperate
to taste that joy, he decided to try one more time: He drove her away with
harsh words and threatening gestures. She left, this time vowing never to
see him again.
The next morning the troubadour regretted what he had done. He
rode back to javiac, but the lady would not receive him, and ordered her
servants to chase him away, across the drawbridge and over the hill. Guil-
laume fled. Back in his chamber he collapsed and started to cry: He had
made a terrible mistake. Over the next year, unable to see his lady, he ex-
perienced the absence, the terrible absence, that can only inflame love. He
wrote one of his most beautiful poems, “My song ascends for mercy pray-
ing.” And he sent many letters to Guillelma, explaining what he had done,
and begging forgiveness.
After a great deal of this, Lady Guillelma, remembering his beautiful
songs, his handsome figure, and his skills in dancing and falconry, found
herselfyearning to have him back. As penance for his cruelty, she ordered
him to remove the nail from the little finger of his right hand, and to send it
to her along with a poem describing his miseries.
He did as she asked. Finally Guillaume de Balaun was able to taste the
ultimate sensation—-a reconciliation
even surpassing that of his friend
Pierre.
Interpretation
Trying to discover the joys ofreconciliation, Guillaume de Balaun inadver—
tently experienced the truth of the law of absence and presence. At the
start of an affair, you need to heighten your presence in the eyes of the
other. If you absent yourself too early, you may be forgotten. But once
your lover‘s emotions are engaged, and the feeling of love has crystallized,
absence inflames and excites. Giving no reason for your absence excites
even more: The other person assumes he or she is at fault. While you are
away, the lover’s imagination takes flight, and a stimulated imagination
cannot help but make love grow stronger. Conversely, the more Guillelma
pursued Guillaume, the less he loved her—she had become too present,
too accessible, leaving no room for his imagination and fancy, so that his
feelings were suffocating. When she finally stopped sending messengers,
he was able to breathe again, and to return to his plan.
What withdraws, what becomes scarce, suddenly seems to deserve our
respect and honor. What stays too long, inundating us with its presence,
makes us disdain it. In the Middle Ages, ladies were constantly putting
their knights through trials of love, sending them on some long and ardu-
ous quest—-all to create a pattern of absence and presence. Indeed, had
Guillaume not left his lady in the first place, she might have been forced to
send him away, creating an absence of her own.
Absence diminishes minarrpassianr and inflame: great ones,
as the wind clauses a candle andfams aflre.
La Rot/wfo1u‘auId, 1P§I3-I680
I'M I‘ \|ll'll l',\' (H-
l'Hl. z.<)<1k
lVhiIu .wr\'iIzg under
the Llulw flit:/'l.1(.
T'iz’II Jur), rlnwrllirzg his
obscure pnrimm, mid
to hir rrmslcr‘. “I am
goilzg tn wnmlz.-rfar
away like :1 M10141
goose,
“
“What do you Imnuzn by
llml?" inquired the
Duke.
"Do you see 111:’ trade?
"
said 'l"ien ./an in reply.
“Its 5"/£5! is’ /2 symbol of
rivililyz its powerful
mlrms rzlggesl xlrmgtlz:
ilx (luring m fighr any
enemy zimz.~(e.r
cuura3ge,'i1.s 1m~Iim;I to
invite oIhcr.~:
5
fund is ubminczl shows
/r.-mevolenrz-;nru1. [ml
but not least, its p1mc—
rzmlily In keeping the
Iinte I/trough the nigh!
gives us an (tr/mtple of
wrarilxt In .s'[11't¢‘,
/mwcw’r. of v',h(¢Sf‘ five
virtmo, Ihe cock is duil_r
killed In,/ill a (lixla on
your table. Why? The
rwmalz is (hm 1'1 Ls‘
fnurzd within our rmrli.
On the other hzmrl. the
wow goose trovt'rrr5 in
zmefligiar (I Ilmmuml ii.
Re,vtir1g in your garden.
i1 ;>wy'.‘ an _vuur,ti.shu.v
am] Inr/(es and pm‘/t'_<
your mific»/. Tlmuglz
devoid ufany ofllzc
CrI1'k3 /in’ virzurls. yet
you prize I/nix‘ bird for
the silky nfm s~ca:'z'irv.
'I“lu’s bt'iug.
. l.s'hal/fly
fur like a .\m/w game.
"
K(?llf?1>'(’J’
AN/.'ll‘N l’ I'lllt‘\F.'>l|-,
Iwmm
'
Yo Hsu. SLIV. H)”
1974
LAW 16
I17
118
LAW 16
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
For many centuries the Assyrians ruled upper Asia with an iron fist. In the
eighth century B.C., however, the people of Medea (now northwestern
Iran) revolted against them, and finally broke free. Now the Medes had to
establish a new government. Determined to avoid any form of despotism,
they refused to give ultimate power to any one man, or to establish a
monarchy. Without a leader, however, the country soon fell into chaos,
and fractured into small kingdoms, with village fighting against village.
In one such village lived a man named Deioces, who began to make a
name for himself for fair dealing and the ability to settle disputes.
He did this so successfully, in fact, that soon any legal conflict in the
area was brought to him, and his power increased. Throughout the land,
the law had fallen into disrepute-——the judges were corrupt, and no one en-
trusted their cases to the courts any more, resorting to violence instead.
When news spread of Deioces’ wisdom, incormptibility, and unshakable
impartiality, Medean villages far and wide turned to him to settle all man-
ner of cases. Soon he became the sole arbiter ofjustice in the land.
At the height of his power, Deioces suddenly decided he had had
enough. He would no longer sit in the chair of judgment, would hear no
more suits, settle no more disputes between brother and brother, village
and village. Complaining that he was spending so much time dealing with
other people’s problems that he had neglected his own affairs, he retired.
The country
once again descended into chaos. With the sudden with-
drawal of a powerful arbiter like Deioces, crime increased, and contempt
for the law was never greater. The Medes held a meeting of all the villages
to decide how to get out of their predicament. “We cannot continue to live
in this country under these conditions,” said one tribal leader. “Let us ap-
point one of our number to rule so that we can live under orderly govern-
ment, rather than losing our homes altogether in the present chaos.”
And so, despite all that the Medes had suffered under the Assyrian des-
potism, they decided to set up a monarchy and name a king. And the man
they most wanted to rule, of course, was the fair-minded Deioces. He was
hard to convince, for he wanted nothing more to do with the villages’ in-
fighting and bickering, but the Medes begged and pleaded—without him the
country had descended into a state of lawlessness. Deioces finally agreed.
Yet he also imposed conditions. An enormous palace was to be con-
structed for him, he was to be provided with bodyguards, and a capital city
was to be built from which he could rule. All of this was done, and Deioces
settled into his palace. In the center of the capital, the palace was sur-
rounded by walls, and completely inaccessible to ordinary people. Deioces
then established the terms of his rule: Admission to his presence was for-
bidden. Communication with the king was only possible through messen-
gers. No one in the royal court could see him more than once a week, and
then only by permission.
Deioces ruled for fifty—three years, extended the Medean empire, and
established the foundation for what would later be the Persian empire,
under his great—great—grandson Cyrus. During Deioces’ reign, the people’s
respect for him gradually turned into a form ofworship: He was not a mere
mortal, they believed, but the son of a god.
Interpretation
Deioces was a man of great ambition. He determined early on that the
country needed a strong ruler, and that he was the man for the job.
ln a land plagued with anarchy, the most powerful man is the judge
and arbiter. So Deioces began his career by making his reputation as a man
of impeccable fairness.
At the height of his power as a judge, however, Deioces realized the
truth of the law of absence and presence: By serving so many clients, he
had become too noticeable, too available, and had lost the respect he had
earlier enjoyed. People were taking his services for granted. The only way
to regain the veneration and power he wanted was to withdraw com-
pletely, and let the Medes taste what life was like without him. As he ex-
pected, they came begging for him to rule.
Once Deioces had discovered the truth of this law, he carried it to its
ultimate realization. In the palace his people had built for him, none could
see him except a few courtiers, and those only rarely. As Herodotus wrote,
“There was a risk that if they saw him habitually, it might lead to jealousy
and resentment, and plots would follow; but ifnobody saw him, the legend
would grow that he was a being of a different order from more men.”
A man said to a Dervish.‘ “Why do I not see you mm ofim?" The Dervish
replied, “Because the words ‘Why have you not been to see me?’ are
sweeter to my ear than the words ‘Why have you come again .9’
”
Mnlllofami. quoted in [dries S./uzh '5 (Jaravan of I)remns_. 1.968
KEYS TO POWER
Everything in the world depends on absence and presence. A strong pres-
ence will draw power and attention to you—you shine more brightly than
those around you. But a point is inevitably reached where too much pres-
ence creates the opposite effect: The more you are seen and heard from,
the more your value degrades. You become a habit. No matter how hard
you try to be different, subtly, without your knowing why. people respect
you less and less. At the right moment you must leam to withdraw yourself
before they unconsciously push you away. It is a game of hide—and~seek.
The truth of this law can most easily be appreciated in matters of love
and seduction. In the beginning stages of an affair, the 1over‘s absence stim-
ulates your imagination, forming a sort of aura around him or her. But this
aura fades when you know too much--~when your imagination no longer
has room to roam. The loved one becomes a person like anyone else, a
person whose presence is taken for granted. This is why the seventeenth-
century French courtesan Ninon de Lenclos advised constant feints at with
drawal from one’s lover. “Love never dies of starvation,” she wrote, “but
often of indigestion.”
LAW 16
.
119
120
LAW
16
The moment you allow yourself to be treated like anyone else, it is too
late--you are swallowed and digested To prevent this you need to starve
the other poison of your presence. Force their respect by threatening them
with the possibility that they will lose you for good; create a pattern of pres-
ence and absence.
Once you die, everything about you will seem different. You will be
surrounded by an instant aura of respect. People will remember their criti~
cisms of you, their arguments with you, and will be filled with regret and
guilt. They are missing a presence that will never return. But you do not
have to wait until you die: By completely withdrawing for a while, you cre-
ate a kind of death before death. And when you come back, it will be as if
you had come back from the dead--an air of resuirection will cling to you,
and people will be relieved at your return. This is how Deioces made him~
self king.
Napoleon was recognizing the law of absence and presence when he
said, “If I am often seen at the theater, people will cease to notice me.”
Today, in a world inundated with presence through the flood of images, the
game of withdrawal is all the more powerful. We rarely know when to
withdraw anymore, and nothing seems private, so we are awed by anyone
who is able to disappear by choice. Novelists J. D. Salinger and Thomas
Pynchon have created cultlike followings by knowing when to disappear.
Another, more everyday side of this law, but one that demonstrates
its truth even further, is the law of scarcity in the science of economics.
By withdrawing something from the market, you create instant value. In
seventeenth-century Holland, the upper classes wanted to make the tulip
more than just a beautiful flower——they wanted it to be a kind of status sym~
bol. Making the flower scarce, indeed almost impossible to obtain, they
sparked what was later called tulipomania. A single flower was now worth
more than its weight in gold. In our own century, similarly, the art dealer
Joseph Duveen insisted on making the paintings he sold as scarce and rare
as possible. To keep their prices elevated and their status high, he bought up
whole collections and stored them in his basement. The paintings that he
sold became more than just paintings-—t.hey were fetish objects, their value
increased by their rarity. “You can get all the pictures you want at fifty thou-
sand dollars apiece~—-that’s easy,” he once said. “But to get pictures at a
quarter of a million apiece—that wants doing!”
I
In
a g
e:
The Sun. It can only be
appreciated by its absence.
The longer the days of rain, the
more the sun is craved. But too many
hot days and the
sun overwhelms.
Learn to keep yourself obscure and
make people demand your return
Extend the law of scarcity to your own skills. Make what you are offer-
ing the world rare and hard to find, and you instantly increase its value.
There always comes a moment when those in power overstay their
welcome. We have grown tired of them, lost respect for them; we see them
as no different from the rest of mankind, which is to say that we see them as
rather worse, since we inevitably compare their current status in our eyes
to their former one. There is an art to knowing when to retire. If it is done
right, you regain the respect you had lost, and retain a part of your power.
The greatest ruler of the sixteenth century was Charles V. King of
Spain, Hapsburg emperor, he governed an empire that at one point in-
clucled much of Europe and the New World. Yet at the height of his power,
in 1557, he retired to the monastery of Yuste. All of Europe was captivated
by his sudden withdrawal; people who had hated anti feared him suddenly
called him great, and he came to be seen as a saint. In more recent times,
the film actress Greta Garbo was never more admired than when she re
tired, in 1941, For some her absence came too soon—sl1e was in her mid-
thirties—but she wisely preferred to leave on her own terms, rather than
waiting for her audience to grow tired of her.
Make yourself too available and the aura of power you have created
around yourself will wear away. Turn the game around: Make yourself less
accessible and you increase the value of your presence.
Authority:
Use absence to create
respect and esteem. If presence
diminishes fame, absence augments it.
A man who when absent is regarded as a
lion becomes when present something com-
mon and ridiculous. Talents lose their luster
if we become too familiar with them, for the
outer shell of the mind is
more readily
seen
than its rich inner kernel. Even the outstand«
ing genius makes use of retirement so that
men may honor him and
so that the
yearning aroused by his
absence
may cause him to be esteemed.
(Baltasar Grecian,
l60lvl658)
LAW
16
I21
REVERSAL
This law only applies once a certain level of power has been attained. The
need to withdraw only comes after you have established your presence;
leave too early and you do not increase your respect, you are simply for-
gotten. When you are first entering onto the world’: stage, create an image
that is recognizable, reproducible, and is seen everywhere. Until that status
is attained, absence is dangerous—instead of farming the flames, it will ex-
tinguish them.
In love and seduction, similarly, absence is only effective once you
have surrounded the other with your image, been seen by him or her
everywhere. Everything must remind your lover of your presence, so that
when you do choose to be away, the lover will always be thinking of you,
will always be seeing you in his or her mind’s eye.
Remember: In the beginning, make yourself not
scarce but
om-
nipresent. Only what is seen, appreciated, and loved will be missed in its
absence.
17
KEEP OTHERS IN
SUSPENDED TERROR:
CULTIVATE AN AIR OF
UNPREDICTABILITY
_]UDGMENT
Humans are creatures ofhabit with an insatiabte need to
seefamiliarity in otherpeople’s actions. Y<mrpredictabz‘l—
it)‘ gives them a sense qf contml. Tum ike tables: Be de-
liberately unparedictable. Behavior film: seems to have no
consistency or purpose will keqb them ofiibalkznce, and
they will wear themselves out flying tn explaiez your
moves‘ Yhken to an extnefine, this straiegy can intimidate
and mmrize.
I23
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In May of 1972, chess champion Boris Spassky anxiously awaited his rival
Bobby Fischer in Reylqavik, Iceland. The two men had been scheduled to
meet for the World Championship of Chess, but Fischer had not arrived on
time and the match was on hold. Fischer had problems with the size of the
prize money, problems with the way the money was to be distributed,
problems with the logistics of holding the match in Iceland. He might back
out at any moment.
Spassky tried to be patient. His Russian bosses felt that Fischer was hu—
miliating him and told him to walk away, but Spassky wanted this match.
He knew he could destroy Fischer, and nothing was going to spoil the
greatest victory of his career. “So it seems that all our work may come to
nothing,” Spassky told a comrade. “But what can we do? It is Bobby’s
move. If he comes, we play. If he does not come; we do not play. A man
who is willing to commit suicide has the initiative.”
Fischer finally arrived in Reykjavik, but the problems, and the threat
of cancellation, continued. He disliked the hall where the match was to be
fought, he criticized the lighting, he complained about the noise of the
cameras, he even hated the chairs in which he and Spassky were to sit
Now the Soviet Union took the initiative and threatened to withdraw their
man.
The bluff apparently worked: After all the weeks of waiting, the end-
less and infuriating negotiations, Fischer agreed to play. Everyone was re-
lieved,
no
one
more
than Spassky.
But
on
the day of the
ofiicial
introductions, Fischer arrived very late, and on the day when the “Match
of the Century” was to begin, he was late again. This fime, however, the
consequences would be dire: If he showed up too late he would forfeit the
first game. What was going on? Was he playing some sort of mind game?
Or was Bobby Fischer perhaps afraid of Boris Spassky? It seemed to the as-
sembled grand masters, and to Spassky, that this young kid from Brooklyn
had a terrible case of the jitters. At 5:09 Fischer showed up, exactly one
minute before the match was to be canceled.
The first game of a chess tournament is critical, since it sets the tone for
the months to come. It is often a slow and quiet struggle, with the two play-
ers preparing themselves for the war and trying to read each other’s strate-
gies. This game
was different. Fischer made
a terrible move early on,
perhaps the worst of his career, and when Spassky had him on the ropes,
he seemed to give up. Yet Spassky knew that Fischer never gave up. Even
when facing checkmate, he fought to the bitter end, wearing the opponent
down. This time, though, he seemed resigned. Then suddenly he broke out
a bold move that put the room in a buzz. The move shocked Spassky, but
he recovered and managed to win the game. But no one could figure out
what Fischer was up to. Had he lost deliberately? Or was he rattled? Unset-
tled? Even, as some thought, insane?
After his defeat in the first game, Fischer complained all the more
loudly about the room, the cameras, and everything else. He also failed to
show up on time for the second game. This time the organizers had had
enough: He was given a forfeit. Now he was down two games to none,
at
position from which no one had ever come back to win a chess champi-
onship. Fischer was clearly unhinged. Yet in the third game, as all those
who witnessed it remember, he had a ferocious look in his eye, a look that
clearly bothered Spassky. And despite the hole he had dug for himself, he
seemed supremely confident. He did make what appeared to be another
blunder, as he had in the first game—but his cocky air made Spassky smell
a trap. Yet despite the Russian’s suspicions, he could not figure out the trap,
and before he knew it Fischer had checkmated him. In fact Fischer’s un—
orthodox tactics had completely unnerved his opponent. At the end of the
game, Fischer leaped up and rushed out, yelling to his confederates as he
smashed a list into his palm, “I’m crushing him with brute force!”
In the next games Fischer pulled moves that no one had seen from
him before, moves that were not his style. Now Spassky started to make
blunders. After losing the sixth game, he started to cry. One grand master
said, “After this, Spassky’s got to ask himself if it’s safe to go back to Rus-
sia." After the eighth game Spassky decided he knew what was happening:
Bobby Fischer was hypnotizing him. He decided not to look Fischer in the
eye; he lost anyway.
After the fourteenth game he called a staff conference and announced,
“An attempt is being made to control my mind.” He wondered whether the
orange juice they drank at the chess table could have been drugged.
Maybe chemicals were being blown into the air. Finally Spassky went pub—
lic, accusing the Fischer team of putting something in the chairs that was a1»
tering Spassky’s mind. The KGB
went
on
alert:
Boris Spassky
was
embarrassing the Soviet Union!
The chairs were taken apart and X—rayed. A chemist found nothing
unusual in them. The only things anyone found anywhere, in fact, were
two dead flies in a lighting fixture. Spassky began to complain of hallucina-
tions. He tried to keep playdng, but his mind was unraveling. He could not
go on. On September 2, he resigned. Although still relatively young, he
never recovered from this defeat.
Interpretation
In previous games between Fischer and Spassky, Fischer had not fared
well. Spassky had an uncanny ability to read his opponent’s strategy and
use it against him. Adaptable and patient, he would build attacks that would
defeat not in seven moves but in seventy. He defeated Fischer every time
they played because he saw much further ahead, and because he was a bril-
liant psychologist who never lost control. One master said, “He doesn’tjust
look for the best move. He looks for the move that will disturb the man he
is playing.”
Fischer, however, finally understood that this was one of the keys to
Spassky’s success: He played on your predictability, defeated you at your
own game. Everything Fischer did for the championship match was an at-
LAW
17
125
I26
LAW
17
tempt to put the initiative on his side and to keep Spassl-Ly offibalance.
Clearly the endless waiting had an effect on Spassky’s psyche. Most power-
ful of all, though, were Fischer’s deliberate blunders and his appearance of
having no clear strategy. In fact, he was doing everything he could to
scramble his old patterns, even if it meant losing the first match and forfeit-
ing the second.
Spassky was known for his sangfroid and levelheadedness, but for the
first time in his life he could not figure out his opponent. He slowly melted
down, until at the end he was the one who seemed insane.
Chess contains the concentrated essence of life: First, because to win
you have to be supremely patient and farseeing; and second, because the
game is built on patterns, whole sequences of moves that have been played
before and will be played again, with slight alterations, in any one match
Your opponent analyzes the patterns you are playing and uses them to try
to foresee your moves. Allowing him nothing predictable to base his strat-
egy on gives you a big advantage. In chess as in life, when people cannot
figure out what you are doing, they are kept in a state of terror—waiting,
uncertain, confused,
Life at court is a serious, melancholy game of chess, which requires us to draw
up our pieces and batteries, form a plan, pursue it, parry that of our
adversary. Sometimes, however, it is better to take risks
and play the most capricious, unpredictable mave.
lean (1rI.a Bruyéw, I/545-1696
KEYS TO POWER
Nothing is more terrifying than the sudden and unpredictable. That is why
we are so frightened by earthquakes and tornadoes: We do not know when
they will strike. Alter one has occurred, we wait in terror for the next one.
To a lesser degree, this is the effect that unpredictable human behavior has
on us.
Animals behave in set patterns, which is why we are able to hunt and
kill them. Only man has the capacity to consciously alter his behavior, to
improvise and overcome the weight of routine and habit. Yet most men do
not realize this power. They prefer the comforts of routine, of giving in to
the animal nature that has them repeating the same compulsive actions
time and time again. They do this because it requires no effort, and be-
cause they mistakenly believe that if they do not unsettle others, they will
be left alone. Understand: A person of power instills a kind of fear by delib-
erately unsettling those around him to keep the initiative on his side. You
sometimes need to strike without waming, to make others tremble when
they least expect it. It is a device that the powerful have used for centuries.
Filippo Maria, the last of the Visconti dukes of Milan in fifteenth»
century Italy, consciously did the opposite of what everyone expected of
him. For instance, he might suddenly shower a courtier with attention, and
then, once the man had come to expect a promotion to higher office,
would suddenly start treating him with the utmost disdain. Confused, the
man might leave the court, when the duke would suddenly recall him and
start treating him well again. Doubly confused, the courtier would wonder
whether his assumption that he would be promoted had become obvious,
and offensive, to the duke, and would start to behave as if he no longer ex-
pected such honor. The duke would rebuke him for his lack of ambition
and would send him away.
The secret of dealing with Filippo was simple: Do not presume to
know what he wants. Do not try to guess what will please him. Never inject
your will; just surrender to his will. Then wait to see what happens. Amidst
the confusion and uncertainty he created, the duke ruled supreme, unchal-
lenged and at peace.
Unpredictability is most often the tactic of the master, but the under-
dog too can use it to great effect. If you find yourself outnumbered or cor-
nered, throw in a series of unpredictable moves. Your enemies will be so
confused that they will pull back or make a tactical blunder.
In the spring of 1862, during the American Civil War, General
Stonewall Jackson and a force of 4,600 Confederate soldiers were torment»
ing the larger Union forces in the Shenandoah Valley. Meanwhile, not far
away, General George Brinton McClellan, heading a force of 90,000
Union soldiers, was marching south from Washington, D.C., to lay siege to
Richmond, Virginia, the Confederate capital, As the weeks of the cam-
paign went by, Jackson repeatedly led his soldiers out of the Shenandoah
Valley, then back to it.
His movements made no sense. Was he preparing to help defend
Richmond? Was he marching on Washington, now that McClellan’s ab-
sence had left it unprotected? Was be heading north to wreak havoc up
there? Why was his small force moving in circles?
Jacksorfs inexplicable moves made the Union generals delay the
march on Richmond as they waited to figure out what he was up to. Mean-
while, the South was able to pour reinforcements into the town. A battle
that could have crushed the Confederacy turned into a stalemate. Jackson
used this tactic time and again when facing numerically superior forces.
“Always mystify, mislead, and surprise the enemy, if possible,” he said,
“.
.
. such tactics will win every time and a small army may thus destroy a
large ones”
This law applies not only to war but to everyday situations. People are
always trying to read the motives behind your actions and to use your pre«
dictability against you. Throw in at completely inexplicable move and you
put them on the defensive. Because they do not understand you, they are
unnerved, and in such a state you can easily intimidate them.
Pablo Picasso once remarked, “The best calculation is the absence of
calculation. Once you have attained a certain level of recognition, others
generally figure that when you do something, it’s for an intelligent reason.
So it’s really foolish to plot out your movements too carefully in advance.
You’re better off acting capriciously.”
For a while, Picasso worked with the ait dealer Paul Rosenberg. At first
LAW
17
127
128
LAW 17
he allowed him a fair amount of latitude in handling his paintings, then one
day, for no apparent reason, he told the man he would no longer give him
any work to sell. As Picasso explained, “Rosenberg would spend the next
forty-eight hours trying to figure out why. Was I reserving things for some
other dealer? I’d go on working and sleeping and Rosenberg would spend
his time figuring. In two days he’d come back, nervesjangled, anxious, say»
ing, ‘After all, dear friend, you wouldn’t turn me down if I offered you this
much [naming a substantially higher figure] for those paintings rather than
the price Pve been accustomed to paying you, would you?’
”
Unpredictability is not only a weapon of terror: Scrambling your pat-
terns on a day-to-day basis will cause a stir around you and stimulate intet—
est. People will talk about you, ascribe motives and explanations that have
nothing to do with the truth, but that keep you constantly in their minds. In
the end, the more capricious you appear, the more respect you will garner.
Only the terminally subordinate act in a predictable manner.
Image: The Cyclone. A
wind that cannot be fore-
seen. Sudden shifts in
the barometer, in—
explicable changes
in direction and
velocity. There is
no defense: A
cyclone sows
terror and
confusion.
Authority: The enlightened ruler is so mysterious that he seems
to dwell nowhere, so inexplicable that no one can seek him.
He repose-s in nonaction above, and his ministers tremble
below. (Han-fei-tzu, Chinese philosopher, third century B.C.)
REVERSAL
Sometimes predictability can work in your favor: By creating a pattern for
people to be familiar and comfortable with, you can lull them to sleep.
They have prepared everything according to their preconceived notions
about you. You can use this in several ways: First, it sets up a smoke screen,
a comfortable front behind which you can carry on deceptive actions. Sec
ond, it allows you on rare occasions to do something completely against
the pattern, unsettling your opponent so deeply he will fall to the ground
without being pushed.
In 1974 Muhammad Ali and George Foreman were scheduled to fight
for the world heavyweight boxing championship. Everyone knew what
would happen: Big George Foreman would try to land a knockout punch
while Ali would dance around him, wearing him out. That was Ali’s way of
fighting, his pattern, and he had not changed it in more than ten years. But
in this case it seemed to give Foreman the advantage: He had a devastating
punch, and if he waited, sooner or later Ali would have to come to him.
Ali, the master strategist, had other plans: In press conferences before the
big fight, he said he was going to change his style and punch it out with
Foreman. No one, least of all Foreman, believed this for a second. That
plan would be suicide on Ali’s part; he was playing the comedian, as usual.
Then, before the fight, Ali’s trainer loosened the ropes around the ring,
something a trainer would do if his boxer were intending to slug it out. But
no one believed this play; it had to be a setup.
To everyone’s amazement, Ali did exactly what he had said he would
do. As Foreman waited for him to dance around, Ali went right up to him
and slugged it out. He completely upset his opponent’s strategy. At a loss,
Foreman ended up wearing himself out, not by chasing Ali but by throw-
ing punches wildly, and taking more and more counterpunches. Finally,
Ali landed a dramatic right cross that knocked out Foreman. The habit of
assuming that a person’s behavior will fit its previous patterns is so strong
that not even Ali’s announcement of a strategy change was enough to upset
it. Foreman walked into a trap-«the trap he had been told to expect.
A warning: Unpredictability can work against you sometimes, es
pecially if you are in a subordinate position. There are times when it is bet
ter to let people feel comfortable and settled around you than to disturb
thern. Too much unpredictability will be seen as a sign of indecisiveness, or
even of some more serious psychic problem. Rattems are powerful, and
you can terrify people by disrupting them. Such power should only be
used judiciously.
LAW
I7
129
130
18
DO NOT BUILD FORTRESSES
TO PROTECT YOURSELF-
ISOLATION IS DANGEROUS
_]UI)GM ENT
The world is dangerous and enemies am everywhere-—
everyone has to protect themselves. A fowrms seems the
safest. But isolation exposes you to mom dangers than it
protects youfmm——-it cuts you ojj‘from valuable informa-
tion, it makes you conspicuous and an easy target. Better
to cirrulate among people, find allies, mingle.
You are
shieldedfrom your enemies by the crowd.
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAVV
Ch’in Shih Huang Ti, the first emperor of China (221-210 B.C.), was the
mightiest man of his day. His empire was vaster and more powerful than
that of Alexander the Great. He had conquered all of the kingdoms sur-
rounding his own kingdom of Chin and unified them into one massive
realm called China. But in the last years of his life, few, if anyone, saw him.
The emperor lived in the most magnificent palace built to that date, in
the capital of Hsien-yang. The palace had 270 pavilions; all of these were
connected by secret underground passageways, allowing the emperor to
move through the palace without anyone seeing him. He slept in a differ-—
ent room every night, and anyone who inadvertently laid eyes on him was
instantly beheaded. Only a handful of men knew his whereabouts, and if
they revealed it to anyone, they, too, were put to death.
The first emperor had grown so terrified of human Contact that when
he had to leave the palace he traveled incognito, disguising himself care
fully. On one such trip through the provinces, he suddenly died. His body
was borne back to the capital in the emperor’s carriage, with a cart packed
with salted fish trailing behind it to cover up the smell of the rotting
corpse-—~no one was to know of his death. He died alone, far from his
wives, his family, his friends, and his courfiers, accompanied only by a
minister and a handful of eunuchs.
Interpretation
Shih Huang Ti started off as the king of Ch’in, a fearless warrior of unbri-
dled ambition. Writers of the time described him as a man with “a waspish
nose, eyes like slits, the voice of a jackal, and the heart of a tiger or wolf.”
He could be merciful sometimes, but more often he “swallowed men up
without a scruple.” It was through trickery and violence that he conquered
the provinces surrounding his own and created China, forging a single na-
tion and culture out of many. He broke up the feudal system, and to keep
an eye on the many members of the royal families that were scattered
across the realm’s various kingdoms, he moved 120,000 of them to the cap-
ital, where he housed the most important couxtiers in the vast palace of
Hsienyang. He consolidated the many walls on the borders and built them
into the Great Wall of China. He standardized the country’s laws, its writ-
ten language, even the size of its cartwheels.
As part of this process of unification, however, the first emperor out-
lawed the writings and teachings of Confucius, the philosopher whose
ideas on the moral life had already become virtually a religion in Chinese
culture. On Shih Huang Ti’s order, thousands of books relating to Confu-
cius were burned, and anyone who quoted Confucius was to be beheaded.
This made many enemies for the emperor, and he grew constantly afraid,
even paranoid. The executions mounted. A contemporary, the writer Han-
fei-tzu, noted that “Ch’in has been victorious for four generations, yet has
lived in constant terror and apprehension of destruction.”
As the emperor withdrew deeper and deeper into the palace to protect
'l HI. \lr\~t)l
l-l. HI
l'||l‘.
HM) I)! \l H
The “Ra! DcuII1"lmrl
long dew1.sl(:twl the
ummry. No pi=.\‘lIIenr:>
lluzl (Iver/1¢‘t?r1
.
final,
or so /u':Iemi.>‘, Blood
was LIA‘ A vnmr and its
weal-—~Ilrermi:1i:.v,
mt
/mrmy of Inhorl. 7h€rc'
Wflfl‘ sharp palms; and
smldmz rlizzirmsxs‘, and
than pro/"lure hluetlirzg
at the pores, with
dix.ioluIu,m
.Aiut
thy w/mic seizure.
[)1"(7gIf.‘SA', and termiuzr
mm 0f the d1'.s'c'a.\'c. were
[he iIz(‘i(l(mr.i' nfhulfau
hour.
Bur the Prim:r* Prox-
pero was Iznppy and
L/£tIU1Il(‘\‘S and mgzzv
cirms. When his’ domin-
ians were half‘
ilefmjzulnled, Iw
Surnrnuned In his
pmtr-,nc7c u tlizmxuml
lmlr and Ii;:ht»Immi'd
_/'rzrmrIx from («mung the
koziglzrr and tlturwr of
/zir court, and with
iliese retired (0 the (leap
su'i'im‘rm o_,"mzc nfhis
t‘{L\'f{’//Ilffll (II)/JE’y,3. This
Win an ex’/t»nsiw 4/ml
rnagnificewt s(rm.'tnre'.
1/21,’ <'r(ratir2rc 17] the
prince 3' own ¢u':"e'ItIrir
yet Lmgmt law. A
strong and lofty wall
girdlezl it in. Tim wall
/wt} gtll£‘.8' ofirmz. The
4 ounier.-;, having
marred. lmnzglti
fu/nm.'e.x' and nm.s'.vv
lmmmc-r.\* um.‘ weltlurl
the boltx. 'I'he'y resolved
to leave tnmms‘ mirlirr
ufingrlasis imr 4'grz>.s:< to
(/10 sudrlmz iI17[ml.\'(*.s of
<lc.vpuir or 0j‘from:y
from It izlzin. Tlzu
abbey was amply
prowsiolzccl. Willi s'm:h
LAW is
131
prr~i:uuIim1.s thr-
4'rmmers migh! bid
dr7_fimzr;v IO mnlagiorz.
'1 71¢‘ L’.Xl€‘W1tl[ world
zruuld take care: of
itself In (/16 mmntirize
It was [ally to gri(!Vd.
or to ririrtk. The pritlue‘
liu1fpr0w'dea' all rlw
apgrlamiws rtfpieasalre.
Tit!-‘IL’ were bllffaorls,
1/zen‘ were impm~
visrtrori. Iherr wen’
[2t1ll€‘l-lI\!W(‘W'), there
were mzi.\'i<rz'r1Iz.s', their
was Bmuly, tlwre was
wine. All lll(!.$'(3£ll1d
.\(‘L‘l.U‘lIV were within.
Without was the
“Red [)e',aIh.”
It was toward the close
of rho fifth /tr yixrh
momfr oflris swlusirm,
and while (hr pr-srilcrrrer
mgr-ii most furiously
ahmrm’, thin the Prince
[’r().s’pem emcrminerl
his Ilmumnzl friemlr at
Ll muskzezl hull of the
must unusmal magnifi-
cence. /I was a volup-
uumr .ST.‘(’Il€’, (hut
ma.\‘qm:rade.
.
.
.
.
. ./lnd rim revel want
wlziriingly on, mm"! m
/cngtix {ht-re rom-
mmlrerl the vmmding
of midnight upon thv
clock.
.
.
, And’ thus‘ (00,
it lzappmzed, perhaps,
lhm before the last
t14:i1<ms' of the last rhmw
/wd utterly sunk into
silmite, them were
many /'mlividual.s' in the
crowd who had found
Ieisurr 10 becmru’
aware of the prresrcmuz
of u musket! [igure
wlrirh had dN'(’.$‘FL'fl I110
mtemion ofm) single
imIivit£zmI' before.
.
.
Hie figure was tall and
gaunt, and shrouded
from ham] to fool in
thc l1ubiIinu'nts' of the
gmve. Th(’Im1.\‘k which
concralrd YIN,‘ visage
I32
LAW I8
himself, he slowly lost control of the realm. Eunuchs and ministers enacted
political policies without his approval or even his knowledge; they also
plotted against him. By the end, he was emperor in name only, and was so
isolated that barely anyone knew he had died. He had probably been poi-
soned by the same scheming ministers who encouraged his isolation.
That is what isolation brings: Retreat into a. fortress and you lose con-
tact with the sources of your power. You lose your ear for what is happen-
ing around you, as well as a sense ofproportion. Instead ofbeing safer, you
cut yourself off from the kind of knowledge on which your life depends.
Never enclose yourself so far from the streets that you cannot hear what is
happening around you, including the plots against you.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
Louis XIV had the palace of Versailles built for him and his court in the
16605, and it was like no other royal palace in the world. As in El, beehive,
everything revolved around the royal person. He lived surrounded by the
nobility, who were allotted apartments nestled around his, their closeness
to him dependent on their rank. The kings bedroom occupied the literal
center of the palace and was the focus of everyone’s attention. Every mom~
ing the king was greeted in this room by a ritual known as the lever.
At eight A.M., the king's first valet, who slept at the foot of the royal
bed, would awaken His Majesty. Then pages would open the door and
admit those who had a. function in the lever. The order of their entry was
precise: First came the king’s illegitimate sons and his grandchildren, then
the princes and princesses of the blood, and then his physician and sur-
geon. There followed the grand ollicers of the wardrobe, the king’s oflicial
reader, and those in charge of entertaining the king‘ Next would arrive var-
ious government officials. in ascending order of rank. Last but not least
came those attending the [ever by special invitation. By the end of the cere»
many, the room would be packed with well over a hundred royal atten»
dams and visitors.
The day was organized so that all the palace’s energy was directed at
and passed through the king. Louis was constantly attended by courtiers
and officials, all asking for his advice and judgment. To all their questions
he usually replied, “I shall see.”
As Saint-Simon noted, “If he turned to someone, asked him a ques-
tion, made an insignificant remark, the eyes of all present were turned on
this person. It was a distinction that was talked of and increased prestige.”
There was no possibility of privacy in the palace, not even for the king-
every room communicated with another, and every hallway led to larger
rooms where groups of nobles gathered constantly. Everyone’s actions
were interdependent, and nothing and no one passed unnoticed: “The
king not only saw to it that all the high nobility was present at his court,”
wrote Saint—Simon, “he demanded the same of the minor nobility. At his
lever and voucher, at his meals, in his gardens of Versailles, he always looked
about him, noticing everything. He was offended if the most distinguished
nobles did not live permanently at court, and those who showed them-
selves never or hardly ever, incurred his full displeasure. If one of these de
sired something, the king would say proudly: ‘I do not know him,’ and the
judgment was irrevocable.”
Interpretation
Louis XIV came to power at the end of a terrible civil war, the Fronde. A
principal instigator of the war had been the nobility, which deeply resented
the growing power of the throne and yearned for the days of feudalism,
when the lords ruled their own fiefdoms and the king had little authority
over them. The nobles had lost the civil war, but they remained a fractious,
resentful lot.
The construction of Versailles, then, was far more than the decadent
whim of a luxury—1oving king. It served a crucial function: The king could
keep an eye and an ear on everyone and everything around him. The
once proud nobility was reduced to squabbling over the right to help the
king put on his robes in the morning. There was no possibility here of pm?
vacy--no possibility of isolation. Louis XIV very early grasped the truth
that for a king to isolate himself is gravely dangerous. In his absence, con-
spiracies will spring up like mushrooms after rain, animosities will crystal-
lize into factions, and rebellion will break out before he has the time to
react. To combat this, sociability and openness must not only be encour-
aged, they must be formally organized and channeled.
These conditions at Versailles lasted for Louis’s entire reign, some fifty
years of relative peace and tranquillity. Through it all, not a pin dropped
without Louis hearing it.
Solitude is dangerous to reason, without beingfavorable to virtue.
.
.
.
Remember that the solitary mortal is certainly luxurious,
probabhv superstitious, and possibly mad.
Dr. Sanmeljolirism, l 709m} 784
KEYS TO POWER
Machiavelli makes the argument that in a strictly military sense a fortress is
invariably a mistake. It becomes a symbol of power's isolation, and is an
easy target for its builders’ enemies. Designed to defend you, fortresses ac—
tually cut you off from help and cut into your flexibility. They may appear
impregnable, but once you retire to one, everyone knows where you are;
and a siege does not have to succeed to turn your fortress into a prison.
With their small and confined spaces, fortresses are also extremely vulnerv
able to the plague and contagious diseases, In a strategic sense, the iso-
lation of a fortress provides
no protection, and actually creates more
problems than it solves.
war made so mmrly m
l'fi,\‘('inl7lf,’ I/M mimic-
mxmr of 1.1 .vlE_/V/nrwd
corpse Ilml llit' (‘Ins-in.-z
scrutiny mm‘! have lzzm’
clifficulzy in (lowering
{he cheat. A ml “wt all
this might have l)(’L’Il
endured, ifmrt
ap]1I'I)v('(l, by the mod
rave/l<>r.\' amuml. But
the mummer had gone
so for as to u.s'.s‘ume the
type afzlze Rm! llmth,
His v:'.\'mr1’ Wm‘
rlahlrlml in blood-» am!
lll.\' brourl blow, with all
the ['94:/um»: of the face,
wuX.x']1riIIklt?til with the
scarlet lwrmr.
.
..
,
.
. A throng ufzlze
f'i3I'¢llt.'I‘é at once /hrew
tin-imelve: mm rlw
black apartment, and,
wizittg the mummer,
wlzoxe ml! figure A‘l()0£l
erect and !7llllll)I'll(’.l.)'
within the shadow of
the ebony rtlmtk, gaspezl
m mmltrzra/711' lmrror ul
finding the grave cert»
mean and ¢torp.i‘e-/ilcx‘
mark, Wl2IClI they
handled with so violmt
a l’(l(,l(,‘Pl(f.\',S'. mitt-nunwd
by any tangible form.
And now was mtI<m2wl-
edged the prrnwrzzrt: of
the RM D:-am. I14-lmd
r‘{)t.Vl£’ like 11 Iliirafin the
izigltl, And one by one
dropped the revellers in
the bl47od~herlmver1
halls I)flll-‘fl!’ rm/pl, and
dim} mrrlx in (ho
rlespmrirzg po.v1ur<I of
his [all And the life of
Ill? e'l:on_>.* (‘lurk wen!
out with that ofrlvc last
ofthe gay. And the
flames ofihe tripods
ccxpirezl. Am! Darl<rlc:'.s
and llecay and the Red
Death held lllimimhlc
rlnnzinimz (Iver all.
'itll-' MAsoI1I«,0l«"1‘m»,
RED nr,A1'u.
EDGAR ALL.-\N Pm;
3809-1849
LAW 18
I32)’
l34
LAW 18
Because humans are social creatures by nature, power depends on so-
cial interaction and circulation. To make yourself powerful you must place
yourself at the center of things, as Louis XIV did at Versailles. All activity
should revolve around you, and you should be aware of everything hap-
pening on the street, and of anyone who might be hatching plots against
you. The danger for most people comes when they feel threatened. In such
times they tend to retreat and close ranks, to find security in a kind of
fortress. In doing so, however, they come to rely for information on a
smaller and smaller circle, and lose perspective on events around them.
They lose maneuverability and become easy targets, and their isolation
makes them paranoid. As in warfare and most games of strategy, isolation
often precedes defeat and death.
In moments of uncertainty and danger, you need to fight this desire to
turn inward. Instead, make yourself more accessible, seek out old allies and
make new ones, force yourself into more and more different circles. This
has been the trick of powerful people for centuries.
The Roman statesman Cicero was born into the lower nobility, and
had little chance of power unless he managed to make a place for himself
among the aristocrats who controlled the city. He succeeded brilliantly,
identifying everyone with influence and figuring out how they were con-
nected to one another. He mingled everywhere, knew everyone, and had
such a vast network of connections that an enemy here could easily be
counterbalanced by an ally there,
The French statesman Talleyrand played the game the same way. Al-
though he came from one of the oldest aristocratic families in France, he
made a point of always staying in touch with what was happening in the
streets of Paris, allowing him to foresee trends and troubles. He even got a
certain pleasure out of mingling with shady criminal types, who supplied
him with valuable information. Every time there was a crisis, a transition of
power--the end of the Directory, the fall of Napoleon, the abdication of
Louis XVIII-~he was able to survive and even thrive, because he never
closed himself up in a small circle but always forged connections with the
new order.
This law pertains to kings and queens, and to those of the highest
power: The moment you lose contact with your people, seeking security in
isolation, rebellion is brewing. Never imagine yourself so elevated that you
can afford to cut yourself off from even the lowest echelons. By retreating
to a fortress, you make yourself an easy target for your plotting subjects,
who view your isolation as an insult and a reason for rebellion.
Since humans are such social creatures, it follows that the social arts
that make us pleasant to be around can be practiced only by constant ex-
posure and circulation. The more you are in contact with others, the more
graceful and at ease you become. Isolation, on the other hand, engenders
an awkwardness in your gestures, and leads to further isolation, as people
start avoidmg you.
In 1545 Duke Cosimo I de’ Medici decided that to ensure the immor-
tality of his name he would commission frescoes for the main chapel of the
church of San Lorenzo in Florence. He had many great painters to choose
from, and in the end he picked jacopo da Pontonno. Getting on in years,
Pontormo wanted to make these frescoes his chef d’oeuvre and legacy. His
first decision was to close the chapel off with walls, partitions, and blinds.
He wanted no one to witness the creation of his masterpiece, or to steal his
ideas. He would outdo Michelangelo himself. When some young men
broke into the chapel out of curiosity, jacopo sealed it off even further.
Pontormo filled the chape1’s ceiling with biblical scenes—the Creation,
Adam and Eve, Noah's ark, on and on. At the top of the middle will he
painted Christ in his majesty, raising the dead onjudgment Day. The artist
worked on the chapel for eleven years, rarely leaving it, since he had de—
veloped a phobia for human contact and was afraid his ideas would be
stolen.
Ponrormo died before completing the frescoes, and none of them has
survived. But the great Renaissance writer Vasari, a friend of Pontormds
who saw the frescoes shortly after the artist’s death, left a description of
what they looked like. There
was
a total lack of proportion. Scenes
bumped against scenes, figures in one story beingjuxtaposed with those in
another, in maddening numbers. Pontormo had become obsessed with de»
tall but had lost any sense of the overall composition. Vasari left off his de~
scription of the frescoes by writing that if he continued, “I think I would go
mad and become entangled in this painting, just as I believe that in the
eleven years of time jacopo spent on it, he entangled himself and anyone
else who saw it.” Instead of crowning Pontormo’s career, the work became
his undoing.
These frescoes were visual equivalents of the effects of isolation on the
human mind: a loss of proportion, an obsession with detail combined with
an inability to see the larger picture, a kind of extravagant ugliness that no
longer communicates. Clearly, isolation is as deadly for the creative arts as
for the social arts. Shakespeare is the most famous writer in history be-
cause, as a dramatist for the popular stage, he opened himself up to the
masses, making his work accessible to people no matter what their educa-
tion and taste. Artists who hole themselves up in their fortress lose a sense
of proportion, their work communicating only to their small circle. Such
art remains cornered and powerless.
Finally, since power is a human creation, it is inevitably increased by
Contact with other people. Instead of falling into the fortress mentality,
view the world in the following manner: It is like a vast Versailles, with
every room communicating with another. You need to be permeable, able
to float in and out of different circles and mix with different types. That
kind of mobility and social contact will protect you from plotters, who will
be unable to keep secrets from you, and from your enemies, who will be
unable to isolate you from your allies. Always on the move, you mix and
mingle in the rooms of the palace, never sitting or settling in one place. No
hunter can fix his aim on such a svvifbmoving creature.
LAW
18
135
I36
LAW 18
Image: The Fortress. High
up on the hill, the citadel be
comes a symbol of all that is
hateful in power and authority.
The citizens of the town betray
you to the first enemy that comes.
Cut off from communication and in-
telligence, the citadel falls with ease.
Authority: A good and wise ptince, desirous of maintaining that
character, and to avoid giving the opportunity to his sons to be-
come oppressive, will never build fortresses,
so that they may
place their reliance upon the good will of their subjects, and not
upon the strength of citadels. {Niccolo Machiavelli, 1469-4527)
REVE RSAL
It is hardly ever right and propitious to choose isolation. Without keeping
an ear on what is happening in the streets, you will be unable to protect
yourself. About the only thing that constant human contact cannot facili~
tate is thought. The weight of society's pressure to conform, and the lack of
distance from other people, can make it impossible to think clearly about
what is going on around you. As a temporary recourse, then, isolation can
help you to gain perspective. Many a serious thinker has been produced in
prisons, where we have nothing to do but think. Machiavelli could write
The Prince only once he found himself in exile and isolated on a farm far
from the political intrigues of Florence.
The danger is, however, that this kind of isolation will sire all kinds of
strange and perverted ideas. You may gain perspective on the larger pic-
ture, but you lose a sense of your own smallness and limitations. Also, the
more isolated you are, the harder it is to break out of your isolation when
you choose to——it sinks you deep into its quicksand without your noticing.
If you need time to think, then, choose isolation only as a last resort, and
only in small doses. Be careful to keep your way back into society open.
LAW
19
KNOW WHO YOU’RE
DEALING WITH-
DO NOT OFFEND THE
WRONG PERSON
JUDGMENT
There are many different kinds ofpeople in the world,
and you can never assume that everyone will react to
your strategies in the same way. Deeeive or outmaneuver
some[maple and they will spend the rest oftheir lives seek-
ing revenge. They are wolves in lambs’ clothing. Choose
your victims and opponents carefully, then-—never of-
fend or deceive the wrongperson.
13?’
When you rneet a
swordsman, draw your
rwnrd: Do not recita
poetry 10 one who is
YXDYHIYUPI.
Fuom /\ CH‘/\N
Bcnmusi CLASSIC.
OU(7TF]') IN
‘lHllNl)l—iR INTHE; sou’,
TR.-\:~sL.r\TEo BY
THOMAS (l/I,F,ARY. 1993
TI II: ll|",\ l,\(.l'
I)!‘
I.()|‘|‘, l>I: \(;l IHKIC
[Ln]/e dc] Agltirreir
riharactcr 1'’ amply
illustrate‘/1 in im urirc»
dour from (ht? chronicle
uf(}¢Ir(7il11.rlI de‘ la
Vega. who related that
in 1548 Aguirre was a
member ofa platoon of
wliliers excortirig
Indian slaves from the
mine: at Paton’
[Bolivia] to a royal
treasury 11512111. The
Indians were illegally
lmrtlrmezl with great
quantities ofstlver, and
II [oral 0/flrriul urrevteil
Aguirre. senwricing
him to receive two
hundred lashes in lieu
oft: fine for appraising
the Indians. “The
soldier Aguirre, lutving
rrrcmvrerl a notificatitm
nflhe verztertce,
hesuughl the alcalde
that, iris‘t1'ml of/lugging
him he would put him
In death, for that he‘
was a gentleman by
birth.
.
.
. All this had
no effect on the alcalde,
who ordered the execu-
tioner to bring a beast,
and eiemte the
.\'(mteI1(‘e. The 1-,xer:u—
tionrr came to the
138
LAW 19
OPPON ENTS, SUCKERS, AND VICTIMS: Preliminary Typology
In your rise to power you will come across many breeds of opponent,
sucker, and victim. The highest form of the art of power is the ability to dis-
tinguish the wolves from the lambs, the foxes from the hares, the hawks
from the vultures. If you make this distinction well, you will succeed with»
out needing to coerce anyone too much. But if you deal blindly with
whomever crosses your path, you will have a life of constant sorrow, if you
even live that long. Being able to recognize types of people, and to act ac-
cordingly, is critical. The following are the five most dangerous and diffi-
cult types
of mark in the jungle,
as identified by
artists—con
and
othetwise——of the past
The Arrogant and Proud Man.
Although he may initially disguise
it, this man’s touchy pride makes him very dangerous. Any perceived
slight will lead to a vengeance of overwhelming violence. You may say to
yourself, “But I only said such-and-such at a party, where everyone was
drunk.
.
. .” It does not matter. There is no sanity behind his over-reaction,
so do not waste time trying to figure him out. If at any point in your deal
ings with a person you sense an oversensitive and overactive pride, flee.
Whatever you are hoping for from him isn't worth it.
The Hopelessly Insecure Man. This man is related to the proud and ar-
rogant type, but is less violent and harder to spot. His ego is fragile, his
sense of self insecure, and if he feels himself deceived or attacked, the hurt
will simmer. He will attack you in bites that will take forever to get big
enough for you to notice. If you find you have deceived or harmed such a
man, disappear for a long time. Do not stay around him or he will nibble
you to death.
Mr. Suspicion. Another variant on the breeds above, this is a future _]oe
Stalin. He sees what he wants to see—usually the worst—in other people,
and imagines that everyone is after him. Mr. Suspicion is in fact the least
dangerous of the three: Genuinely unbalanced, he is easy to deceive, just as
Stalin himself was constantly deceived. Play on his suspicious nature to get
him to turn against other people. But if you do become the target of his sus-
picions, watch out.
The Serpent with a Long Memory. If hurt or deceived, this man will
show no anger on the surface; he will calculate and wait. Then, when he is
in a position to turn the tables, he will exact a revenge marked by a cold-
blooded shrewdness. Recognize this man by his calculation and cunning in
the different areas of his life. He is usually cold and unaffectionate. Be dou-
bly careful of this snake, and if you have somehow injured him, either
crush him completely or get him out of your sight.
The Plain, Unassuming, and Often Unintelligent Man. Ah, your ears
prick up when you find such a tempting victim. But this man is a lot harder
to deceive than you imagine. Falling for a ruse often takes intelligence
and imagina1J'on—-a sense of the possible rewards. The blunt man will
not take the bait because he does not recognize it. He is that unaware. The
danger with this man is not that he will harm you or seek revenge, but
merely that he will waste your time, energy, resources, and even your san~
ity in trying to deceive him. Have a test ready for a mark—ajoke, a story. If
his reaction is utterly literal, this is the type you are dealing with. Continue
at your own risk.
TRANSGRESSIONS OF THE LAW
Transgression I
In the early part of the thirteenth century, Muhammad, the shah of
Khwarezm, managed after many wars to forge a huge empire, extending
west to present-day Turkey and south to Afghanistan. The empire’s center
was the great Asian capital of Samarkand. The shah had a powerful, well-
trained army, and could mobilize 200,000 waniors within days.
In 1219 Muhammad received an embassy from a new tribal leader to
the east, Genghis Khan. The embassy included all sorts of gifts to the great
Muhammad, representing the finest goods from Khan’s small but growing
Mongol empire. Genghis Khan wanted to reopen the Silk Route to Europe,
and offered to share it with Muhammad, while promising peace between
the two empires.
Muhammad did not know this upstart from the east, who, it seemed to
him, was extremely arrogant to try to talk as an equal to one so clearly his
superior. He ignored Khan’s offer. Khan tried again: This time he sent a
caravan of a hundred camels filled with the rarest articles he had plun-
dered from China. Before the
caravan reached Muhammad, however,
Inalchik, the governor of a region bordering on Samarkand, seized it
for himself, and executed its leaders.
'
Genghis Khan was sure that this was a mistake—that Inalchik had
acted without Muhammad’s approval. He sent yet another mission to
Muhammad, reiterating his offer and asking that the governor be punished.
This time Muhammad himself had one of the ambassadors beheaded, and
sent the other two back with shaved heads-a horrifying insult in the Mon-
gol code of honor. Khan sent a message to the shah: “You have chosen war.
What will happen will happen, and what it is to be we know not; only God
knows.” Mobilizing his forces, in 1220 he attacked Inalchik’s province,
where he seized the capital, captured the governor, and ordered him exe-
cuted by having molten silver poured into his eyes and ears.
Over the next year, Khan led
a series of guern‘lla~1ike campaigns
against the sha.h’s much larger army, His method was totally novel for the
time—his soldiers could move very fast on horseback, and had mastered
the art of firing with bow and arrow while mounted. The speed and flexi-
bility of his forces allowed him to deceive Muhammad as to his intentions
and the directions of his movements. Eventually he managed first to sur-
prison, and put Aguirre
on the beast.
.
.
. The
beast war driven on,
and he receiver! the
l£15llt’..X.
.
.
W'l1en freed. Aguirre
announced his intarr
/ion 0_/‘killing the offi-
cial who lmzl St’Ilf€I1C(’(l
him, the alcaldri
Esquivel, Esquiuelly
term nfoffire l’X[7Ir£?(l
and he/led to Lima,
three lmmlred tweruy
leagues away, but
within /ifrcen days
Aguirre hm] mzvkezl
him there. Theft-ighr
melt judge i()IlI‘ll€_W:'(l
tn Quim, a Irip offour
/zmzdred l€agN€.\‘, and in
twenty days Aguirre
arn'w=d.
“When Erquivul /ward
of his presemr,
”
rurconlirig In Gzzrcilaso,
“he made anotl1t>r}'()ur-
my uffiw: humlreil
leagues tn Cuzco; but
in a few days Aguirre
also arrived, liming
tmvcllrcrl on foot and
William‘ .sI1oc.\‘, saying
that (1 Wllipped man
has‘ no l)u.sir1¢r.s,\‘ to rirlc
u h()P‘.Yt’., or to go where
he would be sezrtz by
01/mrs. In this way,
/iguzrrr fnllowmi his
judge for three years.
and/our Inmztlls."
Wcarying of the
pur.s'uz'I, Esquire]
remained at Cu.'./so, :2
city mr1erIzlygoverr:.ezI
/hat lzefclt he would be
safe from Agufrre. He
look a house near /he
rnrlmdral and never
\’€I’ltll7'(,’£l outdnorr
wirlwul a swan! and (1
dagger. “llnwevcr. on a
('£’l'l£lln Momlay, ut
mum. Aguirre entered
his lwu.\‘(.', and having
walked all over ii. and
having rrawtr.red u
corridor. :1 mloon, (2
L'lzurnber.mn1 an inner
LAW I9
139
chamber where the
judge kept his books.
he at last found him
axlcep over one ofltis
hm)/<.\', and stahbcd him
10 death. The murderer
then went out, but
when he came to the
door of the house, he
format’ that he had
forgotten his hat, and
had the temerity 10
return amf fetch it. and
then walked down
the street.”
'lHE GOLDEN l'lREAVl.‘
SI:F,Kl:llS 01- t~:L uotmuo.
WALKIER CIIAPMAN.
1967
‘fill’. (.R()V€ AND
Tllli I~»Ill‘l|'iP
A troublesome Crow
seated herself on the
back of a Slzccp. The
Sheep, much against his
will. carried her back—
ward and forward for (I
long time, and at last
said. “ifyou had
trcatetl a dug in this
way. yrtu would have:
had your desert: from
his sharp teeth,
" To this
the Crow rteplictl, “I
dexpiye the weak, and
yield to the strong. I
know whom I may
bully, and whom I must
firmer; and thtm I hope
to prolong my life to t1
AB,
R
SIXTH (‘l:NTlIRY B1,‘.
140
LAW
)9
round Samarkand, then to seize it. Muhammad fled, and a year later died,
his vast empire broken and destroyed. Genghis Khan was sole master of
Samarkand, the Silk Route, and most of northern Asia.
Interpretation
Never assume that the person you are dealing with is weaker or less impor-
tant than you are. Some men are slow to take offense, which may make
you misjudge the thickness of their skin, and fail to wony about insulting
them. But should you offend their honor and their pride, they will over-
whelm you with a violence that seems sudden and extreme given their
slowness to anger. If you want to turn people down, it is best to do so po~
litely and respectfully, even if you feel their request is impudent or their
offer ridiculous. Never reject them with an insult until you know them bet-
ter; you may be dealing with a Genghis Khan.
Transgression II
In the late 1910s some of the best swindlers in America formed a con-artist
ring based in Denver, Colorado. In the winter months they would spread
across the southern states, plying their trade. In 1920 Joe Furey, a leader of
the ring, was working his way through Texas, making hundreds of thou-
sands of dollars with classic con games. In Fort Worth, he met a sucker
named j. Frank Norileet, a cattleman who owned a large ranch. Nortleet
fell for the con. Convinced of the riches to come, he emptied his bank ac»
count of $45,000 and handed it over to Furey and his Confederates. A few
days later they gave him his “millions,” which turned out to be a few good
dollars wrapped around a packet of newspaper clippings.
Furey and his men had worked such cons a hundred times before, and
the sucker was usually so embarrassed by his gullibility that he quietly
learned his lesson and accepted the loss. But Norfleet was not like other
suckers. He went to the police, who told him there was little they could do.
“Then I’ll go after those people myselfl” Norfleet told the detectives. “I’ll
get them, too, ifit takes the rest of my life.” His wife took over the ranch as
Norileet scoured the country, looking for others who had been fleeced in
the same game. One such sucker came forward, and the two men identified
one of the con artists in San Francisco, and managed to get him locked up,
The man committed suicide rather than face a long term in prison.
Norfleet kept going. He tracked down another of the con artists in
Montana, roped him like a calf, and dragged him through the muddy streets
to the town jail. He traveled not only across the country but to England,
Canada, and Mexico in Search ofjoe Furey, and also of Furey’s right-hand
man, W B. Spencer. Finding Spencer in Montreal, Norfleet chased him
through the streets. Spencer escaped but the rancher stayed on his trail and
caught up with him in Salt Lake City. Preferring the mercy of the law to
Nortleet’s wrath, Spencer turned himself in.
=
Norfleet found Furey in Jacksonville, Florida, and personally hauled
him off to face justice in Texas. But he wouldn’t stop there: He continued
on to Denver, determined to break up the entire ring. Spending not only
large sums of money but another year of his life in the pursuit, he managed
to put all of the con n'ng’s leaders behind bars. Even some he didn’t catch
had grown so terrified of him that they too turned themselves in.
After five years ofhunting, Norfleet had single-handedly destroyed the
country’s largest confederation of con artists. The efiort bankrupted him
and mined his marriage, but he died a satisfied man.
Interpretation
Most men accept the humiliation of being conned with a sense of resigna-
tion. They learn their lesson, recognizing that there is no such thing as a
free lunch, and that they have usually been brought down by their own
greed for easy money. Some, however, refuse to take their medicine. In
stead of reflecting on their own gullibility and avarice, they see themselves
as totally innocent victims.
Men like this may seem to be crusaders for justice and honesty, but
they are actually immoderately insecure. Being fooled, being conned, has
activated their self-doubt, and they are desperate to repair the damage.
Were the mortgage on N0rfleet’s ranch, the collapse of his marriage, and
the years of borrowing money and living in cheap hotels worth his revenge
over his embarrassment at being fleeced? To the Norfleets of the world,
overcoming their embarrassment is worth any price.
All people have insecurities, and often the best way to deceive a sucker
is to play upon his insecurities. But in the realm of power, everything is a
question of degree, and the person who is decidedly more insecure than
the average mortal presents great dangers. Be warned: If you practice de~
ception or trickery of any sort, study your mark well. Some people’s inse-
curity and ego fragility cannot tolerate the slightest offense. To see if you
are dealing with such a type, test them first—make, say, a mildjoke at their
expense. A confident person will laugh; an overly insecure one will react as
ifpersonally insulted. If you suspect you are dealing with this type, find an-
other victim.
Transgression III
In the fifth century B.C., Ch’ung-erh, the prince of Ch’in (in present-day
China), had been forced into exile. He lived modestly——even, sometimes,
in poverty—waiting for the time when he could return home and resume
his princely life. Once he was passing through the state of Cheng, where
the ruler, not knowing who he was, treated him rudely. The r1.1ler’s minis-
ter, Shu Chan, saw this and said, “This man is a worthy prince. May Your
Highness treat him with great courtesy and thereby place him under an
obligation!” But the ruler, able to see only the prince’s lowly station, ig-
nored this advice and insulted the prince again. Shu Chan again warned
his master, saying, “If Your Highness cannot treat Ch’ung~erh with cour-
tesy, you should put him to death, to avoid calamity in the future.” The
ruler only scoffed.
Years later, the prince was finally able to return home, his circum-
stances greatly changed. He did not forget who had been kind to him, and
LAW
19
I41
142
j
LAW 19
who had been insolent, during his years of poverty. Least of all did he for»
get his treatment at the hands of the ruler of Cheng. At his first opportunity
he assembled a vast army and marched on Chang, taking eight cities, de~
straying the kingdom, and sending the ruler into an exile of his own.
Interpretation
You can never be sure who you are dealing with. A man who is of little im-
portance and means today can be a person of power tomorrow. We forget
a lot in our lives, but we rarely forget an insult.
How was the ruler of Cheng to know that Prince Ch’ung-erh was an
ambitious, calculating, cunning type, a serpent with along memory? There
was really no way for him to know, you may say-—but since there was no
way, it would have been better not to tempt the fates by finding out. There
is nothing to be gained by insulting a person unnecessarily Swallow the
impulse to offend, even if the other person seems weak. The satisfaction is
meager compared to the danger that someday be or she will be in a posi
tion to hurt you.
Transgresskm IV
The year of 1920 had been a particularly bad one for American art dealers.
Big buyers«-«the robber-baron generation of the previous century-~were
getting to an age where they were dying off like flies, and no new million»
aires had emerged to take their place. Things were so bad that a number of
the major dealers decided to pool their resources, an unheard-of event,
since art dealers usually get along like cats and dogs.
Joseph Duveen, art dealer to the richest tycoons of America, was suf-
fering more than the others that year, so he decided to go along with this
alliance. The group now consisted of the five biggest dealers in the country.
Looking around for a new client, they decided that their last best hope was
Henry Ford, then the wealthiest man in America. Ford had yet to venture
into the art market, and he was such a big target that it made sense for them
to work together.
The dealers decided to assemble a list, “The 100 Greatest Paintings in
the World” (all of which they happened to have in stock), and to offer the
lot of them to Ford. With one purchase he could make himself the world’s
greatest collector. The consortium worked for weeks to produce a magnifi-
cent object: a three-volume set of books containing beautiful reproductions
of the paintings, as well as scholarly texts accompanying each picture. Next
they made a personal visit to Ford at his home in Dearborn, Michigan.
There they were surprised by the simplicity of his house: Mr. Ford was ob‘
viously an extremely unaffected man.
Ford received them in his study. Looking through the book, he ex-
pressed astonishment and delight. The excited dealers began imagining the
millions of dollars that would shortly flow into their coflers. Finally, how—
ever, Ford looked up from the book and said, “Gentlemen, beautiful books
like these, with beautiful colored pictures like these, must cost an awful
lot!” “But Mr. Ford!” exclaimed Duveen, “we don’t expect you to buy these
books. We got them up especially for you, to show you the pictures. These
books are a present to you.” Ford seemed puzzled. “Gentlemen,” he said,
“it is extremely nice of you, but I really don’t see how I can accept a beau-
tiful, expensive present like this from strangers.” Duveen explained to Ford
that the reproductions in the books showed paintings they had hoped to
sell to him. Ford finally understood. “But gentlemen,” he exclaimed, “what
would I want with the original pictures when the ones right here in these
books are so beautiful?”
Interpretation
Joseph Duveen prided himself on studying his victims and clients in ad
Vance, figuring out their weaknesses and the peculiarities of their tastes be
fore he ever met them. He was driven by desperation to drop this tacticjust
once, in his assault on Henry Ford. It took him months to recover from his
misjudgrnent, both mentally and monetarily. Ford was the unassuming
plain—ma.n type who just isn’t worth the bother. He was the incarnation of
those literal-minded folk who do not possess enough imagination to be de
ceived. From then on, Duveen saved his energies for the Mellons and Mor-
gans of the world——men crafty enough for him to entrap in his snares.
KEYS T() POWER
The ability to measure people and to know who you’re dealing with is the
most important skill of all in gathering and conserving power. Without it
you are blind: Not only will you offend the wrong people, you will choose
the Wrong types to work on, and will think you are flattering people when
you are actually insulting them. Before embarking on any move, take the
measure of your mark or potential opponent. Otherwise you will waste
time and make mistakes. Study people's weaknesses, the chinks in their
armor, their areas of both pride and insecurity. Know their ins and outs be-
fore you even decide whether or not to deal with them.
Two final words of caution: First, in judging and measuring your oppo~
nent, never rely on your instincts. You will make the greatest mistakes of all
if you rely on such inexact indicators. Nothing can substitute for gathering
concrete knowledge. Study and spy on your opponent for however long it
takes; this will pay off in the long run.
Second, never trust appearances. Anyone with a serpent’s heart can
use a show of kindness to cloak it; a person who is blustery on the outside is
often really a coward. Learn to see through appearances and their contra-
dictions. Never trust the version that people give of themselves——it is ut-
terly unreliable.
LAW 19
;
143
Image: The Hunter, He does not lay the
same trap for a wolf as for a fox. He does
not
set bait where
no
one will
take
it.
He knows his prey thoroughly, its habits
and
hideaways,
and
hunts
accordingly.
Authority: Be Convinced, that there are no
persons so insignificant and inconsiderable,
but may, some time or other, have it in their
power to be of use to you; which they cer-
tainly will not, ifyou have once shown them
contempt. Wrongs
are often forgiven, but
contempt never is. Our pride remembers
it for ever. (Lord Chesterfield, 1694-1773)
REVERSAL
What possible good can come from ignorance about other people? Leam
to tell the lions from the lambs or pay the price. Obey this law to its fullest
extent; it has no reversal—-do not bother looking for one.
I44
LAW 19
LAW
20
I)C)PJCYT CXDLJBJIT
'TC)1&DTY()PJE
JUDGMENT
It is thefool who always rushes to take sides. Do not com-
mil to any side or cause but yourself By maintaining
your independence, you become the master of others——
playing people against
one another, making them
pursue you.
'
I45
M6
?
LAW 20
PART I: DO NOT COMMIT TO ANYONE,
BUT BE COURTED BY ALL
Ifyou allow people tofeel they possess you to any degree, you lose all power
over them. By not committing your affections, tfwy will only try harder to
win you over Stay aloof and you gain the power that comes from their at—
tention and frustrated desire. Play the Virgin Queen: Give them hope but
never satisfaction.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
When Queen Elizabeth I ascended the throne of England, in 1558, there
was much to-do about her finding a husband. The issue was debated in Par-
liament, and was
a. main topic of conversation among Englishmen of all
classes; they often disagreed as to whom she should marry, but everyone
thought she should marry as soon as possible, for a queen must have a
king, and must bear heirs for the kingdom. The debates raged on for years.
Meanwhile the most handsome and eligible bachelors in the realm-Sir
Robert Dudley, the Earl of Essex, Sir Walter Ra.leigh———vied for Elizabetlfs
hand. She did not discourage them, but she seemed to be in no hurry, and
her hints as to which man might be her favorite often contradicted each
other. In 1566, Parliament sent a delegation to Elizabeth urging her to
marry before she was too old to bear children. She did not argue, nor did
she discourage the delegation, but she remained a virgin nonetheless.
The delicate game that Elizabeth played with her suitors slowly made
her the subject of innumerable sexual fantasies and the object of cultish
worship. The court physician, Simon Forman, used his diary to describe
his dreams of deflowering her. Painters represented her as Diana and other
goddesses. The poet Edmund Spenser and others wrote eulogies to the Vir-
gin Queen. She was referred to as “tha, wor1d’s Empresse,” “that virtuous
Virgo” who rules the world and sets the stars in motion. In conversation
with her, her many male suitors would employ bold sexual innuendo, a
dare that Elizabeth did not discourage. She did all she could to stir their in
terest and simultaneously keep them at bay.
Throughout Europe, kings and princes knew that a marriage with Eliz-
abeth would seal an alliance between England and any nation. The king of
Spain wooed her, as did the prince of Sweden and the archduke of Austria.
She politely refused them all.
The great diplomatic issue of Elizabetlfs day was posed by the revolt
of the Flemish and Dutch Lowlands, which were then possessions of Spain.
Should England break its alliance with Spain and choose France as its main
ally on the Continent, thereby encouraging Flemish and Dutch indepen-
dence? By 1570 it had come to seem that an alliance with France would be
England’s wisest course. France had two eligible men of noble blood, the
dukes of Anjou and Alencon, brothers of the French king. Would either of
them marry Elizabeth? Both had advantages, and Elizabeth kept the hopes
of both alive. The issue simmered for years. The duke of Anjou made sev-
eral visits to England, kissed Elizabeth in public, even called her by pet
names; she appeared to requite his affections. Meanwhile, as she flirted
with the two brothers,
a treaty was signed that sealed peace between
France and England. By
1582 Elizabeth felt she could break off the
courtship. In the case of the duke of Anjou in particular, she did so with
great relief: For the sake of diplomacy she had allowed herself to be
courted by a man whose presence she could not stand and whom she
found physically repulsive. Once peace between France and England was
secure, she dropped the unctuous duke as politely as she could.
By this time Elizabeth was too old to bear children. She was accord-
ingly able to live the rest of her life as she desired, and she died the Virgin
Queen. She left no direct heir, but ruled through a period of incomparable
peace and cultural fertility.
“
Interpretation
Elizabeth had good reason not to marry: She had witnessed the mistakes of
Mary Queen of Scots, her cousin. Resisting the idea of being ruled by a
woman, the Scots expected Mary to many and marry wisely. To wed a for-
eigner would be unpopular; to favor any particular noble house would
open up terrible rivalries. In the end Mary chose Lord Damley, a Catholic.
In doing so she incurred the wrath of Scotland’s Protestants, and endless
turmoil ensued.
Elizabeth knew that marriage can often lead to a female ru1er’s undo-
ing: By marrying and committing to an alliance with one party or nation,
the queen becomes embroiled in conflicts that are not of her choosing, con~
flicts which may eventually overwhelm her or lead her into a futile war.
Also, the husband becomes the de facto ruler, and often tries to do away
with his wife the queen, as Darnley tried to get rid of Mary. Elizabeth
learned the lesson well. She had two goals as a ruler: to a‘ ‘old marriage and
to avoid war. She managed to combine these goals by Lnngling the possi-
bility of marriage in order to forge alliances. The moment she committed
to any single suitor would have been the moment she lost her power. She
had to emanate mystery and desirability,
never discouraging anyone’s
hopes but never yielding.
Through this lifelong game of flirting and withdrawing, Elizabeth
dominated the country and every man who sought to conquer her. As the
center of attention, she was in control. Keeping her independence above
all, Elizabeth protected her power and made herself an object of worship.
I would rather be a beggar and single than a queen and married.
Queen l‘?l1':alzzth I, 15 33-161]?
KEYS 'l‘(..) POWER
Since power depends greatly on appearances, you must learn the tricks
that will enhance your image. Refusing to commit to a person or group is
one of these, When you hold yourself back, you incur not anger but a kind
LAW 20
§
147
148
LAW 20
of respect. You instantly seem powerful because you make yourself un-
graspable, rather than succumbing to the group, or to the relationship, as
most people do. This aura of power only grows with time: As your reputa-
tion for independence grows, more and more people will come to desire
you, wanting to be the one who gets you to commit. Desire is like a virus: If
we see that someone is desired by other people, we tend to find this person
desirable too.
The moment you commit, the magic is gone. You become like every-
one else. People will try all kinds of underhanded methods to get you to
commit. They will give you gifts, shower you with favors, all to put you
under obligation. Encourage the attention, stimulate their interest, but do
not commit at any cost. Accept the gifts and favors if you so desire, but be
careful to maintain your inner aloofness, You cannot inadvertently allow
yourself to feel obligated to anyone.
Remember, though: The goal is not to put people off, or to make it seem
that you are incapable of commitment. Like the Virgin Queen, you need to
stir the pot, excite interest, lure people with the possibility of having you.
You have to bend to their attention occasionally, then——but never too far:
The Greek soldier and statesman Alcibiades played this game to per-
fection. It was Alcibiades who inspired and led the massive Athenian at-
mada that invaded Sicily in 414 BC. When envious Athenians back home
tried to bring him down by accusing him of trumpedup charges, he de-
fected to the enemy, the Spartans, instead offacing a trial back home. Then,
after the Athenians were defeated at Syracuse, he left Sparta for Persia, even
though the power of Sparta was now on the rise. Now, however, both the
Athenians and the Spartans courted Alcibiades because of his influence
with the Persians; and the Pen tans showered him with honors because of
his power over the Athenians and the Spartans. He made promises to every
side but committed to none, and in the end he held all the cards.
If you aspire to power and influence, try the Alcibiades tactic: Put
yourself in the middle between competing powers. Lure one side with the
promise of your help; the other side, always wanting to outdo its enemy,
will pursue you as well. As each side vies for your attention, you will im-
mediately seem a person of great influence and desirability. More power
will accrue to you than if you had rashly committed to one side. To perfect
this tactic you need to keep yourself inwardly free from emotional entan-
glements, and to view all those around you as pawns in your rise to the top.
You cannot let yourself become the lackey for any cause.
In the midst of the 1968 U.S. presidential election, Henry Kissinger
made a phone call to Richard Nixon’s team. Kissinger had been allied with
Nelson Rockefeller, who had unsuccessfully sought the Republican nomina-
tion. Now Kissinger offered to supply the Nixon camp with valuable inside
information on the negotiations for peace in Vietnam that were then going
on in Paris. He had a man on the negotiating team keeping him informed of
the latest developments. The Nixon team gladly accepted his offer.
At the same time, however, Kissinger also approached the Democratic
nominee, Hubert Humphrey, and offered his aid. The Humphrey people
asked him for inside information on Nixon and he supplied it. “Look,”
Kissinger told Hurnphrey’s people, “I’ve hated Nixon for years.” In fact he
had no interest in either side. What he really wanted was what he got: the
promise of a high-level cabinet post from both Nixon and Humphrey.
Whichever man won the election, Kissingefs career was secure.
The winner, of course, was Nixon, and Kissinger duly went on to his
cabinet post. Even so, he was careful never to appear too much of a Nixon
man. When Nixon was reelected in 1972, men much more loyal to him
than Kissinger were fired. Kissinger was also the only Nixon high official to
survive Watergate and serve under the next president, Gerald Ford. By
maintaining a little distance he thrived in turbulent times.
Those who
use this strategy often notice
a strange phenomenon:
People who rush to the support of others tend to gain little respect in the
process, for their help is so easily obtained, while those who stand back
find themselves besieged with supplicants. Their aloofness is powerful, and
everyone wants them on their side.
When Picasso, after early years of poverty, had become the most suc-
cessful aitist in the world, he did not commit himself to this dealer or that
dealer, although they now besieged him from all sides with attractive offers
and grand promises. Instead, he appeared to have no interest in their ser-
vices; this technique drove them wild, and as they fought over him his
prices only rose. When Henry Kissinger, as U.S. secretary of state, wanted
to reach détente with the Soviet Union, he made no concessions or concil-
iatory gestures, but courted China instead. This infuriated and also scared
the Soviets——-they were already politically isolated and feared further isola
tion if the United States and China, ,ca.me together. Kissinger’s
move
pushed them to the negotiating table. The tactic has a parallel in seduction:
When you want to seduce a woman, Stendhal advises, court her sister first.
Stay aloof and people will come to you. It will become a challenge for
them to win your affections. As long as you imitate the wise Virgin Queen
and stimulate their hopes, you will remain a magnet of attention and desire.
Image:
The Virgin Queen.
The center of attention,
desire, and worship. Never
succumbing to one suitor or the
other, the Virgin Queen keeps
them all revolving around
her like planets, unable to
leave her orbit but never
getting any closer
to her.
Authority:
Do
not
commit
yourself to anybody
or any
thing, for that is to be a slave, a
slave to every man.
.
.
. Above
all, keep yourself free of com-
mitments
and
obligations——
they are the device of another
to get you into his power.
.
.
.
(Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658)
LAW 20
149
'11“
l\!H',.\‘
HM’
(,|{0\\.~'. .\\l) TU!‘ t-(9.\
731¢’ lrilcs am] the rrmvx
made an ngn=um'n1
mmmg zhcmwlves {lust
ilujv 3'/wuld go hrtivcza
in out-rytlziivg obttlitzal
in t}1efor¢:1'I. One day
Hwy saw u jbx that Jim!
b{'t.’iZ WUI1‘t16,(’(I by
hunter: tying Iiel]If€.s'.\‘
mulrr a trim‘, and gath-
ered mmm‘ it.
Thy rnzws said. “We
will’ mkc the upper half
uftlw fax.
" “'I'£n:Ia nu:
It (I! (aim the [own
h1:i_1'.'"x12i1I the lcilzas,
The {cu ?(lughl’d at this;
am! mid. “! aIwa_v.s‘
thought the kims u-‘ere
superior in crenlirm to
the crcmix; XIX ,s‘u<:h tlujv
muxt gel the uppzr half
afnzy hm:!_V~ nfwhich
In}: haul, warh the brain
(mil other rte-!t'<‘t4!e
rlu'ng.\~ m r1,_/"arms 1!
portion.
"
“Uh, },‘n’.\'. that (Y right,
"
xutot the kites’, "we will
ha w that gun of Ihl,‘
fox.
" “./'\/at cu <11/."st1id
the rmwx, “um must
have
'
‘already
agr('v1I," Titan :1 war
(time I)<'Iwcen the rival
]mrliz'.\. and at great
many fvll rm I>r1rI1.<irIm,
am! the rmttuirttrzg few
z'.s'<’apr-d with zli_I]1'('uIIy.
The tax mutuuwr1'
them for snnw {l{1}>,\‘,
‘/50
,
LAW2n
PART 11: DO NOT C.(.)MMl'1‘ TO ANYONE—-
STAY ABOVE THE FRAY
Do not let people drag you into their pettyfights and squabbles. Seem inter-
ested and suppcwtive, butfind a way to mnain neutral; let others do the
fighting while you stand back, watch and wait. When thefighting patties
am good and tired thvy will be ripefor the picking. You can make it a prac-
tice, infact, to stir up quarrels between otherpeople, and then offer to medi-
ate, gaining power as the go-between.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In the late fifteenth century, the strongest city~states in Italy-——Venice, Flo-
rence, Rome, and Milan~—-found themselves constantly squabbling. Hover-
ing above their struggles were the nations of France and Spain, ready to
grab whatever they could from the weakened Italian powers. And trapped
in the middle was the small state of Mantua, ruled by the young Duke
Gianfrancesco Gonzaga. Mantua was strategically located in northern
Italy, and it seemed only a matter of time before one of the powers swal-
lowed it up and it ceased to exist as an independent kingdom.
Gonzaga was a fierce warrior and a skilled commander of troops, and
he became a kind of mercenzuy general for whatever side paid him best. In
the year 1490, he married Isabella d’Este, daughter of the ruler of another
small Italian duchy, Ferrara. Since he now spent most of his time away
iron Mantua, it fell to Isabella to rule in his stead.
lsabellzfs first true test as ruler came in 1498, when King Louis XII of
France was preparing armies to attack Milan. In their usual perfidious fash«
ion, the Italian states immediately looked for ways to profit from Mila.n’s
difficulties. Pope Alexander VI promised not to intervene, thereby giving
the French carte blanche. The Venefians signaled that they would not help
Milan, either—and in exchange for this, they hoped the French would give
them Mantua. The ruler of Milan, Lodovico Sforza, suddenly found him-
self alone and abandoned. He turned to Isabella d’Este, one of his closest
friends (also rumored to be his lover), and begged her to persuade Duke
Gonzaga to come to his aid. Isabella tried, but her husband balked, for he
saw Sforza’s cause as hopeless. And so, in 1499, Louis swooped down on
Milan and took it with ease.
Isabella now faced a dilemma: If she stayed loyal to Lodovico, the
French would now move against her. But if, instead, she allied herself with
France, she would make enemies elsewhere in Italy, compromising Man-
tua once Louis eventually withdrew. And if she looked to Venice or Rome
for help, they would simply swallow up Mantua under the cloak of coming
to her aid. Yet she had to do something. The mighty king of France was
breathing down her neck: She decided to befxiend him, as she had be~
friended Lodovico Sforza before him——-with alluring gifts, witty, intelligent
letters, and the possibility of her company, for Isabella was famous as a
woman of incomparable beauty and charm.
In 1500 Louis invited Isabella to a great party in Milan to celebrate his
victory. Leonardo da Vinci built an enormous mechanical lion for the af-
fair: When the lion opened its mouth, it spewed fresh lilies, the symbols of
French royalty. At the party Isabella wore one of her celebrated dresses
(she had by far the largest wardrobe of any of the Italian princesses), and
just as she had hoped, she charmed and captivated Louis, who ignored all
the other ladies vying for his attention. She soon became his constant com-
panion, and in exchange for her friendship he pledged to protect Mantua’s
independence from Venice.
As one danger receded, however, another, more worrying one arose,
this time from the south, in the form of Cesare Borgia Starting in 1500,
Borgia had marched steadily northward, gobbling up all the small king-
doms in his path in the name of his father, Pope Alexander. Isabella under»
stood Cesare perfectly: He could be neither tnisted
1101' in any way
offended. He had to be cajoled and kept at arm’s length. Isabella began by
sending him gifts——falcons, prize dogs, perfumes, and dozens of masks,
which she knew he always wore when he walked the streets of Rome. She
sent messengers with flattering greetings (although these messengers also
acted as her spies). At one point Cesare asked if he could house some
troops in Mantua; Isabella managed to dissuade him politely, knowing full
well that once the troops were quartered in the city, they would never
leave.
Even while Isabella was charming Cesare, she convinced everyone
around her to take care never to utter a harsh word about him, since he
had spies everywhere and would use the slightest pretext for invasion.
When Isabella had a child, she asked Cesare to be the godfather. She even
dangled in front of him the possibility of a marriage between her family
and his. Somehow it all worked, for although elsewhere he seized every-
thing in his path, he spared Mantua.
In 1503 Cesare’s father, Alexander, died, and a few years later the new
pope, Julius II, went to war to drive the French troops from Italy. When
the ruler of Fe1rara——Alfonso, Isabella’s brother—sided with the French,
Julius decided to attack and humble him. Once again Isabella found herself
in the middle: the pope on one side, the French and her brother on the
other. She dared not ally herself with either, but to offend either would be
equally disastrous. Again she played the double game at which she had be-
come so expert. On the one hand she got her husband Gonzaga to fight for
the pope, knowing he would not fight very hard. On the other she let
French troops pass through Mantua to come to Ferrara’s aid. While she
publicly complained that the French had “invaded” her territory, she pri-
vately supplied them with valuable information. To make the invasion
plausible to Julius, she even had the French pretend to plunder Mantua. It
worked once again: The pope left Mantua alone.
In 1513, after a lengthy siege, Julius defeated Ferrara, and the French
troops withdrew. Worn out by the effort, the pope died a few months later.
With his death, the nightmarish cycle of battles and petty squabbles began
to repeat itself.
leisurely /keding on the
dead kites and crows.
and then left the place
Italy and hearty,
observing, "The Ivmk
hem?/it by Ilze 1]M(lI‘I‘tf].¥
of (he mighty."
INDIAN EARLF3
Men ofgreat abilities
are slow :0 act. for it is
easier In avoid ncca«
.s'irm.r for commiltirzg
yourself than to (‘only
well nut (If a commit-
mml. Such 0L'L'llSf07lS
test yourjudgmeut; it is
safer to avoid them
than to emerge victurr
nus from them. One
obligation loads to a
greater one. and you
mme very neur tn the
brink 0/'di.m.\'ter.
BALTASAR GR/u'1A:\‘.
16014658
LAW 20
I51
'11 Eli‘. l§A<;l E AND T} il-Z .‘~'()\X'
Art eagle built a nest on
a tree, and hatched out
some euglets. And fl
wild sow brought her
litter umier the tree.
T111’ aagfe used tofly
off’after her prey. and
bring it back to her
young. And the sow
rooted around the tree
and hunted in the
woods, and when night
came she would bring
her young something
to eat.
And the eagle and the
sow lived in neighborly
fashion. And a
grimalkin laid her
plum‘ to destroy the
eaglezs and the little
Sucrking pigr She went
to the eagle, and said:
"Eagle, you had better
nalfly very far away.
Beware ofthe sow;shc
ix planning an evil
design. She is going (0
undemzine the roots of
the tree. You see she is‘
rooting ah? the time."
Then the grmuzlkin
went to the sow and
mid: "Saw, you have
not 42 good tteighbor.
Last Uvfntng I heard
the eagle saying to her
eagles‘: ‘My dear (title
eaglels,1 am going to
treat you to a nice little
pig. Just as soon as the
row is gone, I will bring
you it little young
sucking pig.
‘ "
From that time the
eagle ceased tojiy out
after prey, mad the sow
did not go any more
into thr_fnre.vt. The
euglets and the young
pigs perished of .§‘!l1t'\’fl~
tion. mm‘ grimztlkin
fenstrci on them.
mnx.r=.s,
1,150 To LSTOY.
[R28-#1010
152'
LAW 20
A great deal changed in Italy during Isabella’s reign: Popes came and
went, Cesare Borgia rose and then fell, Venice lost its empire, Milan was in
vaded, Florence fell into decline, and Rome was sacked by the Hapsburg
Emperor Charles V. Through all this, tiny Mantua not only survived but
thrived, its court the envy of Italy. Its wealth and sovereignty would remain
intact for a century after Isabella’s death, in 1539.
Interpretation
Isabella d’Este understood Italy’s political situation with amazing clarity:
Once you took the side of any of the forces in the field, you were doomed.
The powerful would take you over, the weak would wear you down. Any
new alliance would lead to a new enemy, and as this cycle stirred up more
conflict, other forces would be dragged in, until you could no longer extri-
cate yourself. Eventually you would collapse from exhaustion.
Isabella steered her kingdom on the only course that would bring her
safely through. She would not allow herself to lose her head through loy~
alty to a duke or a king. Nor would she try to stop the conflict that raged
around her---that would only drag her into it. And in any case the conflict
was to her advantage. If die various parties were fighting to the death, and
exhausting themselves in the process, they were in no position to gobble
up Mantua. The source of Isabella’s power was her clever ability to seem
interested in the affairs and interests of each side, while actually commib
ting to no one but herself and her kingdom.
Once you step into a. fight that is not of your own choosing, you lose all
initiative. The combatants’ interests become your interests; you become
their tool. Learn to control yourself, to restrain your natural tendency to
take sides and join the fight. Be friendly and charming to each of the com~
batants, then step back as they collide. V/Wth every battle they grow weaker,
while you grow stronger with every battle you avoid.
When the snipe and the mussel struggle, thefishetman gets the benefit.
Ancient Chinese saying
KEYS TO POWER
To succeed in the game of power, you have to master your emotions. But
even if you succeed in gaining such self-control, you can never control the
temperamental dispositions of those around you. And this presents a great
danger. Most people operate in a whirlpool of emotions, constantly react‘
ing, churning up squabbles and conflicts. Your sell’—contIol and autonomy
will only bother and infuriate them. They will my to draw you into the
whirlpool, begging you to take sides in their endless battles, or to make
peace for them. If you succumb to their emotional entreaties, little by little
you will find your mind and time occupied by their problems. Do not allow
whatever compassion and pity you possess to suck you in. You can never
win in this game; the conflicts can only multiply.
On the other hand, you cannot completely stand aside, for that would
cause needless offense. To play the game properly, you must seem inter-
ested in other people‘s problems, even sometimes appear to take their side.
But while you make outward gestures of support, you must maintain your
inner energy and sanity by keeping your emotions disengaged. No matter
how hard people try to pull you in, never let your interest in their affairs
and petty squabbles go beyond the surface. Give them gifts, listen with a
sympathetic look, even occasionally play the charmer-—but inwardly keep
both the friendly kings and the perfidious Borgias at arm’s length. By refus~
ing to commit and thus maintaining your autonomy you retain the initia-
tive: Your
moves stay
matters of your
own choosing, not defensive
reactions to the push-and~pu1l of those around you.
Slowness to pick up your weapons can be a weapon itself, especially if
you let other people exhaust themselves fighting, then take advantage of
their exhaustion. In ancient China, the kingdom of Chin once invaded the
kingdom of Hsing. Huan, the ruler of a nearby province, thought he
should rush to Hsing’s defense, but his adviser counseled him to wait:
“Hsing is not yet going to ruin,” he said, “and Chin is not yet exhausted. If
Chin is not exhausted, [we] cannot become very influential. Moreover, the
merit of supporting a state in danger is not as great as the virtue of reviving
a ruined one.” The adviser’s argument won the day, and as he had pre-
dicted, Huan later had the glory both of rescuing Hsing from the brink of
destruction and then of conquering an exhausted Chin. He stayed out of
the fighting until the forces engaged in it had worn each other down, at
which point it was safe for him to intervene.
That is what holding back from the fray allows you: time to position
yourselfto take advantage of the situation once one side starts to lose. You
can also take the game a step further, by promising your support to both
sides in a conflict while maneuvering so that the one to come out ahead in
the struggle is you. This was whatCastn1ccio Castracani, ruler of the Italian
town of Lucca in the fourteenth century, did when he had designs on the
town of Pistoia. A siege would have been expensive, costing both lives and
money, but Castruccio knew that Pistoia contained two rival factions, the
Blacks and the Whites, which hated one another. He negotiated with the
Blacks, promising to help them against the Whites; then, without their
knowledge, he promised the Whites he would help them against the
Blacks. And Castruccio kept his promiseswhe sent an army to a Black-
controlled gate to the city, which the sentxies of course welcomed in.
Meanwhile another of his armies entered through a White—control1ed gate.
The two armies united in the middle, occupied the town, killed the leaders
of both factions, ended the internal war, and took Pistoia for Castruccio.
Preserving your autonomy gives you options when people come to
blows—~you can play the mediator, broker the peace, while really securing
your own interests. You can pledge support to one side and the other may
have to court you with a higher bid. Or, like Castruccio, you can appear to
take both sides, then play the antagonists against each other.
Dftentimes when a conflict breaks out, you are tempted to side with
the stronger party, or the one that offers you apparent advantages in an al-
THE Pliltlli OF E'\'\"Y
While a poor woman
stood in the marker-
place selling cheeses,
(1
cat came along and
carried offu cheese. A
dog saw the pilferer
and Iried to lake the
cheese away from him.
The cat stood up la the
dog. So they pitched
into each other. The
dog barked and
mapped; the ca! spa:
and scratched, but they
could bring the battle
to no decision,
“Let's go to the fox and
have him referee the
mailer," the cat finally
suggested.
“Agreed,
" said the dog.
So they wen! In the fox.
The fox listened to their
arguments with ajurli~
ciaus air.
“Foolish animals," he
chided them, “why
carry on like that? If
both ofyou are willing,
I'll divide the cheese in
two and you’ll both be
satisfied.
"
“/lgrecrl. "said die cut
and the dog.
50 the fax took out his
knife and cut the ltheese
in two, but, instead of
czuting it lengthwise, he‘
Cut it in the width.
"My lmlfis smaller!"
protested the dog.
The for looked judi-
ciously through his
.s'pectarle.r at the dog's
share,
"You're right, quite
right!" he decided.
So he went and bit off
a piece ofrhe catk
share.
“That will make it
evem”' he said.
When the cm‘ saw what
Ihe fox did she began
10 yowl:
LAW 20
153
“Jam! look.’ My port 3*
.\'ma[l4'r noun‘
"
The fox again put on
his \pm‘/m,'It'.\' um!
looked jutliciously 41!
the calis‘ .8/luff.
“Right you are/"mid
(hv fox. “./last (0
/Iumzmt, and I’ll make
it ng/tr.
“
And he went and bit
0/fa ])l('('i", from {hr
dog’; vlzeevv
’I7'Ii.\‘ wen! mi
\'1; long,
with the fox nibbling
;‘5r.\‘.t as the (logic and
then at /he cat}: simre.
that 1ie*fEna:’!_v are up
(he whale cheese brforc’
their ey<'.s'.
A 'lKEASUi<Y or .lF.WL\H
F()i,,KL<)Rl:.
NA'l'iI»\N Atr<\:1;H.1‘r)..
1 948
154
LAW 20
Hence. This is risky business. First, it is often difficult to foresee which side
will prevail in the long run. But even if you guess right and ally yourself
with the stronger party, you may find yourself swallowed up and lost, or
conveniently forgotten, when they become victors. Side with the weaker,
on the other hand, and you are doomed. But play a waiting game and you
cannot lose.
In Frances July Revolution of 1830, after three days of riots, the states-
man Talleyrand, now elderly, sat by his Paris window, listening to the peel-
ing bells that signaled the riots were over. Turning to an assistant, he said,
“Ah, the bells! We’re winning.” “Who’s ‘we,’
man puma?” the assistant
asked. Gesturing for the man to keep quiet, Talleyrand replied, “Not a
word! I’ll tell you who we are tomorrow.” He well knew that only fools
rush into a situalion—tl1a.t by committing too quickly you lose your ma~
neuverability. People also respect you less: Perhaps tomorrow, they think,
you will commit to another, dilferent cause, since you gave yourself so eas
ily to this one. Good fortune is a fickle god and will often pass from one
side to the other. Commitment to one side deprives you of the advantage of
time and the luxury of waiting. Let others fall in love with this group or
that; for your part don’t rush in, don’t lose your head.
Finally, there are occasions when it is wisest to drop all pretence of ap-
pearing supportive and instead to trumpet your independence and self»
reliance. The aristocratic pose of independence is particularly important
for those who need to gain respect. George Washington recognized this in
his work to establish the young American republic on firm ground As
president, Washington avoided the temptation of making an alliance with
France or England, despite the pressure on him to do so. He wanted the
country to earn the world’s respect through its independence. Although a
treaty with France mighthave helped in the short toxin, in the long run he
knew it would be more effective to establish the nation’s autonomy. Eu-
rope would have to see the United States as an equal power.
Remember: You have only so much energy and so much time. Every
moment wasted on the affairs of others subtracts from your strength. You
may be afraid that people will condemn you as heartless, but in the end,
maintaining your independence and selfvreliance will gain you more re
spect and place you in a position of power from which you can choose to
help others on your own initiative.
Image: A Thicket of Shrubs.
In the forest,
one shrub
latches
on
to another.
entzmgling
its Iwighboi‘
with its thorns, the thicket
slowly extending its impen-
etrable domain‘ Only what
keeps its clistancze and
stands apart can grow and
rise above the thicket.
Authority: Regard it as
more courageous not to
become involved in
an
engagement than to win
in battle, and where there
is already one interfering
fool, take care that there
shall not be two. (Baltasar
Gracian, 1601-1658}
REVERSAL
Both parts of this law will turn against you if you take it too far. The game
proposed here is delicate and difficult. If you play too many parties against
one another, they will see through the maneuver and will gang up on you.
If you keep your growing number of suitors waiting too long, you will in-
spire not desire but distrust. People will start to lose interest. Eventually
you may find it worthwhile to commit to one sidevwifonly for appearances’
sake, to prove you are capable of attachment.
Even then, however, the key will be to maintain your inner indepen-
dence-—to keep yourself from getting emotionally involved. Preserve the
unspoken option of being able to leave at any moment and reclaim your
freedom if the side you are allied with starts to collapse. The friends you
made while you were being courted will give you plenty of places to go
once you jump ship.
LAW 20
755
156
;
LAW
21
PLAY A SUCKER TO CATCH
A SUCKER-——~SEEM DUMBER
THAN YOUR MARK
JUDGMISNT
No one likes feeling st-upider than the next person. The
hick, tiwn, is to make your victimsfeel smart——-and not
just smart, but smarter than you am. Once convinced of
this, they will never suspect that you may have ulterior
motives.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In the winter of 1872, the U.S. financier Asbury Harpending; was visiting
London when he received a cable: A diamond mine had been discovered
in the American West. The cable came from a reliable source—-William
Ralston, owner of the Bank of Califomia—-but Harpending nevertheless
took it as a practical joke, probably inspired by the recent discovery of
huge diamond mines in South Africa. True, when reports had first come in
of gold being discovered in the western United States, everyone had been
skeptical, and those had turned out to be true. But a diamond mine in the
West‘ Haipending showed the cable to his fellow financier Baron Roth
schild (one of the richest men in the world), saying it must be a joke. The
baron, however, replied, “Don’t be too sure about that. America is a very
large country. It has furnished the world with many surprises already. Per-
haps it has others in store.” Harpending promptly took the first ship back
to the States.
When Harpending reached San Francisco, there was an excitement in
the air recalling the Gold Rush days of the late 1840s. Two crusty prospec-
tors named Philip Arnold and john Slack had been the ones to find the di-
amond mine. They had not divulged its location, in Wyoming, but had led
. aliighly respected mining expert to it several weeks back, taking a circular
route so he could not guess his whereabouts. Once there, the expert had
watched as the miners dug up diamonds. Back in San Francisco the expert
had taken the gems to various jewelers, one of whom had estimated their
worth at $15 million.
Ha:-pending and Ralston now asked Amold and Slack to accompany
them back to New York, where the jeweler Charles Tiffany would verify
the original estimates. The prospectors responded uneasily--they smelled
a trap: How could they must these city slickers? Vifhat if Tiffany and the fi-
nanciers managed to steal the whole mine out from under them? Ralston
tried to allay their fears by giving them $100,000 and placing another
$300,000 in escrow for them. If the deal went through, they would be paid
an additional $300,000. The miners agreed.
The little group traveled to New York, where a meeting was held at the
mansion of Samuel L. Barlow. The cream of the city’s aristocracy was in at-
tx-,ndance——General George Brinton McClellan, commander of the Union
forces in the Civil War; General Benjamin Butler; Horace Greeley, editor
of the newspaper the New Ybrk Tribune; Harpending; Ralston; and Tiffany.
Only Slack and Arnold were missing—-as tourists in the city, they had de-
cided to go sight-seeing.
When Tiffany announced that the gems were real and worth a. fortune,
the financiers could barely control their excitement. They wired Roth-
_,
schild and other tycoons to tell them about the diamond mine and inviting
them to share in the investment. At the same time, they also told the
prospectors that they wanted one more test: They insisted that a mining ex-
I
pert of their choosing accompany Slack and Arnold to the site to verify its
'
wealth. The prospectors reluctantly agreed. In the meantime, they said,
Now. tlnm: is nothing
of which a mun is
prouder than of Imel-
iecvuul ubiliIy,for 11 is
this that gives him his’
mmmarzding plan: In
the animal world. 1: is
an e.rz:eerIingIy rush
thing to let anyone we
(ha: you are decidedly
3:upcriur10him in [his
respect, and to let other
people see it too.
.
.
.
Hence, while rank and
riciies may always
rec kon upon deferen-
Iial rreamzmr in sncirrzy;
that is s()mc,'2’hiIIg u,hin'z
inzeitrrctmil ability can
never expect: To be
ignored is the grecltcsl
favour rliowri 10 it; and
ifpr-‘opts rwlice it at all,
it is lwcausc they
regard If as a pI'.c’r‘e of
impertmrmrr, or else as
$(>metIn'ng tn whirl: its
p:n:¢e.v.s'rn' [ms no legiti-
marc right, and upon
which he dares In pride
hirIm’If.' and in remind-
lion and revenge for
his conduct, people
soc-relly Irv am! lzunn'ii-
ale hill! in some other
way.’ and if they wait to
do this, 1'1 15 only for 41
fitting oppm'mm'iy. A
man may be rLHm!11bIv
as p().s'.riI7lcii1 his
ilemcunour. and ye!
/mrdly ever get people
to overlook his crime
in xru/irling imeI[ecm-
ally above them. In the
Garden of Roses. Sadr‘
make-5 thz: remark.-
"You should know that
fuoli.s‘]1 [imply an! a
humiredfnlzi mon-
uwerse 10 meeting (he
wire than I/In’ wise
are irutir/:<m’ci /or
(he company of
me foolish."
LAW 21
15?‘
()n (he other /mm]. It i.\'
11 rml remrrinwmlulirm
to be stupizl. For m.s.‘tz/1.x‘
wumulz is agrcrtuh/¢' to
the (Indy. .\'l7 it rlmtv the
mind gum! lo feel its
\'upz'Vmri!y.' and 41 man
will seek <'Im1])unV
likely to give him I/nix‘
fwlnzg, us inmmzrvcly
us he Will uppruuc/1 the
_firr'plm*v or walk m the
.\‘IlVl if he warns to get
warm. Bu! llzlr mcam‘
that In: will be ills/ikurl
rm tlttffltttll ufhix supe-
riority; umi 1'/cl man ix
/0 be Iilrml. he mm‘!
really be in/'eriur in
pain! ofinrcllecl.
A R I Hi ZR
Sr II(wl~.N|IAL=|~:R.
l7h‘2*l~l?<(»()
158
1
LAW 21
they had to return to San Francisco. The jewels that Tiffany had examined
they left with Harpending for safekeeping.
Several weeks later, a man named Louis Janin, the best mining expert
in the country, met the prospectors in San Francisco. _]ani.n was a born
skeptic who was determined to make sure that the mine was not a fraud.
Accompanying janin were Harpending, and several other interested fi~
nanciers. As with the previous expert, the prospectors led the team through
a complex series of canyons, completely confusing them as to their where
abouts. Arriving at the site, the financiers watched in amazement as janin
dug the area up, leveling anthills, turning over boulders, and finding emer-
alds, rubies, sapphires, and most of all diamonds. The dig lasted eight days,
and by the end,
was convinced: He told the investors that they now
possessed the richest field in mining history. “With a hundred men and
proper machinery," he told them, “I would guarantee to send out one mil
lion dollars in diamonds every thirty days."
Returning to San Francisco a few days later, Ralston, Harpending, and
company acted fast to form a $10 million corporation of private investors.
First, however, they had to get rid of Arnold and Slack. That meant hiding
their excitement—they certainly did not want to reveal the field’s real
value. So they played possum. Who knows if _]anin is right, they told the
prospectors, the mine may not be as rich as we think. This just made the
prospectors angry. Trying a different tactic, the financiers told the two men
that if they insisted on having shares in the mine, they would end up being
fleeced by the unscrupulous tycoons and investors who would run the cor-
poration; better, they said, to take the $700,000 already offerecl—an enor»
mous sum at the time—and put their greed aside. This the prospectors
seemed to understand, and they finally agreed to take the money, in return
signing the rights to the site over to the financiers, and leaving maps to it.
News of the mine spread like wildfire. Prospectors fanned out across
Wyoming. Meanwhile Harpending and group began spending the millions
they had collected from their investors, buying equipment, hiring the best
men in the business, and furnishing luxurious offices in New York and San
0
Francisco.
A few weeks later, on their first trip back to the site, they learned the
hard truth: Not a single diamond or ruby was to be found. It was all a fake.
They were mined. Harpending had unwittingly lured the richest men in
the world into the biggest scam of the century.
Interpretation
Arnold and Slack pulled off their stupendous con not by using a fake engi-
neer or bribing Tiffany: All of the experts had been real. All of them hon-
estly believed in the existence of the mine and in the value of the gems.
What had fooled them all was nothing else than Arnold and Slack them-
selves. The two men seemed to be such rubes, such hayseeds, so naive, that
no one for an instant had believed them capable of an audacious scam.
The prospectors had simply observed the law of appearing more stupid
than the mark-—the deceiver’s First Commandment.
The logistics of the con were quite simple. Months before Arnold and
Slack announced the “discovery” of the diamond mine, they traveled to
Europe, where they purchased some real gems for around $12,000 (part of
the money they had saved from their days
as gold miners). They then
salted the “mine” with these gems, which the first expert dug up and
brought to San Francisco. The jewelers who had appraised these stones, in»
cluding Tiffany himself, had gotten caught up in the fever and had grossly
overestimated their value. Then Ralston gave the prospectors $l00,000 as
security, and immediately after their trip to New York they simply went to
Amsterdam, where they bought sacks of uncut gems, before ramming to
San Francisco. The second time they salted the mine, there were many
morejewels to be found.
The effectiveness of the scheme, however, rested not on tricks like
these but on the fact that Arnold and Slack played their parts to perfection.
On their trip to New York, where they mingled with millionaires and ty—
coons, they played up their clodhopper image, wearing pants and coats a
size or two too small and acting incredulous at everything they saw in the
big city. No one believed that these country simpletons could possibly be
conning the most devious, unscrupulous financiers of the time. And once
Harpending, Ralston, and even Rothschild accepted the mine’s existence,
anyone who doubted it was questioning the intelligence of the world’s most
successful businessmen.
In the end, Harpending’s reputation was mined and he never recov-
ered; Rothschild learned his lesson and never fell for another con; Slack
took his money and disappeared from view, never to be found. Arnold
simply went home to Kentucky. After all, his sale of his mining rights had
been legitimate; the buyers had taken the best advice, and if the mine had
run out of diamonds, that was their problem. Arnold used the money to
greatly enlarge his farm and open up a bank of his own.
KEYS TO POWER
The feeling that someone else is more intelligent than we are is almost in-
tolerable. We usually try to justify it in difierent ways: “He only has book
knowledge, whereas I have real knowledge.” “Her parents paid for her to
get a good education. If my parents had had as much money, if I had been
as privileged.
.
. .” “He’s not as smart as he thinks.” Last but not least: “She
may know her narrow little field better than I do, but beyond that she’s re-
ally not smart at all. Even Einstein was a boob outside physics.”
Given how important the idea of intelligence is to most people’s van-
ity, it is critical never inadvertently to insult or impugn a person’s brain
power. That is an unforgivable sin. But if you can make this iron rule work
for you, it opens up all sorts of avenues of deception. Sublirninally reassure
people that they are more intelligent than you are, or even that you are a
bit of a moron, and you can run rings around them. The feeling of intellee
tual superiority you give them will disarm their suspiciorrmuscles.
In 1865 the Prussian councillor Otto von Bismarck wanted Austria to
LAW 21
;
I59
I60
3
LAW 2]
sign a certain treaty. The treaty was totally in the interests of Prussia and
against the interests of Austria, and Bismarck would have to strategize to
get the Ausmans to agree to it But the Austrian negotiator, Count Blorne,
was an avid cardplayer. His particular game was quinze, and he often said
that he could judge a man’s character by the way he played quinze. Bis-
marck knew of this saying of Blome’s.
The night before the negotiations were to begin, Bismarck innocently
engaged Blome in a game of quinze. The Prussian would later write, “That
was the very last time I ever played quinze. I played so recklessly that
everyone was astonished. I lost several thousand talers [the currency of the
time], but I succeeded in fooling [Blome], for he believed me to be more
venturesome than I am and I gave way.” Besides appearing reckless, Bis-
marck also played the witless fool, saying ridiculous things and bumbling
about with a surplus of nervous energy.
All this made Blome feel he had gadiered valuable information. He
knew that Bismarck was aggressive———the Prussian already had that reputa-
tion, and the way he played had confirmed it. And aggressive men, Blome
knew, can be foolish and rash. Accordingly, when the time came to Sign
the treaty, Blome thought he had the advantage. A heedless fool like Bis-
marck, he thought, is incapable of cold—blooded calculation and deception,
so he only glanced at the treaty before signing it—he failed to read the fine
print. As soon as the ink was dry, ajoyous Bismarck exclaimed in his face,
“Well, I could never have believed that I should find an Austrian diplomat
willing to sign that document!”
The Chinese have a phrase, “Masqueracling as a swine to kill the
tiger.” This refers to an ancient hunting technique in which the hunter
clothes himself in the hide and snout of a pig, and mimics its grunting. The
mighty tiger thinks a pig is coming his way, and lets it get close, savoring
the prospect of an easy meal. But it is the hunter who has the last laugh.
Masquerading as a swine works wonders on those who, like tigers, are
arrogant and overconfident: The easier they think it is to prey on you, the
more easily you can turn the tables. This trick is also useful if you are ambi-
tious yet find yourself low in the hierarchy: Appearing less intelligent than
you are, even a bit of a fool, is the perfect disguise. Look like a harmless pig
and no one will believe you harbor dangerous ambitions. They may even
promote you since you seem so likable, and subservient. Claudius before
he became emperor of Rome, and the prince of France who later became
Louis XIII, used this tactic when those above them suspected they might
have designs on the throne. By playing the fool as young men, they were
left alone. When the time came for them to strike, and to act with vigor and
decisiveness, they caught everyone oi?-guard.
Intelligence is the obvious quality to downplay, but why stop there?
Taste and sophistication rank close to intelligence on the vanity scale;
make people feel they are more sophisticated than you are and their guard
will come down. As Arnold and Slack knew, an air ofcomplete naiveté can
work wonders. Those fancy financiers were laughing at them behind their
backs, but who laughed loudest in the end? In general, then, always make
people believe they are smarter and more sophisticated than you are. They
will keep you around because you make them feel better about themselves,
and the longer you are around, the more opportunities you will have to do
ceive them.
I m
a. g e
2
The Opossum. In playing
dead, the opossum plays stupid.
Many a predator has therefore left it
alone. Who could believe that such
an
ugly, unintelligent,
nervous little creature
could
be
capable
of
such deception?
Authority: Know how to make use of stupidity: The wisest man
plays this card at times. There are occasions when the highest
wisdom consists in appearing not to know—you must not be ign0—
rant but capable of playing it. It is not much good being wise
among fools and sane among lunatics. He who poses as a fool is not
a fool. The best way to be well received by all is to clothe yourself
in the skin of the dumbest of brutes. (Baltasar Gracién, 1601-1658)
REVE RS A14
To reveal the true nature of your intelligence rarely pays; you should get in
the habit of downplaying it at all times. If people inadvertently learn the
truth—-that you are actually much smarter than you look--«they will admire
you more for being discreet than for making your brilliance show. At the
start of your climb to the top, of course, you cannot play too stupid: You
may want to let your bosses know, in a subtle way, that you are smarter
than the competition around you. As you climb the ladder, however, you
should to some degree try to dampen your brilliance.
There is, however, one situation where it pays to do the opposite-
when you can cover up a deception with a show of intelligence. In matters
of smarts as in most things, appearances are what count. If you seem to
have authority and knowledge, people will believe what you say. This can
be very useful in getting you out of a scrape.
The art dealer Joseph Duveen was once attending a soirée at the New
York home of a tycoon to whom he had recently sold a Diirer painting for
LAW 21
I51
I62
LAW ‘ll
a high price. Among the guests was a young French art critic who seemed
extremely knowledgeable and confident. Wanting to impress this man, the
tyeoon’s daughter showed him the Diirer, which had not yet been hung.
The critic studied it for a time, then finally said, “You know, I don’t think
this Diirer is right.” He followed the young woman as she hurried to tell
her father what he had said, and listened as the magnate, deeply unsettled,
turned to Duveen for reassurance. Duveen just laughed. “How very amus-
ing,” he said. “Do you realize, young man, that at least twenty other art ex-
perts here and in Europe have been taken in too, and have said that
painting isn’t genuine? And now you’ve made the same mistake.” His con-
fident tone and air of authority intimidated the Frenchman, who apolo-
gized for his mistake.
Duveen knew that the art market was flooded with fakes, and that
many paintings had been falsely ascribed to old masters. He tried his best
to distinguish the real from the fake, but in his zeal to sell he often over-
played a work’s authenticity. What mattered to him was that the buyer be-
lieved he had bought
a Diii-er, and that Duveen himself convinced
everyone of his “expertness” through his air of irreproachable authority,
Thus, it is important to be able to play the professor when necessary and
never impose such an attitude for its own sake.
LAW
22
USE THE SURRENDER
TACTIC: TRANSFORM
WEAKNESS INTO POWER
J U D G M E NT
When you are weaker, neverfightfor honor’: sake; choose
surrender instead. Surrender gives you time to recover;
time to torment and irritate your conqueror, time to wait
for his power to wane. Do not give him the satisfaction of
fighting and defeating you——surrenderfirst. By turning
the other cheek you infuriate and unsettle him. Make
surrender a tool ofpower.
153
‘lI‘1I".l‘|lI 'NI'Vl'|
\7\l)
|‘I[la |'|(. '|‘l(|'l
A man who had
climbed upon (I certain
fig tree, was [muting
the banghs toward him
and plmrking the ripe
fruit, which he then
put mm his mouth to
(ie.rIrr>y and gnaw
with his hard teeth. The
vlzertnut. seeing this‘.
l().l’Se(l in’ long bt‘(ltu.'ht’.\'
and with ttnnultuotts
VILYIIL’ excluintell: "Oh
Fig! How much less
protected by zmture you
are than I. See how my
mien! offspring are set
in Close array,’/irst
clorhzrrl in soft wrap-
pers over which is the
hard but softly lined
Itusk. Aml not mntenl
with this much care,
nature has also given
us these slmrp and
close-re! Sptne.s‘, so that
the hunt! ofman
rrammt hurt us.
"
Then tlmfig tree began
10 laugh. and after the
laug/tier it mitt: "You
know well that man is
0f.rm,h ingmttity that
he will berenve even
you of your children.
But in your ease he will
do it by metms of rods
and stones; and when
they are fellc-tl he will
trample them Wtfll his
feet or hit them With
.\fI)Il(‘,.\‘, so that your
of)‘;-prizzg will emerge
from their armor
crushed and niaimed.‘
while I am lutlched
carefully by his hands,
and never, like you,
with r0llgltflt’.XS.
"
LLONARDQ DAVINCI.
14324519
164
LAW 22
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
The island of Melos is strategically situated in the heart of the Mediter-
ranean. In classical times, the city of Athens dominated the sea and coastal
areas around Greece, but Sparta, in the Peloponnese, had been Mel0s’s
original colonizer. During the Peloponnesian War, then, the Melians re-
fused to ally themselves with Athens and remained loyal to Mother Sparta.
In 416 B.C. the Athenians sent an expedition against Melos, Before launch-
ing an all—out attack, however, they dispatched a delegation to persuade the
Melians to surrender and become an ally rather than suffer devastation and
defeat.
“You know as well as we do,” the delegates said, “that the standard of
justice depends on the equality of power to compel, and that in fact the
strong do what they have the power to do and the weak accept what they
have to accept.” When the Melians responded that this denied the notion
of fair play, the Athenians said that those in power determined what was
fair and what was not. The Melians argued that this authority belonged to
the gods, not to mortals, “Our opinion of the gods and our knowledge of
men,” replied a member of the Athenian delegation, “lead us to conclude
that it is a general and necessary law of nature to rule whatever one can.”
The Melians would not budge. Sparta, they insisted, would come to
their defense. The Athenians countered that the Spartans were a conserva-
tive, practical people, and would not help Melos because they had nothing
to gain and a lot to lose by doing so.
Finally the Melians began to talk of honor and the principle of resisting
brute force. “Do not be led astray by a false sense of honor,” said the Athe-
nians. “Honor often brings men to ruin when they are faced with an obvi-
ous danger that somehow affects their pride. There is nothing disgraceful in
giving way to the greatest city in Hellas when she is offering you such rea-
sonable terms.” The debate ended. The Melians discussed the issue among
themselves, and decided to trust in the aid of the Spartans, the will of the
gods, and the tightness of their cause. They politely declined the Athenians’
offer.
A few days later the Athenians invaded Melos. The Melians fought
nobly, even without the Spartans, who did not come to their rescue. It took
several attempts before the Athenians could surround and besiege their
main city, but the Melians finally surrendered. The Athenians wasted no
tirne—they put to death all the men of military age that they could capture,
they sold the women and children as slaves, and they re.-populated the is
land with their own colonists. Only a handful of Melians survived.
Interpretation
The Athenians were one of the most eminently practical people in history,
and they made the most practical argument they could with the Melians:
When you are weaker, there is nothing to be gained by fighting a useless
fight. No one comes to help the weak—by doing so they would only put
themselves in jeopardy. The weak are alone and must submit. Fighting
gives you nothing to gain but martyrdom, and in the process a lot of people
who do not believe in your cause will die.
Weakness is no sin, and can even become a strength if you learn how
to play it right. Had the Melians surrendered in the first place, they would
have been able to sabotage the Athenians in subtle ways, or might have
gotten what they could have out of the alliance and then left it when the
Athenians themselves were weakened, as in fact happened several years
later. Fortunes change and the mighty are often brought down. Surrender
conceals great power: Lulling the enemy into complacency, it gives you
time to recoup, time to undermine, time for revenge. Never sacrifice that
time in exchange for honor in a battle that you cannot win.
Weak people never give way when they ought to.
Cardinal tle R212, 16] 3-16 79
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
Sometime in the 19205 the German writer Bertolt Brecht became a convert
to the cause of Communism. From then on his plays, essays, and poems re-
flected his revolutionary fervor, and he generally tried to make his ideolog-
ical statements
as clear
as possible. When Hitler
came to power in
Germany, Brecht and his Communist colleagues became marked men. He
had many friends in the United States—Amerlcans who sympathized with
his beliefs, as well as fellow German intellectuals who had lied Hitler. In
1941, accordingly, Brecht emigrated to the United States, and chose to set-
tle in Los Angeles, where he hoped to make a living in the film business.
Over the next few years Brecht wrote screenplays with a pointedly an—
ticapitalist slant. He had little success in Hollywood, so in 1947, the war
having ended, he decided to return to Europe. That same year, however,
the US. Cong;ress’s House Un—American Activities Committee began its
investigation into supposed Communist infiltration in Hollywood. It began
to gather information on Brecht, who had so openly espoused Marxism,
and on September 19, 1947, only a month before he had planned to leave
the United States, he received a subpoena to appear before the committee.
In addition to Brecht, a number of other writers, producers, and directors
were summoned to appear as well, and this group came to be known as the
Hollywood 19.
Before going to Washington, the Hollywood 19 met to decide on a plan
of action. Their approach would be confrontational. Instead of answering
questions about their membership, or lack of it, in the Communist Party,
they would read prepared statements that would challenge the authority of
the committee and argue that its activities were unconstitutional. Even if
this strategy meant imprisonment, it would gain publicity for their cause.
Brecht disagreed. What good was it, he asked, to play the martyr and
gain a little public sympathy if in the process they lost the ability to stage
their plays and sell their scripts for years to come? He felt certain they were
Voltaire was living in
exile in London at :1
time when untifrenclr
3.-enrimem was in
its highest. One day
walking I/trough the
streets, he found himself
summnderl by an
tmgry crowd. “Ilrmg
him. Ilzmg the French
man,
”
llzagv yelled.
Voltaire calmly
adrlrresmrl the mob with
the following words:
"Men of England/ You
wish to kill mt‘ because
I am a Frmchman. Am
I no: ymnirhed enough
in not Ming ham an
Eirgléxhmarz?
" T/tr:
crowd charred /zis
thoughtful wnrrlx, and
escorted him safely
back m his lodgings.
ins, LITTLE. BROWN
noon or m+:n)o'rF.s.
CI.lF'l'().\' FADIMAN, I-.t)..
1985
LAW 22
I65
166
LAW 22
all more intelligent than the members of the committee. Why lower them-
selves to the level of their opponents by arguing with them? Why not out
fox the committee by appearing to surrender to it while subtly mocking it?
The Hollywood 19 listened to Brecht politely, but decided to stick to their
plan, leaving Brecht to go his own way.
The committee finally summoned Brecht on October 30. They ex-
pected him to do what others among the Hollywood 19 who had testified
before him had done: Argue, refuse to answer questions, challenge the
committee's right to hold its hearing, even yell and hurl insults. Much to
their surprise, however, Brecht was the very picture of Congeniality. He
wore a suit (something he rarely did), smoked a cigar (he had heard that
the committee chairman was a passionate cigar smoker), answered their
questions politely, and generally deferred to their authority.
Unlike the other witnesses, Brecht answered the question of whether
he belonged to the Communist Party: He was not a member, he said,
which happened to be the truth. One committee member asked him, “is it
true you have written a number of revolutionary plays?” Brecht had writ-
ten many plays with overt Communist messages, but he responded, “I
have written a number of poems and songs and plays in the fight against
Hitler and, of course, they can be considered, therefore, as revolutionary
because I, of course, was for the overthrow of that government.” This state
ment went unchallenged.
Brecht’s English was more than adequate, but he used an interpreter
throughout his testimony, a tactic that allowed him to play subtle games
with language. When committee members found Communist leanings in
lines from English editions of his poems, he would repeat the lines in Ger
man for the interpreter, who would then retranslate them; and somehow
they would come out innocuous. At one point a committee member read
one of Brechfs revolutionary poems out loud in English, and asked him if
he had written it. “No,” he responded, “I wrote a German poem, which is
very different from this.” The author's elusive answers baffled the commit-
tee members, but his politeness and the way he yielded to their authority
made it impossible for them to get angry with him.
After only an hour of questioning, the committee members had had
enough. “Thank you very much,” said the chairman, “You are a good ex-
ample to the {other} witnesses.” Not only did they free him, they offered to
help him if he had any trouble with immigration oficials who might detain
him for their own reasons. The following day, Brecht left the United States,
never to return.
Interpretation
The Hollywood 19’s confrontational approach won them a lot of sympa~
thy, and years later they gained a kind of vindication in public opinion. But
they were also blacklisted, and lost valuable years of profitable working
time. Brecht, on the other hand, expressed his disgust at the committee
more indirectly. It was not that he changed his beliefs or compromised his
values; instead, during his short testimony, he kept the upper hand by ap-
pearing to yield while all the time running circles around the committee
with vague responses, outright lies that went unchallenged because they
were wrapped in enigmas, and word games. In the end he kept the free-
dom to continue his revolutionary writing (as opposed to suffering impris
onment or detainment in the United States), even while subtly mocking the
committee and its authority with his pseudo-obedience.
Keep in mind the following: People trying to make a show of their au-
thority are easily deceived by the surrender tactic. Your outward sign of
submission makes them feel important; satisfied that you respect them,
they become easier targets for a later counterattack, or for the kind of indi»
rect ridicule used by Brecht. Measuring your power over time, never sacri-
fice long-term maneuverability for the short-lived glories of martyrdom.
When the great lord passes, the wise peasant bows deeply and silentlyfarts.
Ethiopian prozuzllr
KEYS T0 POWER
What gets us into trouble in the realm of power is often our own overreac~
tion to the moves of our enemies and rivals. That overreaction creates
problems we would have avoided had we been more reasonable. It also
has an endless rebound effect, for the enemy then overreacts as well, much
as the Athenians did to the Melians. It is always our first instinct to react, to
meet aggression with some other kind of aggression. But the next time
someone pushes you and you find yourself starting to react, try this: Do not
resist or fight back, but yield, turn the other cheek, bend. You will find that
this often neutralizes their behavior——they expected, even wanted you to
react with force and so they are caught ofiguard and confounded by your
lack of resistance. By yielding, you in fact control the situation, because
your surrender is part of a larger plan to lull them into believing they have
defeated you.
This is the essence of the surrender tactic: Inwardly you stay firm, but
outwardly you bend. Deprived of a reason to get angry, your opponents
will often be bewildered instead. And they are unlikely to react with more
violence, which would demand a reaction from you. Instead you are al
lowed the time and space to plot the countermoves that will bring them
down. In the battle of the intelligent against the brutal and the aggressive,
the surrender tactic is the supreme weapon. It does require self~control:
Those who genuinely surrender give up their freedom, and may be
crushed by the humiliation of their defeat You have to remember that you
only appear to surrender, like the animal that plays dead to save its hide.
We have seen that it can be better to surrender than to fight; faced with
a. more powerful opponent and a sure defeat, it is often also better to sur-
render than to run away. Running away may save you for the time being,
but the aggressor will eventually catch up with you.
you surrender in-
stead, you have an opportunity to coil around your enemy and strike with
your fangs from close up.
LAW 22
167
I65
LAW 22
In 473 B.C., in ancient China, King Goujian of Yue suffered a horrible
defeat from the ruler of Wu in the battle of Fujiao. Goujian wanted to flee,
but he had an adviser who told him to surrender and to place himself in the
service of the ruler ofWu, from which position he could study the man and
plot his revenge. Deciding to follow this advice, Goujian gave the ruler all
of his riches, and went to work in his conqueror’s stables as the lowest ser-
vant. For three years he humbled himself before the ruler, who then, finally
satisfied of his loyalty, allowed him to return home. Inwardly, however,
Goujian had spent those three years gathering information and plotting re-
venge. When a terrible drought struck Wu, and the kingdom was weak
ened by irmer turmoil, he raised an army, invaded, and won with ease.
That is the power behind surrender: It gives you the time and the flexibility
to plot a devastating counterblow. Had Goujian run away, he would have
lost this chance.
When foreign trade began to threaten Japanese independence in the
mid—nineteenth century, the Japanese debated how to defeat the foreign-
ers. One minister, Hotta Masayoshi, wrote a memorandum in 1857 that in-
fluencedJapanese policy for years to come: “I am therefore convinced that
our policy should be to conclude friendly alliances, to send ships to foreign
counhies everywhere and conduct trade, to copy the foreigners where they
are at their best and so repair our own shortcomings, to foster our national
strength and complete our armaments, and so gradually subject the foreigrr
ers to our influence until in the end all the countries of the world know the
blessings
of perfect tranquillity
and
our hegemony
is acknowledged
throughout the globe.” This is a brilliant application of the Law: Use sur-
render to gain access to your enemy. Learn his ways, insinuate yourself
with him slowly, outwardly conform to his customs, but inwardly maintain
your own culture. Eventually you will emerge victorious, for while he con—
siders you weak and inferior, and takes no precautions against you, you are
using the time to catch up and surpass him. This soft, penneable form of in»
vasion is often the best, for the enemy has nothing to react against, prepare
for, or resist. And had japan resisted Western influence by force, it might
well have suffered a devastating invasion that would have permanently al-
tered its culture.
Surrender can also offer a way of mocking your enemies, of turning
their power against them, as it did for Brecht. Milan Kundera’s novel 7719
Jake, based on the author’s experiences in a penal camp in Czechoslovakia,
tells the story of how the prison guards organized a relay race, guards
against prisoners. For the guards this was a chance to show off their physi-
cal superiority. The prisoners knew they were expected to lose, so they
went out of their way to oblige-—miming exaggerated exertion while
barely moving, running a few yards and collapsing, limping, jogging ever
so slowly while the guards raced ahead at full speed. Both by joining the
race and by losing ig they had obliged the guards obediently; but their
“overobedience” had mocked the event to the point of mining it. Overobe-
dience—su.rrender—was here a way to demonstrate superiority in a re-
verse manner. Resistance would have engaged the prisoners in the cycle of
violence, lowering them to the guards’ level. Overobeying the guards, how»
ever, made them ridiculous, yet they could not rightly punish the prison»
ers, who had only done what they asked.
Power is always in flux—since the game is by nature fluid, and an arena
of constant struggle, those with power almost always find themselves even-
tually on the downward swing. If you find yourself temporarily weakened,
the surrender tactic is perfect for raising yourselfup again»-it disguises your
ambition; it teaches you patience and self—control, key skills in the game;
and it puts you in the best possible position for taking advantage ofyour up-
pressofs sudden slide. If you run away or fight back, in the long run you
cannot win. If you surrender, you will almost always emerge victorious.
Image: An Oak
Tree. The oak
that resists the
wind
loses
its
branches one
by
one,
and
with nothing
left
to protect
it, the trunk fi-
nally
snaps.
The
oak
that
bends lives long-
er, its trunk grow-
ing
wider,
its
roots
deeper and more tenacious.
Authority: Ye have heard that it hath been said, An eye for an eye
and a tooth for a tooth: But I say unto you, That ye resist not evil: but
whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other
also. And if any man will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat,
let them have thy cloak also. And whosoever shall compel thee to
go
a mile, go with him twain. (Jesus Christ, in Matthew 5:38-41)
LAW 22
169
170
LAW 22
R EV E RSAI .
The point of surrendering is to save your hide for a later date when you
can reassert yourself. It is precisely to avoid martyrdom that one surren-
ders, but there are times when the enemy will not relent, and martyrdom
seems the only way out Furthermore, if you are willing to die, others may
gain power and inspiration from your example.
Yet martyrdom, surrender’s reversal, is a. messy, inexact tactic, and is
as violent as the aggression it combats. For every famous martyr there are
thousands more who have inspired neither a religion nor a rebellion, so
that if martyrdom does sometimes grant a certain power, it does so unpre-
dictably. More important, you will not be around to enjoy that power, such
as it is. And there is finally something selfish and arrogant about martyrs,
as if they felt their followers were less important than their own glory,
When power deserts you, it is best to ignore this Law’s reversal. Leave
martyrdom alone: The pendulum will swing back your way eventually,
and you should stay alive to see it.
23
CONCENTRATE
Y()[JR.F()R(3ES
JUDGMENT
Conserve your forces and energies by keeping them
concentrated at their strongest point. You gain more by
finding a rich mine and mining it deeper, than byflit—
tingfrom one shallow mine to another-—intensity dzfeats
extensity every time. When lookingfor sources ofpower to
elevate you,find the one key patnm, the_fat cow who will
give you milkfor a long time to came.
12’!
TH} (.‘UU.<l; AND
Till’. IIOHSF
A game who was
plucking grass upon u
common thought
her.\'el_faffronter! by a
horse who fed near her;
mm’. in hi.\'.s'ing ll(‘L‘(Wll.\',
thus addressed him: “I
am certainly a more
noble and perfect
animal than yozr for
tin’ whole range and
extent afyourfarcrtlties
is confined to one
element. I can walk
upon the groom! as
well (:5 you,’ I have,
basidtas, wings, with
which I can raise
myself in the air; and
when I please. I can
sport on pomls and
lakes, and n7f*'.'Sh
myst,-ifin 1119
‘ml
waters: 1 enfmirlle
dlffermzr powers Ufa
bird, (1 fish, am! a
qumiruped.
"
The horse, $tl(5!‘!§Izg
sonrrwhat distltzinjizliy.
replied: “I: is mic: you
inhabit three eiemems.
but you make no very
disrirzguisiieri/ignre in
any one ofthem. You
fly, imlerd; but your
flight is so heavy and
clmnsy, that Von luau-‘e
no right to put yourself
nn a level with the [ark
or the swallow. You can
swim on the surface of
the watch», but you
Ltmnoi live in them as
fishes r1o:you cannot
find your food in rho!
riemenl, nor gfirlr
.\'nzoor?:1y (aitmg the
bottom of rite waves.
Ami when you walk, or
rather wtlcltlle, upon
the ground, with your
liroad fret and your
long neck xlretchred out,
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
In China in the early sixth century B.C., the kingdom of Wu began a was
with the neighboring norlhem provinces of the Middle Kingdom. Wu was
a. growing power, but it lacked the great history and civilization of the Mid
dle Kingdom, for centuries the center of Chinese culture. By defeating the
Middle Kingdom, the king of Wu would instantly raise his status.
The war began with great fanfare and several victories, but it soon
bogged down. A victory on one from would leave the Wu armies vulnera~
ble on another. The king’s chief minister and adviser, Wu Tzu-hsiu, warned
him that the barbarous state of Yueh, to the south, was beginning to notice
the kingdom of V\’u’s problems and had designs to invade. The king only
laughed at such w0rries~one more big victory and the great Middle King—
dom would be his.
In the year 490, Wu T212-hsiu sent his son away to safety in the king-
dom of Ch’i. In doing so he sent the king a signal that he disapproved of
the war, and that he believed the king’s selfish ambition was leading Wu to
min. The king, sensing betrayal, lashed out at his minister, accusing him of
a lack of loyalty and, in a fit of anger, ordered him to kill himself. Wu Tzu-
hsiu obeyed his king, but before he plunged the knife into his chest, he
cried, “Tear out my eyes, oh King, and fix them on the gate of Wu, so that I
may see the triumphant entry of Yueh.”
As Wu Tzwlrsiu had predicted, within a few years a Yueh army passed
beneath the gate of Wu. As the barbarians surrounded the palace, the king
remembered his minister’s last Words-——~and felt the dead man’s disembod-
ied eyes watching his disgrace. Unable to hear his shame, the king killed
himself, “covering his face so that he would not have to meet the reproaclr
ful gaze of his minister in the next world.”
Interpretation
The story of Wu is a paradigm of all the empires that have come to min by
overreachlng. Drunk with success and sick with ambition, such empires ex‘
pand to grotesque proportions and meet a min that is total. This is what
happened to ancient Athens, which lusted for the faraway island of Sicily
and ended up losing its empire. The Romans stretched the boundaries of
their empire to encompass vast territories; in doing so they increased their
vulnerability, and the chances of invasion from yet another barbarian tribe.
Their useless expansion led their empire into oblivion.
For the Chinese, the fate of the kingdom of Wu serves as an elemental
lesson on what happens when you dissipate your forces on several fronts,
losing sight of distant dangers for the sake ofpresent gain. “If you are not in
danger,” says Sun-tzu, “do not fight.” It is almost a physical law: What is
bloated beyond its proportions inevitably collapses. The mind must not
wander from goal to goal, or be distracted by success from its sense of pur-
pose and proportion. What is concentrated, coherent, and connected to its
past has power. What is dissipated, divided, and distended rots and falls to
the ground. The bigger it bloats, the harder it falls.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW’
The Rothschild banking family had humble beginnings in the Jewish
ghetto of Frankfurt, Germany. The city‘s harsh laws made it impossible for
Jews to mingle outside the ghetto, but the Jews had turned this into a
virtuemit made them self—reliant, and zealous to preserve their culture at
all costs. Mayer Amschel, the first of the Rothschilds to accumulate wealth
by lending money, in the late eighteenth century, well understood the
power that comes from this kind of concentration and cohesion.
First, Mayer Amschel allied himself with one family, the powerful
princes of Thom und Taxis. Instead of spreading his services out, he made
himself these princes’ primary banker. Second, he entrusted none of his
business to outsiders, using only his children and close relatives. The more
unified and tight-knit the family, the more powerful it would become. Soon
Mayer Amschel’s five sons were running the business. And when Mayer
Amschel lay dying, in 1812, he refused to name a principal heir, instead set-
ting up all of his sons to continue-the fa.mily' tradition, so that they would
stay united and would resist the dangers of dillusion and of infiltration by
outsiders.
Once Mayer Amschel’s sons controlled the family business, they de-
cided that the key to wealth on a. larger scale was to secure a foothold in the
finances of Europe as a whole, rather than being tied to any one country or
prince. Of the five brothers, Nathan had already opened up shop in Lon-
don. In
1813 James moved
to Paris. Amschel remained in Frankfurt,
Salomon established himself in Vienna, and Karl, the youngest son, went
to Naples. With each sphere of influence covered, they could tighten their
hold on Europe’s financial markets.
This widespread network, of course, opened the Rothschilds to the
very danger of which their father had warned them: diliusion, division, dis-
sension. They avoided this danger, and established themselves as the most
powerful force in European finance and politics, by once again resorting to
the strategy of the ghetto-——excluding outsiders, concentrating their forces.
The Rothschiids established the fastest courier system in Europe, allowing
them to get news of events before all their competitors. They held a virtual
monopoly on information. And their internal communications and corre-
spondence were written in Frankfurt Yiddish, and in a code that only the
brothers could decipher. There was no point in stealing this information—-
no one could understand it. “Even the shewdest bankers cannot find their
way through the Rothschild maze,” admitted a financier who had tried to
infiltrate the clan.
In 1824 James Rothschild decided it was time to get married. This pre-
sented a problem for the Rothschilds, since it meant incorporating an out-
sider into the Rothschild clan, an outsider who could betray its secrets.
jarnes therefore decided to marry within the family, and chose the daugh-
ter of his brother Salomon. The brothers were ecstatic—~this was the per-
fect solution to their marriage problems. james‘s choice now became the
family policy:
Two years later,
Nathan married off his daughter
to
fzissirig at ewrrvmze
who passes by, you
bring upon yourself the
deri5z'orx ofall belmid-
err. I confess that I am
only formed to move
upon the ground, but
how graceful is my
rmzkef How well tumml
my lz'mb.r.’ How highly
finished my whole
burly! How great my
strength! Haw aston-
irhing my speed/I had
much rather be
confined to one
elerm-nt, and be
arlmirml m that, than
be 11 goose m 011.’
”
mm lzs mom
um~r:At“cio .-mo
CHAUCER.
Du. .l<)H.N Arum,
l747~»lR22
Beware t)j'tIi.r.\'i[:aIiIig
your p(:wer.r: Xtriw:
consrmnly to concen-
trate (hem. Genius
I/rinks it can do wizar-
ever it reps others
doing. but it is sure to
repent u/every ill-
jutlgcd outlay.
JOEIANN VON Gm-:rmz.
1749-1832
LAW 23
I73
Ir-4
‘
LAW 23
Salornon’s son. In the years to come, the five brothers arranged eighteen
matches among their cluldren, sixteen of these being contracted between
first cousins.
“We are like the mechanism of a watch: Each part is essential,” said
brother Salomon. As in a watch, every part of the business moved in con-
cert with every other, and the inner workings were invisible to the world,
which only saw the movement of the hands. While other rich and powerful
families suffered irrecoverable downturns during the tumultons first half of
the nineteenth century, the tight-knit Rothschilds managed not only to pre-
serve but to expand their unprecedented wealth.
Interpretation
The Rothschilds were born in strange times. They came from a place that
had not changed in centuries, but lived in an age that gave birth to the In-
dustrial Revolution, the French Revolution, and an endless series of up-
heavals. The Rothchilds kept the past alive, resisted the patterns of
dispersion of their era and for this are emblematic of the law of concentra-
tion.
No one represents this better than _]ames Rothschild, the son who es-
tablished himself in Paris. in his lifetime james witnessed the defeat of
Napoleon, the restoration of the Bourbon monarchy, the bourgeois monar-
chy of Orleans, the return to a republic, and finally the enthronement of
Napoleo
1 III. French styles and fashions changed at a relentless pace dur-
ing all this turmoil. Without appearing to be a relic of the past, James
steered his family as if the ghetto lived on within them. He kept alive his
clan’s inner cohesion and strength. Only through such an anchoring in the
past was the family able to thrive amidst such chaos. Concentration was the
foundation of the Rothschilds’ power, wealth, and stability.
The best stmzngy is always to be very strong;flrst in general, than
at the decisive point.
.
.
. There is no higher and simpler law of strategy
than that afkeeping ones/brces concentrated.
.
.
. In short the
first principle is: act with the utmost concentration.
011 War, Carl mm, fllausewitz, 1780-1831
KEYS TO POWER
The world is plagued by greater and geater division-——within countries,
political groups, families, even individuals. We are all in a state of total dis-
traction and diffusion, hardly able to keep our minds in one direction be-
fore we are pulled in a thousand others. The modern world’s level of
conflict is higher than ever, and we have internalized it in our own lives.
The solution is a form of retreat inside ourselves, to the past, to more
concentrated forms of thought and action. As Schopenhauer wrote, “Intel-
lect is a magnitude of intensity, not a magnitude of extensity.” Napoleon
knew the value of concentrating your forces at the enemy’s weakest spot——
it was the secret of his success on the battlefield. But his willpower and his
mind were equally modeled on this notion. Single-mindedness of purpose,
total concentration on the goal, and the use of these qualifies against peo
ple less focused, people in a state of distraction—such an arrow will find its
mark every time and overwhelm the enemy.
Casanova attributed his success in life to his ability to concentrate on a
single goal and push at it until it yielded. It was his ability to give himself
over completely to the women he desired that made him so intensely se-
ducfive. For the weeks or months that one of these women lived in his
orbit, he thought of no one else. When he was imprisoned in the treacher-
ous “leads” of the doge’s palace in Venice, a prison from which no one had
ever escaped, he concentrated his mind on the single goal of escape, day
after day. A change of cells, which meant that months of digging had all
been for naught, did not discourage him; he persisted and eventually es-
caped. “I have always believed,” he later wrote, “that when a man gets it
into his head to do something, and when he exclusively occupies himself in
that design, he must succeed, whatever the diliiculties. That man will be-
come Grand Vizier or Pope.”
Concentrate C
1 a single goal, a single task, and beat it into submission.
In the world of power you will constantly need help from other people,
usually those more powerful than you. The fool flits from one person to an-
other, believing that he will survive by spreading himself out. It is a corol-
lary of the law of concentration, however, that much energy is saved, and
more power is attained, by affixing yourself to a single, appropriate source
of power. The scientist Nikola Tesla. mined himself by believing that he
somehow maintained his independence by not having to serve a single
master. He even turned down
P. Morgan, who offered him a rich con-
tract. In the end, Tesla’s “independence” meant that he could depend on
no single patron, but was always having to toady up to a dozen of them.
Later in his life he realized his mistake.
All the great Renaissance painters and writers wrestled with this prob-
lem,
none
more
so than the sixteenth-century writer Pietro Aretino.
Throughout his life Aretino suffered the indignities of having to please this
prince and that. At last, he had had enough, and decided to woo Charles
V, promising the emperor the services of his powerful pen. He finally dis-
covered the freedom that came from attachment to
a single
source of
power. Michelangelo found this freedom with Pope Julius II, Galileo with
the Medicis. In the end, the singie patron appreciates your loyalty and be-
comes dependent on your services; in the long run the master serves the
slave.
Finally, power itself always exists in concentrated forms. In any orga-
nization it is inevitable for a small youp to hold the strings. And often it is
not those with the titles. In the game of power, only the fool llails about
without fixing his target. You must find out who controls the operations,
who is the real director behind the scenes. As Richelieu discovered at the
beginning of his rise to the top of the French political scene during the
LAW 23
I 75
I 76
LAW 23
early seventeenth century, it was not King Louis XIII who decided things,
it was the king’s mother. And so he attached himself to her, and catapulted
through the ranks of the courtiers, all the way to the top.
It is enough to strike oil once—your wealth and power are assured for
a lifetime.
Image: The Arrow. You cannot hit two targets
with one arrow. If your thoughts stray, you
miss the enemy’s heart. Mind and
arrow must become one. Only
with such concentration of
mental
and physical
power can your arrow
hit the target and
pierce the
h e a r t.
Authority: Prize intensity more than extensity. Perfection re»
sides in quality, not quantity. Extent alone never rises above
mediocrity, and it is the misfortune of men with wide general
interests that while they would like to have their finger in every
pie, they have one in none. Intensity gives eminence, and rises
to the heroic in matters sublime. (Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658)
REVERSAI.
There are dangers in concentration, and moments when dispersion is the
proper tactical move. Fighting the Nationalists for control of China, Mao
Tse~tung and the Communists fought a protracted war on several fronts,
using sabotage and ambush as their main weapons. Dispersal is often suit-
able for the weaker side; it is, in fact, a crucial principle of guerrilla warfare.
When fighting a stronger army, concentrating your forces only makes you
an easier ta.rget—better to dissolve into the scenery and frustrate your
enemy with the elusiveness of your presence.
Tying yourself to a single source of power has one preeminent danger:
If that person dies, leaves, or falls from grace, you suffer. This is what hap-
pened to Cesare Borgia, who derived his power from his father, Pope
Alexander VI. It was the pope who gave Cesare armies to fight with and
wars to wage in his name. When he suddenly died (perhaps from poison),
Cesare was as good as dead. He had made far too many enemies over the
years, and was now without his father’s protection. In cases when you may
need protection, then, it is ofien wise to entwine yourself around several
sources of power. Such a move would be especially prudent in periods of
great tumult and violent change, or when your enemies are numerous. The
more patrons and masters you serve the less risk you run if one of them
falls from power. Such dispersion will even allow you to play one off
against the other. Even if you concentrate on the single source of power,
you still must practice caution, and 1 cepare for the day when your master
or patron is no longer there to help you.
Finally, being too singlerminded in purpose can make you an intolera~
ble bore, especially in the arts. The Renaissance painter Paolo Uccello was
so obsessed with perspective that his paintings look lifeless and contrived.
Whereas Leonardo da Vinci interested himself in everything«-architec-
ture, painting, warfare, sculpture, mechanics. Diffusion was the source of
his power. But such genius is rare, and the rest of us are better off erring on
the side of intensity.
LAW 23
1??’
24
PLAYITUEPERFECT
COUKHER
JUDGMENT
The perfect courtier thrives in a world where everything
revolves (mmml power and political dexterity. He has
mastered the art of 2'ndz‘rection; heflutters, yields to supe—
riors, and asserts power over others in the most oblique
and graceful
mzmnex Learn and apply the laws of
ctourtiership and there will be no limit to howfaryou can
zise in the mun‘.
I78
‘
COURT .‘3(C)ClE'l‘Y
It is a fact of human nature that the structure of a court society forms itself
around power. In the past,‘ the court gathered around the ruler, and had
many functions: Besides keeping the ruler amused, it was a way to solidify
the hierarchy of royalty, nobility, and the upper classes, and to keep the
nobility both subordinate and close to the ruler, so that he could keep an
eye on them. The court serves power in many ways, but most of all it glori-
lles the ruler, providing him with a microcosmic world that must snuggle
to please him.
To be a courtier was a dangerous game. A nineteentl1—century Arab
traveler to the court of Darfur, in what is now Sudan, reported that
courtiers there had to do whatever the sultan did: If he were injured, they
had to suffer the same injury; if he fell off his horse during a hunt, they fell,
too. Mimicry like this appeared in couirs all over the world. More trouble
some was the danger of displeasing the ruler-—-one wrong move spelled
death or exile. The successful courtier had to walk a tightrope, pleasing but
not pleasing too much, obeying but somehow distinguishing himself from
the other courtiers, while also never distinguishing himself so far
as to
make the ruler insecure.
Great courtiers throughout history have mastered the science of ma-
nipulating people. They make the king feel more kingly; they make every-
one else fear their power. They are magicians of appearance, knowing that
most things at court are judged by how they seem. Great coui-tiers are grate
citrus and polite; their aggression is veiled and indirect, Masters of the
word, they never say more than necessary, getting the most out of a corn-
pliment or hidden insult. They are magnets of pleasure—people want to be
around them because they know how to please, yet they neither fawn nor
humiliate themselves. Great courtiers become the king’s favorites, enjoying
the benefits of that position. They often end up more powerful than the
ruler, for they are wizards in the accumulation of influence.
Many today dismiss court life as a relic of the past, a historical curios-
ity. They reason, according to Machiavelli, “as though heaven, the sun, the
elements, and men had changed the order of their motions and power, and
were different from what they were in ancient limes.” There may be no
more Sun Kings but there are still plenty of people who believe the sun re-
volves around them. The royal court may have more or less disappeared,
or at least lost its power, but courts and courtlers still exist because power
still exists. A courtier is rarely asked to fall off a horse anymore, but the
laws that govern court politics are as timeless as the laws of power. There is
much to be leamed, then, from great courtiers past and present.
THE LAWS OF COURT POLITICS
Avoid Ostentation. It is never prudent to prattle on about yourself or call
too much attention to your actions. The more you talk about your deeds
Till‘: T\\‘(> l3l)(«.«
Barlms-, the faithful
yard-dog who serves
his niurrcr zealously.
Izappmx to see hix old
zzcqimimuncc’ Juiljmc,
the curly lzapzlzrg, st'au.'a'
at the window on a .vofr
down curlimlr. Siclling
_]'umlIy up it) hm; like u
child (0 u parczm, he all
but weeps with
cnmmm; and them
under the w1'mlnw, ha
whim-‘.s', wags his tail.
and bmmdx about.
"What sort oflife do
you lead, now‘.
loujozuka, ever since
the master’ took you
into his manvlan.’ You
remmzl-wr, no doubt.
how we uflen used to
suffer hunger our in the’
yard. What is your
prexmr service like?
"
“I; would be a sin in
me to murmur againvl
my good farm/w.
"
answers .ll7ujImtku.
"':vl_v muster cmmol
make enough 0] max, I
live anudu riclws and
plenty, and I an! and
drink ojfsilver. I frolic
with I/1{’ mastrr, and, if
I gez tired, I take my
elm: on u7rp€lS or rm (1
sofi couch.Anz1Iww do
you get em?
" “I?
"
replica" Burbo.t_ letting
has mil dangle like :1
whip, zmcl hanging his
head. “I live“ as I Mel!
to do. 1 sufflar from
cold and hunger; and
Iwre. wlzilv gzmrclirzg
my rrzastcriv Ilatdste, I
have to sleep at me [our
ofrho wall, ("MI I get
drenched in the rain.
And iflbark at thi-
wrong time, I am
whip/)i'd. But how did
you. Jaujau, who were
LAW 24
179
so small and weak, gm‘
taken into favor, while
I iump out ofmy skin
to no purpose?
What iv it you do?
"
“ ‘What is it you do?
' A
pretty questirm to ask/”
replies! ./Uujllll. mock-
ingly. “I walk upmz my
him! lugs.
"
FABLFS,
lV/\N KRIl.()l~‘|‘.
17684844
It H‘ it wise’ thing to be
1,11)!/'Ir.'; mrtwquently, it
is a stupid thing to her
rude. To make reizmnies
by unnece
try and
wilful nzcivil
as irzxanc a ])I‘(}CL((lI1[,’
as to sci your house on
fin’. For poIiIe*rws's is
like a muIzter—an
tlvowcrlly _/21/31’ cuin,
Wllh which it is frmlish
to be strrtgy. A scm‘il>l¢'
man will he j{(’.l1.t’.rUl{.\'
in line use of”.
.
.
. Wax,
a .\‘lll7.\‘laI1( e uulumlly
hard and l7¥'i1llt’, can be
nzadr’ soft by 1hz:applz-
mrirm oft: little
warmth, so that it will
Irzkv any shape you
[)leusz'. In the same
way, by beilzg polite
and friendly. you can
make people plirzlilc
um] ulrliging. even
though they are apt to
be zrrabherl and malev-
olent. Henitc polircrmrs
is to human nature
what warmth is to wax.
ARTHUR
S(‘ll()PFNHAUl:R,
1788-1860
130
LAW 23
the more suspicion you cause. You also stir up enough envy among your
peers to induce treachery and backstabbing. Be careful, ever so careful, in
trumpeting your own achievements, and always talk less about yourself
than about other people. Modesty is generally preferable.
Practice Nonchalance. Never seem to be working too hard. Your talent
must appear to flow naturally, with an ease that makes people take you for
a genius rather than a workaholic. Even when something demands a lot of
sweat, make it look effortless——people prefer to not see your blood and toil,
which is another form of ostentation. It is better for them to marvel at how
gracefully you have achieved your accomplishment than to wonder why it
took so much work.
Be Frugal with Flattery. It may seem that your superiors cannot get
enough flattery, but too much of even a good thing loses its value. It also
stirs up suspicion among your peers. Learn to flatter indirectly—by down-
playing your own contribution, for example, to make your master look bet-
ter.
Arrange to Be Noticed. There is a. paradox: You cannot display yourself
too brazenly, yet you must also get yourself noticed. In the court of Louis
XIV, whoever the king decided to look at rose instantly in the court hierar-
chy. You stand no chance of rising if the ruler does not notice you in the
swamp of courtiers. This task requires much art. It is often initially a matter
of being seen, in the literal sense. Pay attention to your physical appear-
ance, then, and find a way to create a dis1inctive—-a subtly distinctive-style
and image.
Alter Your Style and Language According to the Person You Are
Dealing With. The pseudo-belief in equa.lity——the idea that talking and
acting the same way with everyone, no matter what their rank, makes you
somehow a paragon of civilization—is a terrible mistake. Those below you
will take it as a form of condescension, which it is, and those above you will
be ofiended, although they may not admit it. You must change your style
and your way of speaking to suit each person. This is not lying, it is acting,
and acting is an art, not a gift from God. Learn the art. This is also true for
the great variety of cultures found in the modern court: Never assume that
your criteria of behavior and judgment are universal. Not only is an inabil-
ity to adapt to another culture the height of barbarism, it puts you at a dis-
advantage.
Never Be the Bearer of Bad News. The king kills the messenger who
brings bad news: This is a cliche but there is truth to it. You must struggle
and if necessary lie and cheat to be sure that the lot of the bearer of bad
news falls on a colleague, never on you. Bring only good news and your
approach will gladden your master.
Never Afiect Friendliness and Intimacy with Your Master. He does
not want a friend for a subordinate, he wants a subordinate. Never ap-
proach him in an easy, friendly way, or act as if you are on the best of
ten'ns—that is his prerogative. If he chooses to deal with you on this level,
assume a wary nhumminess. Otherwise err in the opposite direction, and
make the distance between you clear.
Never Criticize Those Above You Directly. This may seem obvious,
but there are often times when some sort of criticism is necessary—to say
nothing, or to give no advice, would open you to risks of another sort. You
must learn, however, to couch your advice and criticism as indirectly and as
politely as possible. Think twice, or three times, before deciding you have
made them sufficiently circuitous. Err on the side of subtlety and gentleness.
Be Frugal in Asking Those Above You for Favors. Nothing imitates a
master more than having to reject someone’s request It stirs up guilt and
resentment. Ask for favors as rarely as possible, and know when to stop.
Rather than making yourself the supplicant, it is always better to earn your
favors, so that the ruler bestows them willingly. Most important: Do not ask
for favors on another person’s behalf, least of all a friend’s.
Neverjoke About Appearances or Taste. A lively wit and a humorous
disposition are essential qualifies for a good courtier, and there are times
when vulgarity is appropriate and engaging. But avoid any kind of joke
about appearance or taste, two highly sensitive areas, especially with those
above you. Do not even try it when you are away from them. You will dig
your own grave.
Do Not Be the Court Cynic. Express admiration for the good work of
others. If you constantly criticize your equals or subordinates some of that
criticism will rub off on you, hovering over you like a gray cloud wherever
you go. People will groan at each new cynical comment, and you will irn'~
tate them. By expressing modest admiration for other people’s achieve-
ments, you paradoxically call attention to your own. The ability to express
wonder and amazement, and seem like you mean it, is a rare and dying tal-
ent, but one still greatly valued.
Be Self-observant. The mirror is a miraculous invention; without it you
would commit great sins against beauty and decorum. You also need a mir-
ror for your actions. This can sometimes come from other people telling
you what they see in you, but that is not the most trustworthy method: Ybu
must be the mirror, training your mind to try to see yourself as others see
you. Are you acting too obsequious? Are you trying too hard to please? Do
you seem desperate for attention, giving the impression that you are on the
decline? Be observant about yourself and you will avoid a mountain of
blunders.
LAW 24
‘
131
182
LAW '24
Master Your Emotions. As an actor in a great play, you must learn to cry
and laugh on command and when it is appropriate. You must be able both
to disguise your anger and frustration and to fake your contentment and
agreement. You must be the master of your own face, Call it lying if you
like; but if you prefer to not play the game and to always be honest and up-
front, do not complain when others call you obnoxious and arrogant.
Fit the Spirit of the Tunes. A slight affectation of a past era can be
charming, as long as you choose a period at least twenty years back; wear-
ing the fashions of ten years ago is ludicrous, unless you enjoy the role of
court jester. Your spirit and way of thinking must keep up with the times,
even if the times offend your sensibilities. Be too forward-thinking, how-
ever, and no one will understand you. It is never a good idea to stand out
too much in this area; you are best off at least being able to mimic the spirit
of the times.
Be a Source of Pleasure. This is critical. It is an obvious law of human
nature that we will flee what is unpleasant and distasteful, while charm and
the promise of delight will draw us like moths to a flame. Make yourself the
flame and you will rise to the top. Since life is otherwise so full of unpleas-
antness and pleasure so scarce, you will be as indispensable as food and
drink. This may seem obvious, but what is obvious is often ignored or un-
appreciabed. There are degrees to this: Not everyone can play the role of
favorite, for not everyone is blessed with charm and wit. But we can all
control our unpleasant qualities and obscure them when necessary.
A man who knows the court is master of his gestures, qfhis eyes and
of hisface; he is pmjrmml, imfienetrable; hr diisimulates bad offices,
smiles at his enemies, amtmls his inflation, disguises his passions,
belies his heart, speaks and acts against his feelings.
jam de La B‘r14y£'re, I645~]696
SCENES OF COURT Ll FE: Exemplary Deeds and Fatal Mistakes
Scene 1
Alexander the Great, conqueror of the Mediterranean basin and the Mid-
dle East through to India, had had the great Aristotle as his tutor and men-
tor, and throughout his short life he remained devoted to philosophy and
his master’s teachings. He once complained to Aristotle that during his
long campaigns he had no one with whom he could discuss philosophical
matters. Aristotle responded by suggesting that he take Callisthenes, a for-
mer pupil of Aristotle’s and
a promising philosopher in his own right,
along on the next campaign.
Aristotle had schooled Callisthenes in the skills of being a courtier, but
the young man secretly scoffed at them. He believed in pure philosophy, in
Imadorned words, in speaking the naked truth. If Alexander loved learning
so much, Callisthenes thought, he could not object to one who spoke his
mind. During one of Alexander’s major campaigns, Callisthenes spoke his
mind one too many times and Alexander had him put to death.
Interpretation
In court, honesty is a fool’s game. Never be so self-absorbed as to believe
that the master is interested in your criticisms of him, no matter how accu-
rate they are.
Scene II
Beginning in the Han Dynasty two thousand years ago, Chinese scholars
compiled a series of writings called the 27 Histories, an official biography of
each dynasty, including stories, statistics, census figures, and war chroni-
cles. Each history also contained a chapter called “Unusual Events,” and
here, among the listings of earthquakes and floods, there would sometimes
suddenly appear descriptions of such bizarre manifestations as two—headed
sheep, geese flying backward, stars suddenly appearing in different parts of
the sky, and so on. The earthquakes could be historically verified, but the
monsters and weird natural phenomena were clearly inserted on purpose,
and invariably occurred in clusters. What could this mean?
The Chinese emperor was considered more than a man—he was a
force of nature. His kingdom was the center of the universe, and every-
thing revolved around him. He embodied the world’s perfection. To criti-
cize him or any of his actions would have been to criticize the divine order.
No minister or courtier dared approach the emperor with even the slightest
cautionary word. But emperors were fallihle and the kingdom suffered
greatly by their mistakes. Inserting sightings of strange phenomena into the
court chronicles was the only way to warn them. The emperor would read
of geese flying backward and moons out of orbit, and realize that he was
being cautioned. His actions were unbalancing the universe and needed to
change.
interpretation
For Chinese courtiers, the problem of how to give the emperor advice was
an important issue. Over the years, thousands of them had died trying to
warn or counsel their master. To be made safely, their criticisms had to be
indirect--yet if they were
ton indirect they would not be heeded. The
chronicles were their solution: Identify no one person as the source of criti«
cism, make the advice as impersonal as possible, but let the emperor know
the gravity of the situation.
Your master is no longer the center of the universe, but he still imag-
ines that everything revolves around him. When you criticize him he sees
the person criticizing, not the criticism itself. Like the Chinese courtiers,
you must find a way to disappear behind the warning. Use symbols and
other indirect methods to paint a picture of the problems to come, without
putting your neck on the line.
LAW 24
‘
183
I84
LAW 24
Scene III
Early in his career, the French architect Jules Mansart received commis-
sions to design minor additions to Versailles for King Louis XIV. For each
design he would draw up his plans, making sure they followed Louis’s in-
structions closely. He would then present them to His Majesty.
The courtier Saint-Simon described MansaIt’s technique in dealing
with the king: “His particular skill was to show the king plans that pur»
posely included something imperfect about them, often dealing with the
gardens, which were not Mansart’s specialty. The king,
as Mansart ex-
pected, would put his finger exactly on the problem and propose how to
solve it, at which point Mansart would exclaim for all to hear that he would
never have seen the problem that the king had so masterfully found and
solved; he would burst with admiration, confessing that next to the king he
was but a lowly pupil.” At the age of thirty, having used these methods
time and time again, Mansart received a prestigious royal commission: Al:
though he
was less talented and experienced than
a number of other
French designers, he was to take charge of the enlargement of Versailles.
He was the king’s architect from then on.
Interpretation
As a young man, Mansart had seen how many royal craftsmen in the sen
vice of Louis XIV had lost their positions not through a lack of talent but
through a costly social blunder. He would not make that mistake. Mansart
always strove to make Louis feel better about himself, to feed the king’s
vanity as publicly as possible.
Never imagine that skill and talent are all that matter. In court the
courtier’s art is more important than his talent; never spend so much time
on your studies that you neglect your social skills. And the greatest skill of
all is the ability to make the master look more talented than those around
him.
Scene IV
Jean-Baptiste Isabey had become the unofficial painter of the Napoleonic
court. During the Congress of Vienna in 1814, after Napoleon, defeated,
had been imprisoned on the island of Elba, the participants in these meet-
ings, which were to decide the fate of Europe, invited Isabey to immortal-
ize the historic events in an epic painting.
When Isabey arrived in Vienna, Talleyrand, the main negotiator for
the French, paid the artist a visit. Considering his role in the proceedings,
the statesman explained, he expected to occupy center stage in the paint-
ing. Isabey cordially agreed. A few days later the Duke of Wellington, the
main negotiator for the English, also approached Isabey, and said much
the same thing that Talleyrand had. The ever polite Isabey agreed that the
great duke should indeed he the center of attention.
Back in his studio, Isabey pondered the dilemma. If he gave the spot-
light to either of the two men, he could create a diplomatic rift, stirring up
all sorts of resentment at a time when peace and concord were critical.
When the painting was finally unveiled, however, both Talleyrand and
Wellington felt honored and satisfied. The work depicts a large hall filled
with diplomats and politicians from allover Europe. 011 one side the Duke
of Wellington enters the room, and all eyes are turned toward him; he is
the “center” of attention. In the very center of the painting, meanwhile, sits
Talleyiand.
Interpretafion
It is often very difficult to satisfy the master, but to satisfy two masters in
one stroke takes the genius of a great courtier. Such predicaments are comw
mon in the life of a courtier: By giving attention to one master, he dis-
pleases another. You must find a way to navigate this Scylla and Charybdis
safely. Masters must receive their due; never inadvertently stir up the re
sentment of one in pleasing another.
Scene V
George Brummell, also known as Beau Brummell, made his mark in the
late 1700s by the supreme elegance of his appearance, his popularization of
shoe buckles (soon imitated by all the dandies). and his clever way with
words. His London house was the fashionable spot in town, and Brunnnell
was the authority on all matters of fashion. If he disliked your footwear,
you immediately got rid of it and bought whatever he was wearing. He per-
fected the art of tying a cravat; Lord Byron was said to spend many a night
in front of the mirror trying to figure out the secret behind Brummell’s per-
fect knots.
One of Brummell’s greatest admirers was the Prince of Wales, who
fancied himself a fashionable young
man. Becoming attached
to the
prince’s court (and provided with a royal pension), Brummell was soon so
sure of his‘ own authority there that he took to joking about the prince’s
weight, referring to his host as Big Ben. Since trimness of figure was an im~
portant quality for a. dandy, this was a withering criticism. At dinner once,
when the service was slow, Brummell said to the prince, “Do ting, Big
Ben” The prince rang, but when the valet arrived he ordered the man to
show Brummell the door and never admit him again.
Despite falling into the prince’s disfavor, Brummell continued to treat
everyone around him with the same arrogance. Without the Prince of
Wales’ patronage to support him, he sank into horrible debt, but he main
tained his insolent manners, and everyone soon abandoned him. He died
in the most pitiahle poverty, alone and deranged.
Interpretation
Beau Brummell’s devastating wit was one of the qualifies that endeared
him to the Prince ofWales. But not even he, the arbiter of taste and fashion,
could get away with ajoke about the prince’s appearance, least of all to his
face. Neverjoke about a person’s plumpness, even indirectly—and particu*
larly when he is your master. The poorhouses of history are filled with peo-
ple who have made such jokes at their master’s expense.
LAW 24
‘
185
1.516
LAW 24
Scene VI
Pope Urban VIII wanted to be remembered for his skills in writing poetry,
which unfortunately
were mediocre at best. In
1629 Duke Francesco
d’Este, knowing the pope’s literary pretensions, sent the poet Fulvio Testi
as his ambassador to the Vatican. One of Tes|i’s letters to the duke reveals
why he was chosen: “Once our discussion was over, I kneeled to depart,
but His Holiness made a signal and walked to another room where he
sleeps, and after reaching a small table, he grabbed at bundle of papers and
thus, turning to me with a smiling face, he said: ‘We want Your Lordship to
listen to some of our compositions.’ And, in fact, he read me two very long
Pindaric poems, one in praise of the most hoiy Virgin, and the other one
about Countess Matilde.”
We do not know exactly what Testi thought of these very long poems,
since it would have been dangerous for him to state his opinion freely,
even in
a letter. But he went on to write, “I, following the mood, com-
mented on each line with the needed praise, and, after having kissed His
Holiness’s foot for such an unusual sign of benevolence [the reading of the
poetry], I left.” Weeks later, when the duke himself visited the pope, he
managed to recite entire verses of the pope’s poetry and praised it enough
to make the pope “sojubilant he seemed to lose his mind.”
Interpretation
In matters of taste you can never be too obsequious with your master. Taste
is one of the ego’s pxickliest parts; never impugn or question the master’s
taste-——his poetry is sublime, his dress impeccable, and his manner the
model for all.
_ Scene VII
One afternoon in ancient China, Chao, ruler of Han from 358 to 333 B.C.,
got drunk and fell asleep in the palace gardens. The court crown-keeper,
whose sole task was to look after the ruler’s head apparel, passed through
the gardens and saw his master sleeping without a coat. Since it was getting
cold, the crowrrkeeper placed his own coat over the ruler, and left.
When Chan awoke and saw the coat upon him, he asked his axten»
‘
dants, “Who put more clothes on my body?” “The crowmkeeper,” they
replied. The ruler immediately called for his ofiicial coat—keeper and had
him punished for neglecting his duties. He also called for the
crown-
keeper, whom he had beheaded.
Interpretation
Do not overstep your bounds. Do what you are assigned to do, to the best
of your abilities, and never do more. To think that by doing more you are
doing better is a common blunder. It is never good to seem to be trying too
ha.rd——-it is as if you were covering up some deficiency. Fulfilling a task that
has not been asked of youjust makes people suspicious. If you are a crown-
keeper, be a crowmkeeper. Save your excess energy for when you are not
in the court.
Scene VIII
One day, for amusement, the Italian Renaissance painter Fra Filippo Lippi
(1406-1469) and some friends went sailing in a small boat off Ancona.
There they were captured by two Moorish galleys, which hauled them off
in chains to Barbary, where they were sold as slaves. For eighteen long
months Filippo toiled with no hope of returning to Italy.
On several occasions Filippo saw the man who had bought him pass
by, and one day he decided to sketch this man’s portrait, using burnt
coal~charcoal—from the fire. Still in his chains, he found a white wall,
where he drew a full—length likeness of his owner in Moorish clothing. The
owner soon heard about this, for no one had seen such skill in drawing be-
fore in these parts; it seemed like a miracle, 3. gift from God. The drawing
so pleased the owner that be instantly gave Filippo his freedom and em—
ployed him in his court. All the big men on the Barbary coast came to see
the magnificent color portraits that Fra Filippo then proceeded to do, and
finally, in gratitude for the honor in this way brought upon him, Filippcfs
owner returned the artist safely to Italy.
lnterpretation
We who toil for other people have all in some way been captured by pi-
rates and sold into slavery. But like Fra Filippo (if to a lesser degree), most
of us possess some gift, some talent, an ability to do something better than
other people. Make your master a gift of your talents and you will rise
above other courtiers. Let him take the credit if necessary, it will only be
temporary: Use him as a stepping stone, a way of displaying your talent
and eventually buying your freedom from enslavernent.
Scene IX
Alfonso I of Aragon once had a servant who told the king that the night
before he had had a dream: Alfonso had given him a gift of weapons,
horses, and clothes. Alfonso, a generous, lordly man, decided it would be
amusing to make this dream come true, and promptly gave the servant
exactly these gifts.
A little while later, the same servant announced to Alfonso that he had
had yet another dream, and in this one Alfonso had given him a consider-
able pile of gold florins. The king smiled and said, “Don't believe in
dreams from now on; they lie.”
interpretation
In his treatment of the servant’s first dream, Alfonso remained in control.
By making a dream come true, he claimed a godlike power for himself, if
in a mild and humorous way. In the second dream, however, all appear-
ance of magic was gone; this was nothing but an ugly con game on the set»
vant’s part. Never ask for too much, then, and know when to stop. It is the
master’s prerogative to give——to give when he wants and what he wants,
and to do so without prompting. Do not give him the chance to reject your
requests. Better to win favors by deserving them, so that they are bestowed
without your asking.
LAW 24
157
18!?
‘
LAW 24
Scene X
The great English landscape painter
M. W. Turner (1775-1851)
was
known for his use of color, which he applied with a brilliance and a strange
iridescence. The color in his paintings was so striking, in fact, that other
artists never wanted his work hung next to theirs: It inevitably made every-
thing around it seem dull.
The painter Sir Thomas Lawrence once had the misfortune of seeing
Turner’s masterpiece Cologne hanging in an exhibition between two works
of his own. Lawrence complained bitterly to the gallery owner, who gave
him no satisfaction: After all, someone’: paintings had to hang next to
Tumer’s. But Turner heard of Lawrence’s complaint, and before the exhibi-
tion opened, he toned down the brilliant golden sky in Cologne, making it as
dull as the colors in Lawrence’s works. A friend of Tumer’s who saw the
painting approached the artist with a horrified look: “What have you done
to your picture!” he said. “Well, poor Lawrence was so unhappy,” Turner
replied, “and it’s only lampblack. It’ll wash off after the exhibition.”
Interpretation
Many of a courtier’s anxieties have to do with the master, with whom most
dangers lie. Yet it is a mistake to imagine that the master is the only one to
determine your fate. Your equals and subordinates play integral parts also.
A court is a vast stew of resentments, fears, and powerful envy. You have to
placate everyone who might someday harm you, deflecting their resent-
ment and envy and diverting their hostility onto other people.
Turner, eminent courtier, knew that his good fortune and fame de
pended on his fellow painters as well as on his dealers and patrons. How
many of the great have been felled by envious colleagues! Better temporar-
ily to dull your brilliance than to suffer the slings and arrows of envy.
Scene XI
Winston Churchill was an amateur artist, and after World War II his paint-
ings became collector’s items. The American publisher Henry Luce, in
fact, creator of Time and L2)? magazines, kept one of Churchill’s landscapes
hanging in his private office in New York.
On a tour through the United States once, Churchill visited Luce in his
office, and the two men looked at the painting together. The publisher re-
marked, “It’s a good picture, but I think it needs something in the fore-
ground-—a sheep, perhaps.” Much to Luce’s horror, Churcl1ill’s secretary
called the publisher the next day and asked him to have the painting sent
to England. Luce did so, mortified that he had perhaps offended the former
prime minister. A few days later, however, the painting was shipped back,
but slightly altered:
a single sheep now grazed peacefully in the fore
ground.
Interpretation
In stature and fame, Churchill stood head and shoulders above Luce, but
Luce was certainly a man of power, so let us imagine a slight equality be-
tween them. Still, what did Churchill have to fear from an American pub
lisher? Why bow to the criticism of a dilettante?
A court-—-in this case the entire world of diplomats and international
statesmen, and also of the journalists who court them--is a place of mutual
dependence. It is unwise to insult or olifend the taste of people of power,
even if they are below or equal to you. If 3. man like Churchill can swallow
the criticisms of a man like Luce, he proves himself a courtier without peer.
(Perhaps his correction of the painting implied a certain condescension as
well, but he did it so subtly that Luce did not perceive any slight.) lmitate
Churchill: Put in the sheep. It is always beneficial to play the obliging
courtier, even when you are not serving a master.
THE DELEGATE GAME OF COURTIERSHIP: A Warning
Talleyraud was the consummate courtier, especially in serving his master
Napoleon. When the two
men were first getting to know each other,
Napoleon once said in passing, “I shall come to lunch at your house one of
these days.” Talleyrancl had a house at Auteuil, in the suburbs of Paris. “I
should be delighted,
man général,” the minister replied, “and since my
house is close to the Bois de Boulogne, you will be able to amuse yourself
with a bit of shooting in the afternoon.”
“I do not like shooting,” said Napoleon, “But I love hunting. Are there
any boars in the Bois de Boulogne?” Napoleon came from Corsica, where
boar hunting was a great sport. By asking if there were boars in
at Paris
park, he showed himself still a. provincial, almost a tube. Talleyrand did not
laugh, however, but he could not resist a practical joke on the man who
was now his master in politics, although not in blood and nobility, since
Talleyrand came from an old aristocratic family. To Napoleorfs question,
then, he simply replied, “Very few, man généml, but I dare say you will man-
age to find one.”
It was arranged that Napoleon would arrive at Talleyrand’s house the
following day at seven AM. and would spend the morning there. The “boar
hunt” would take place in the afternoon. Throughout the morning the ex-
cited general talked nothing but boar hunting. Meanwhile, Talleyrand see
cretly had his servants go to the market, buy two enormous black pigs, and
take them to the great park.
After lunch, the hunters and their hounds set off for the Bois de
Boulogne. At a secret signal from Talleyrand, the servants loosed one of the
pigs. “I see a boar,” Napoleon cried joyfully, jumping onto his horse to give
chase. Talleyrand stayed behind. It took half an hour of galloping through
the park before the “boat” was finally captured. At the moment oftriumph,
however, Napoleon was approached by one of his aides, who knew the
creature could not possibly be at boar, and feared the general would be
ridiculed once the story got out: “Sir,” he told Napoleon, “you realize of
course that this is not a bear but a pig.”
Flying into a rage, Napoleon immediately set off at a gallop for Tal-
leyrand’s house. He realized along the way that he would now be the butt
of many a joke, and that exploding at Talleyrand would only make him
LAW 24
'
199
190
LAW 24
more ridiculous; it would be better to make a show ofgood humor. Still, he
did not hide his displeasure well.
Talleyrand decided to try to soothe the general’s bruised ego. He told
Napoleon not to go back to Paris yet-«he should again go hunting in the
park. There were many rabbits there, and hunting them had been a. fa-
vorite pastime of Louis XVI. Talleyrand even offered to let Napoleon use a
set of guns that had once belonged to Louis. With much flattery and cajol—
ery, he once again got Napoleon to agree to a hunt.
The party left for the park in the late afternoon. Along the way,
Napoleon told Talleyrand, “Pm not Louis XVI, I surely won’t kill even one
rabbit.” Yet that afternoon, strangely enough, the park was teeming with
rabbits. Napoleon killed at least fifty of them, and his mood changed from
anger to satisfaction. At the end of his wild shooting spree, however, the
same aide approached him and whispered in his ear, “To tell the truth, sir, I
am beginning to believe these are not wild rabbits. I suspect that rascal T31»
leyrand has played another joke on us.” (The aide was right: Talleyrand
had in fact sent his servants back to the market, where they had purchased
dozens of rabbits and then had released them in the Bois de Boulogne.)
Napoleon immediately mounted his horse and galloped away, this
time returning straight to Paris. He later threatened Talleyrand, warned
him not to tell a soul what had happened; if he became the laughingstock
of Paris, there would be hell to pay.
It took months for Napoleon to be able to trust Talleyrand again, and
he never totally forgave him his humiliation.
Interpretation
Courtiers are like magicians: They deceptively play with appearances,
only letting those around them see what they want them to see. With so
much deception and manipulation afoot, it is essential to keep people from
seeing your tricks and glimpsing your sleight of hand.
Talleyrand was normally the Grand Vlfizard of Courtiership, and but
for Napoleoifs aide, he probably would have gotten away completely with
both pleasing his master and having a joke at the generafs expense. But
courtiership is a subtle art, and overlooked traps and inadvertent mistakes
can ruin your best tricks. Never risk being caught in your maneuvers;
never let people see your devices. If that happens you instantly pass in peo
ple’s perceptions from a courtier of great manners to a loathsome rogue. It
is a delicate game you play; apply the utmost attention to covering your
tracks, and never let your master unmask you.
LAW
25
RE~CREATE YOURSELF
jUDGMEN'I‘
Do net accept the roles that society foists on you.
Re-create yourself by forging a new identity,
one that
commands attention and never bores the audience. Be
the master ofyour own image rather than letting others
define itjbr yaw. Inemyzmate dramatic devices into your
public gestures and actionswyour power will be en-
hanced and your character will seem larger than li e.
1
791
The man who intend;
[0 make 1111.: fortune in
this anciem capfml of
the world [Rome] mam
be a chameleon .m.s'cep-
rible of reflecting the
colors afthe azmo~
sphere that mrrnunzls
him—-(1 Proteus apt to
assume every fomz,
every shape. He must
be supple, flexible,
insinuating, close,
inscrutable, often base,
sometimes sincere.
somesimes perfidious,
always concealing a
par! of his knowledge,
indulging in but one
tone of voice, patient,
a perfect master ofhis
UWII COIJIUEHGIICE’, 05‘
cold at ice when any
other man would be all
fire; and if unforzw
rrdtely he is not religious
at heart—a very
common occurrence
for a soul possessing
the above requisites-
he must have religion
in his mind, that is to
Say, on his face, on his
lips, in his manners; he
must suffer quie1l_v, if
he be an honest man,
the necessity ofknow-
ing himself an armnz
hypocrite. The man
whoxe sou! would
loathe such a life
should leave Rome and
seek his fortune else-
where. I do not know
whether I am praising
or excusing myself’, but
of all those quahtiex I
possesred but one-
namely, flexibility.
MEMOIRS,
GIOVANNI CASANOVA,
17254798
192
LAW 25
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I
Julius Caesar made his first significant mark on Roman society in 65 B.C.,
when he assumed the post of aedile, the official in charge of grain distribu-
tion and public games. He began his entrance into the public eye by orga~
nizing a series of carefully crafted and well~timed spectac|es——wi1d—beast
hunts, extravagant gladiator shows, theatrical contests. On several occa-
sions, he paid for these spectacles out of his own pocket. To the common
man, Julius Caesar became indelibly associated with these muclrloved
events. As he slowly rose to attain the position of consul, his popularity
among the masses served as the foundation of his power. He had created
an image of himself as a great public showman.
In 49 B.C., Rome was on the brink of a civil war between rival leaders,
Caesar and Pompey. At the height of the tension, Caesar, an addict of the
stage, attended a theatrical performance, and afterward, lost in thought, he
wandered in the darkness back to his camp at the Rubicon, the rivet that
divides Italy from Gaul, where he had been campaigning. To march his
army back into Italy across the Rubicon would mean the beginning of a
war with Pompey.
Before his staff Caesar argued both sides, forming the options like an
actor on stage, a. precursor of Hamlet. Finally, to put his soliloquy to an
end, he pointed to a seemingly innocent appaxition at the edge of the
river——a very tall soldier blasting a call on a trumpet, then going across a
bridge over the Rubicon————a.nd pronounced, “Let us accept this as a sign
from the Gods and follow where they beckon, in vengeance on our double»
dealing enemies. The die is cast.” All of this he spoke portentously and dra-
matically, gesturing toward the river and looking his generals in the eye.
He knew that these generals were uncertain in their support, but his ora-
tory overwhelmed them with a sense of the drama of the moment, and of
the need to seize the time. A more prosaic speech would never have had
the same effect. The generals rallied to his cause; Caesar and his army
crossed the Rubicon and by the following year had vanquished Pompey,
making Caesar dictator of Rome.
In warfare, Caesar always played the leading man with gusto. He was
as skilled a horseman as any of his soldiers, and took pride in outdoing
them in feats of bravery and endurance, He entered battle astzide the
strongest mount, so that his soldiers would see him in the thick of battle,
urging them on, always positioning himself in the center, a godlike symbol
of power and a model for them to follow, Of all the armies in Rome, Cae-
sar’s was the most devoted and loyal. His soldiers, like the common people
who had attended his entertainments, had come to identify with him and
with his cause.
After the defeat of Pompey, the entertainments grew in scale. Nothing
like them had ever been seen in Rome. The chariot races became more
spectacular, the gladiator fights more dramatic, as Caesar staged fights to
the death among the Roman nobility. He organized enormous mock naval
battles on an artificial lake. Plays were performed in every Roman ward. A
giant new theater was built that sloped dramatically down the Tarpeian
Rock. Crowds from all over the empire flocked to these events, the roads to
Rome lined with visitors’ tents. And in 45 B.C., timing his entry into the city
for maximum effect and surprise, Caesar brought Cleopatra back to Rome
after his Egyptian campaign, and staged even more extravagant public
spectacles.
These events were more than devices to divert the masses; they dra~
matically enhanced the public’s sense of Caesar’s character, and made him
seem larger than life. Caesar was the master of his public image, of which
he was forever aware. When he appeared before crowds he wore the most
spectacular purple robes. He would be upstaged by no one. He was notori-
ously vain about his appearance—it was said that one reason he enjoyed
being honored by the Senate and people was that on these occasions he
could wear a laurel wreath, hiding his baldness. Caesar was a masterful or-
ator. He knew how to say a lot by saying a little, intuited the moment to
end a speech for maximum effect. He never failed to incorporate a surprise
into
his public
appearances—a startling
announcement
that
would
heighten their drama.
Immensely popular among the Roman people, Caesar was hated and
feared by his rivals. On the ides of March——March 15—in the year 44 B.C.,
a group of conspirators led by Brutus and Cassius surrounded him in the
senate and stabbed him to death. Even dying, however, he kept his sense of
drama. Drawing the top of his gown over his face, he let go of the cloth’s
lower part so that it draped his legs, allowing him to die covered and de-
cent. According to the Roman historian Suetonius, his final words to his
old friend Brutus, who was about to deliver a second blow, were in Greek,
and as if rehearsed for the end of a play: “You too, my child?”
Interpretation
The Roman theater was
an event for the masses, attended by crowds
unimaginable today. Packed into
enormous auditoriums, the audience
would be amused by raucous comedy or moved by high tragedy. Theater
seemed to contain the essence of life, in its concentrated, dramatic form.
Like a religious ritual, it had a powerful, instant appeal to the common
man.
Julius Caesar was perhaps the first public figure to understand the vital
link between power and theater. This was because of his own obsessive in»
terest in drama. He sublimated this interest by making himself an actor and
director on the world stage. He said his lines as if they had been scripted;
he gestured and moved through a crowd with a constant sense of how he
appeared to his audience. He incorporated surprise into his repertoire,
building drama into his speeches, staging into his public appearances. His
gestures were broad enough for the common man to grasp them instantly.
He became immensely popular.‘
Caesar set the ideal for all leaders and people of power. Like him, you
must leam to enlarge your actions through dramatic techniques such as
LAW 25
19.?
194
L AW 25
surprise, suspense, the creation of sympathy, and symbolic identification.
Also like him, you must be constantly aware of your audience——of what
will please them and what will bore them. You must arrange to place your-
self at the center, to command attention, and never to be upstaged at any
cost.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II
In the year 1831, a young woman named Aurore Dupin Dudevant left her
husband and family in the provinces and moved to Paris. She wanted to be
a writer; marriage, she felt, was worse than prison, for it left her neither the
time nor the freedom to pursue her passion. In Paris she would establish
her independence and make her living by writing.
Soon after Dudevant arrived in the capital, however, she had to con
front certain harsh realities. To have any degree of freedom in Paris you
had to have money. For a woman, money could only come through mar»
rlage or prostitution. No woman had ever come close to making a living by
writing. Women wrote as a hobby, supported by their husbands, or by an
inheritance. In fact when Dudevant first showed her writing to an editor,
he told her, “You should make babies, Madame, not literature,”
Clearly Dudevant had come to Paris to attempt the impossible. In the
end, though, she came up with a strategy to do what no woman had ever
donew-a strategy to re-create herself completely, forging a public image of
her own making. Women writers before her had been forced into a ready-
made role, that of the second-rate arfist who wrote mostly for other
women. Dudevant decided that if she had to play a role, she would turn the
game around: She would play the part of a man.
In 1832 a publisher accepted Dudevanfs first major novel, Indium.
She had chosen to publish it under a pseudonym, “George Sand,” and all
of Paris assumed this impressive
new writer was male. Dudevant had
sometimes worn men’s clothes before creating “George Sand” (she had al-
ways found men‘s shirts and riding breeches more comfortable); now, as
a public figure, she exaggerated the image. She added long men’s coats,
gray hats, heavy boots, and dandyish cravats to her wardrobe. She smoked
cigars and in conversation expressed herself like a man, unafraid to domiv
nate the conversation or to use a. saucy word,
This strange “male/female” writer fascinated the public. And unlike
other women writers, Sand found herself accepted into the clique of male
artists. She drank and smoked with them, even carried on affairs with the
most famous artists of Europe—Musset, Liszt, Chopin. It was she who did
the wooing, and also the abandoning-—she moved on at her discretion.
Those who knew Sand well understood that her male persona pro-
tected her from the public’s prying eyes. Out in the world, she enjoyed
playing the part to the extreme; in private she remained herself. She also
realized that the character of “George Sand” could grow stale or pre-
dictable, and to avoid this she would every now and then dramatically alter
the character she had created; instead of conducting affairs with famous
men, she would begin meddling in politics, leading demonstrations, inspir-
ing student rebellions. No one would dictate to her the limits of the charac-
ter she had created. Long after she died, and after most people had stopped
reading her novels, the larger-than—life theatricality of that character has
continued to fascinate and inspire.
Interpretation
Throughout Sand’s public life, acquaintances and other artists who spent
time in her company had the feeling they were in the presence of a man.
But in herjournals and to her closest friends, such as Gustave Flaubert, she
confessed that she had no desire to be a man, but was playing a part for
public consumption. What she really wanted was the power to determine
her own character. She refused the limits her society would have set on her.
She did not attain her power, however, by being herself; instead she cre-
ated a persona that she could constantly adapt to her own desires, a per-
sona that attracted attention and gave her presence.
Understand this: The world wants to assign you a role in life. And
once you accept that role you are doomed. Your power is limited to the
tiny amount allotted to the role you have selected or have been forced to
assume. An actor, on the other hand, plays many roles. Enjoy that protean
power, and if it is beyond you, at least forge a new identity, one of your
own making, one that has had no boundaries assigned to it by an envious
and resentful world. This act of defiance is Promethean: It makes you re»
sponsible for your own creation.
Your new identity will protect you from the world precisely because it
is not “you”; it is a costume you put on and take off. You need not take it
personally. And your new identity sets you apart, gives you theatrical pres-
ence. Those in the back rows can see you and hear you. Those in the front
rows marvel at your audacity.
Do not people talk in society of a man being a great actor? They do not mean by
that that he/"eels, but that he excels in simulating, though hefeels nothing.
I)»m,i.r I)iderot, 1713-1 784
KEYS TO POWER
The character you seem to have been born with is not necessarily who you
are; beyond the characteristics you have inherited, your parents, your
friends, and your peers have helped to shape your personality. The
Promethean task of the powerful is to take control of the process, to stop al-
lowing others that ability to limit and mold them. Remake yourself into a
character of power. Working on yourself like clay should be one of your
greatest and most pleasurable life tasks. It makes you in essence an a11ist—
an artist creating yourself.
In fact, the idea of self—creation comes from the world of art. For thou-
LAW 25
195
196
LAW 25
sands of years, only kings and the highest courtiers had the freedom to
shape their public image and determine their own identity. Similarly, only
kings and the wealthiest lords could contemplate their own image in art,
and consciously alter it. The rest of mankind played the limited role that
society demanded of them, and had little selficonsciousness.
A shift in this condition can be detected in Velézquez’s painting La:
Marinas, made in 1656. The artist appears at the left of the canvas, standing
before a painting that he is in the process of creating. but that has its back
to us——-we cannot see it. Beside him stands a princess, her attendanw, and
one of the court dwarves, all watching him work. The people posing for the
painting are not directly visible, but we can see them in tiny reflections in a
mirror on the back wal]—-—the king and queen of Spain, who must be sitting
somewhere in the foreground, outside the picture.
The painting represents a dramatic change in the dynamics of power
and the ability to determine one’s own position in society. For Velazquez,
the artist, is far more prominently positioned than the king and queen. In a
sense he is more powerful than they are, since he is clearly the one control»
ling the irnage--their image. Velazquez no longer saw himself as the slav-
ish, dependent artist. He had remade himself into a man of power. And
indeed the first people other than aristocrats to play openly with their
image in Western society were artists and writers, and later on dandies and
bohemians. Today the concept of selflcreation has slowly filtered down to
the rest of society, and has become an ideal to aspire to. Like Velazquez,
you must demand for yourself the power to determine your position in the
painting, and to create your own image.
The first step in the process of self—creation is self-consciousness-
being aware of yourself as an actor and taking control of your appearance
and emotions. As Diderot said, the bad actor is the one who is always sin-
cere. People who wear their hearts on their sleeves out in society are tire-
some and embarrassing. Their sincerity notwithstanding, it is hard to take
them seriously. Those who cry in public may temporarily elicit sympathy,
but
sympathy
soon
turns
to
scorn
and
irritation
at
their
self-
obsessiveness-«~they are crying to get attention, we feel, and a malicious
part of us wants to deny them the satisfaction.
Good actors control themselves better. They
can play sincere and
heartfelt, can affect a tear and a compassionate look at will, but they don’t
have to feel it. They externalize emotion in a form that others can under-
stand. Method acting is fatal in the real world. No ruler or leader could
possibly play the part if all of the emotions he showed had to be real. So
learn self-control. Adopt the plasticity of the actor, who can mold his or her
face to the emotion required.
The second step in the process of selflcreation is a Variation on the
George Sand strategy: the creation of a memorable character, one that
compels attention, that stands out above the other players on the stage.
This was the game Abraham Lincoln played. The homespun, common
country man, he knew, was a kind of president that America had never had
but would delight in electing. Although many of these qualifies came natu-
rally to him, he played them up--the hat and clothes, the beard. (No presi-
dent before him had worn a beard.) Lincoln was also the first president to
use photographs to spread his image, helping to create the icon of the
“homespun president.”
Good drama, however, needs more than an interesting appearance, or
a single stand-out moment. Drama takes place over time—~it is an unfold-
ing event Rhythm and timing are critical. One of the most important ele
ments in the rhythm of drama is suspense. Houdini for instance, could
sometimes complete his escape acts in seconds——but he drew them out to
minutes, to make the audience sweat.
The key to keeping the audience on the edge of their seats is letting
events unfold slowly, then speeding them up at the right moment, accord-
ingto a pattern and tempo that you control. Great rulers from Napoleon to
Mao Tseturig have used theatrical timing to surprise and divert their pub
lic. Franklin Delano Roosevelt understood the importance of staging polio»
cal events in R particular order and rhythm.
At the time of his 1932 presidential election, the United States was in
the midst of a dire economic crisis. Banks were failing at an alarming rate.
Shortly after winning the election, Roosevelt went into at kind of retreat.
He said nothing about his plans or his cabinet appointments, He even re~
fused to meet the sitting president, Herbert Hoover, to discuss the transi-
tion. By the time of Roosevelt’s inauguration the country was in a state of
high anxiety.
In his inaugural address, Roosevelt shifted gears. He made a powerful
speech, making it clear that he intended to lead the country in a completely
new direction, sweeping away the timid gestures of his predecessors. From
then on the pace of his speeches and public decisions——cabinet appoint-
ments, bold legislatiori—~unfolded at an incredibly rapid rate. The period
after the inauguration became known as the “Hundred Days,” and its suc-
cess in altering the country’s mood partly stemmed from Roosevelfs clever
pacing and use of dramatic contrast. He held his audience in suspense,
then hit them with a series of bold gestures that seemed all the more mo-
mentous because they came from nowhere. You must learn to orchestrate
events in a similar manner, never revealing all your cards at once, but un-
folding them in a way that heightens their dramatic effect.
Besides covering a multitude of sins, good drama can also confuse and
deceive your enemy. During World War II, the German playwright Bertolt
Brecht worked in Hollywood as a screenwriter. After the war he was called
before the House Committee on Un-American Activities for his supposed
Communist sympathies. Other writers who had been called to testify
planned to humiliate the committee members with an angry emotional
stand. Brecht was wiser: He would play the committee like a violin, charmv
ing them while fooling them as well. He carefully rehearsed his responses,
and brought along some props, notably a cigar on which he puffed away,
knowing the head of the committee hked cigars. And indeed he proceeded
LAW 25
197
to beguile the committee with well—crafted responses that were ambiguous,
funny, and double—edged. Instead of an angry, heartfelt tirade, he ran cir-
cles around them with a staged production, and they let him off scot-free.
Other dramatic effects for your repertoire include the beau geste, an
action at a climactic moment that symbolizes your triumph or your bold-
ness. Caesar’s dramatic crossing of the Rubicon was a beau geste——a move
that dazzled the soldiers and gave him heroic proportions. You must also
appreciate the importance of stage entrances and exits. When Cleopatra
first met Caesar in Egypt, she arrived rolled up in a carpet, which she
arranged to have unfurled at his feet. George Washington twice left power
with flourish and fanfare (first as a general, then as a president who refused
to sit for a third term), showing he knew how to make the moment count,
dramatically and symbolically. Your own entrances and exits should be
crafied and planned as carefully.
Remember that overacting can be counte1productive—it is another
way of spending too much effort trying to attract attention. The actor
Richard Burton discovered early in his career that by standing totally still
onstage, he drew attention to himself and away from the other actors. It is
less what you do that matters, clearly, than how you do it—your graceful-
ness and imposing stillness on the social stage count for more than overdo»
ing your part and moving around too much.
Finally: Learn to play many roles, to be whatever the moment re»
quires. Adapt your mask to the situation-be protean in the faces you wear.
Bismarck played this game to perfection: To a liberal he was a liberal, to a
hawk he
was
a hawk. He could not be grasped, and what cannot be
grasped cannot be consumed.
I
m
a
g
e
:
The Greek Sea—God Proteus.
His power came from his ability to
change shape at will, to be whatever the
moment required. When Menelaus, brother
of Agarnemnon, tried
to
seize him,
Proteus
transformed himself into a lion, then a serpent, a
panther, a boar, running water, and finally a leafy tree.
Authority: Know how to be all things to all men. A discreet Proteus—a
scholar among scholars, a saint among saints. That is the art of winning over
everyone, for like attracts like. Take note of temperaments and adapt your
self to that of each person you meet—follow the lead of the serious and
jovial in turn, changing your mood discreetly. (Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658)
198
LAW 25
REVERSAL
There can really be no reversal to this critical law: Bad theater is bad the-
ater. Even appearing natural requires a.rt—in other words, acting. Bad act-
ing only
creates
embarrassment.
Of
course
you
should
not
be
too
dramatic—avoid the histfionic gesture. But that is simply bad theater any-
way, since it violates centuries-old dramatic laws against overacting. In
essence there is no reversal to this law.
LAW 25
199
LAW
26
KEEP YOUR HANDS CLEAN
JUDGMENT
You
must
seem
a paragon of civility and efficienr.y.'
Your hands
am:
never soiled by
mistakes and nasty
deeds. Maintain suck a spotless appearance by using
others
as scapegoats and catiwpams to disguise your
involvemmt.
200
PART I-. CONCEAL YOUR MIS'I‘AKES-~
HAVE A SCAPEGOAT AROUND TO TAKE THE BLAME
Our good name and reputation depend more on what we conceal than on
what we reveal. Everyone makes mistakes, but those who are truly clever
manage to hide them, and to make sure someone else is blamed. A conve-
nient scapegoat should always be kept amzmdfor such moments.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 1
Near the end of the second century A.D., as China’s mighty Han Empire
slowly collapsed, the great general and imperial minister Ts’ao Ts’ao
emerged as the most powerful man in the country. Seeking to extend his
power base and to rid himself of the last of his rivals, 'Is’ao Ts’ao began a
campaign to take conlrol of the strategically vital Central Plain. During the
siege of a key city, be slightly miscalculoted the timing for supplies of grain
to arrive from the capital. As he waited for the shipment to come in, the
army ran low on food, and Ts’ao Ts’ao was forced to order the chief of
commissariat to reduce its rations.
Ts‘ao Ts’ao kept a tight rein on the army, and ran a network of inform-
ers. His spies soon reported that the men were complaining, grumbling
that he was living well while they themselves had barely enough to eat.
Perhaps Ts’ao Ts’ao was keeping the food for himself, they murmured. If
the grumbling spread, Ts’ao Ts’ao could have a mutiny on his hands. He
summoned the chief of commissariat to his tent
“I want to ask you to lend me something, and you must not refuse,”
Ts’ao Ts’ao told the chief. “What is it?” the chief replied. “I want the loam of
your head to show to the troops,” said Ts’ao Ts’a.o. “But I’ve dope nothing
wrong!” cried the chief. “I know,” said Ts’ao Ts’ao with a sigh, “but if I do
not put you to death, there will be a mutiny. Do not grieve-—a.fter you’re
gone, I’ll look after your family.” Put this way, the request left the chief no
choice, so he resigned himself to his fate and was beheaded that very day.
Seeing his head on public display, the soldiers stopped grumbling. Some
saw through Ts’ao Ts’ao‘s gesture, but kept quiet, stunned and intimidated
by his violence. And most accepted his version of who was to blame, pre-
ferring to believe in his wisdom and fairness than in his incompetence and
cruelty.
Interpretation
Ts’ao Ts’ao came to power in an extremely tumultuous time. In the struggle
for supremacy in the crumbling Han Empire, enemies had emerged from
all sides. The battle for the Central Plain had proven more difficult than he
imagined, and money and provisions were a constant concern. No wonder
that under such stress, he had forgotten to order supplies in time.
Once it became clear that the delay wa.s a critical mistake, and that the
army was seething with mutiny, Ts’ao 'Is’ao had two options: apology and
excuses, or a scapegoat. Understanding the workings of power and the im—
(IIIEIM .lU~:'E'lfili
A great calarnity hefcll
the (own of Chelm one
day. The mwn zrablrler
murrlered one ufltix
customers. So he was
brought before the
judge. who xemenzretl
him 10 die by hanging.
When the verdict was
read a Iownsmcm arose
and cried am, “Ifyour
Humor ple:2.\ex~)-oz:
have semertcerl to death
the town cobbler! He is
the only one we‘ve got.
IIyou hang him who
will mend our shoes?"
“Who? Who?
" cried all
the people of Chelm
with one voice.
The judge nodtlecl in
agreement and recon-
sidered his verdict.
“Good people of
Chelm,
" he said,
“ what
you .s’a_,v is true. Since
we have only one ml)-
hler it would be a great
wrong against me wm—
munlry to let /ilm die.
As zlwre are two
mofers in the town In
one of them be lzcmged
inxlearl.
"
A |‘RliASl;RY or JEWISH
rm.Ki,0Ri‘-..
NA'1‘HA.~ AL:s1'isi~.L. 2:13..
1948
LAW 26
201
202
LAW 20
portance of appearances as he did, Ts’ao Ts’ao did not hesitate for a mo-
ment: He shopped around for the most convenient head and had it served
up immediately.
Occasional mistakes
are inevitable——the world
is just
too nnpre
diciable. People of power, however. are undone not by the mistakes they
make, but by the way they deal with them. Like surgeons, they must cut
away the tumor with speed and finality. Excuses and apologies are much
too blunt tools for this delicate operation; the powerful avoid them. By
apologizing you open up all sorts of doubts about your competence, your
intentions, any other mistakes you may not have confessed. Excuses satisfy
no one and apologies make everyone uncomfortable. The mistake does
not vanish with an apology; it deepens and testers. Better to cut it off in-
stantly, distract attention from yourself, and focus attention on a conve
nient scapegoat before people have time to ponder your responsibility or
your possible incompetence.
I would rather betray the whole world than let the world betray me.
(.‘u7mul '13"ua 'I‘5’ao,
1:. A12. 155-220
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 11
For several years Cesare Borgia campaigned to gain control of large parts
of Italy in the name of his father, Pope Alexander. In the year I500 he
managed to take Romagna, in northern Italy. The region had for years
been ruled by a series of greedy masters who had plundered its wealth for
themselves. Without police or any disciplining force, it had descended into
lawlessness, whole
areas being ruled by robbers and feuding families.
To establish order, Cesare appointed a lieutenant general of the region-—
Remixro de Oreo, “a cruel and vigorous man,” according to Niccolo
Machiavelli. Cesare gave the Orco absolute powers.
With energy and violence, de Orco established a severe, brutal justice
in Rornagna, and soon rid it of almost all of its lawless elements. But in his
zeal he sometimes went too far, and after a couple of years the local popu-
lation resented and even hated him. In December of 1502, Cesare took dc»
cisive action. He first let it be known that he had not approved of de Orco’s
cruel and violent deeds, which stemmed from the lieutenanfs brutal na-
ture. Then, on December 22, he imprisoned cle Drco in the town of Ce-
sena, and the day after Christmas the townspeople awoke to find a strange
spectacle in the middle of the piazza: do Orco’s headless body, dressed in a
lavish suit with a purple cape, the head impaled beside it on a pike, the
bloody knife and executioner’s block laid out beside the head. As Machi-
avelli concluded his comments on the affair, “The ferocity of this scene left
the people at once stunned and satisfied.”
Interpretation
Cesare Borgia was a master player in the game of power. Always planning
several moves ahead, he set his opponents the cleverest traps. For this
Machiavelli honored him above all others in The Prince.
Cesare foresaw the future with amazing clarity in Romagna‘. Only bru-
tal justice would bring order to the region. The process would take several
years, and at first the people would welcome it. But it would soon make
many enemies, and the citizens would come to resent the imposition of
such unforgiving justice, especially by outsiders. Cesare himself, then,
could not be seen as the agent of this justice-—the people’s hatred would
cause too many problems in the future. And so he chose the one man who
could do the dirty work, knowing in advance that once the task was done
he would have to display de Orco’s head on a pike. The scapegoat in this
case had been planned from the beginning.
With Ts’ao Ts’ao, the scapegoat was an entirely innocent man; in the
Romagna, he was the offensive weapon in Cesare’s arsenal that let him get
the dirty work done without bloodying his own hands. With this second
kind of scapegoat it is wise to separate yourself from the hatchet man at
some point, either leaving him dangling in the wind or, like Cesare, even
making yourself the one to bring him to justice. Not only are you free of in-
volvement in the problem, you can appear as the one who cleaned it up.
The Athenians regularly maintained a number ofdegraded and useless
being: at the public expense; and when any calamity, such as plague,
drought, orfamine, befell the city
.
.
. [these smpegoats] were led about
.
.
A
and then sacrificed, appznvntly by being stoned outside: the city.
The Golden Bough. Sirjames Gemge Frazer, 1854-19-71
KEYS TO POWER
The use of scapegoats is as old as civilization itself, and examples of it can
be found in cultures around the world. The main idea behind these sacri-
fices is the shifting of guilt and sin to an outside fig'ure—object, animal, or
man—which is then banished or destroyed. The Hebrews used to take a
live goat (hence the term “scapegoat”) upon whose head the priest would
lay both hands while confessing the sins of the Children of Israel. Having
thus had those sins transferred to it, the beast would be led away and aban-
doned in the wilderness. With the Athenians and the Aztecs, the scapegoat
was human, often a person fed and raised for the purpose. Since famine
and plague were thought to be visited on humans by the gods, in punish‘
ment for wrongdoing, the people suffered not only from the famine and
plague themselves but from blame and guilt. They freed themselves ofguilt
by transferring it to an innocent person, whose death was intended to sat-
isfy the divine powers and banish the evil from their midst.
It is an extremely human response to not look inward after a mistake
or crime, but rather to look outward and to affix blame and guilt on a con-
venient object. When the plague was ravaging Thebes, Oedipus looked
everywhere for its cause, everywhere except inside himself and his own sin
of incest, which had so offended the gods and occasioned the plague. This
profound need to exteriorize one’s guilt, to project it on another person or
object, has an immense power, which the clever know how to harness. Sar-
LAW 26
203
204
LAW 20‘
rifice is a ritual, perhaps the most ancient ritual of all; ritual too is a well-
spring of power. In the killing of de Orco, note Cesa.re’s symbolic and ritu-
alistic display of his body. By framing it in this dramatic way he focused
guilt outward The citizens of Romagna responded instantly. Because it
comes so naturally to us to look outward rather than inward, we readily ac~
cept the scapegoat’s guilt.
The bloody sacrifice of the scapegoat seems a barbaric relic of the
past, but the practice lives on to this day, if indirectly and symbolically;
since power depends on appearances, and those in power must seem never
to make mistakes, the use of scapegoats is as popular as ever. What modern
leader will take responsibility for his blunders? He searches out others
to blame,
a scapegoat to sacrifice. When Mao Tse-tung’s Cultural Rev—
olution failed miserably, he made no apologies or excuses to the Chinese
people; instead, like Ts’ao Ts’ao before him, he offered up scapegoats, in»
cluding his own personal secretary and higlrranking member of the Party,
Ch ’en Po-ta.
Franklin D. Roosevelt had
a reputation for honesty and fairness.
Throughout his career, however, he faced many situations in which being
the nice guy would have spelled political d.isaster—yet he could not be
seen as the agent of any foul play. For twenty years, then, his secretary,
Louis Howe, played the role de Orco had. He handled the backroom deals,
the manipulation of the press, the underhandecl campaign maneuvers. And
whenever a mistake was committed, or a dirty trick contradicting Roo-
sevelt’s carefully crafted image became public, Howe served as the scape-
goat, and never complained.
Besides conveniently shifting blame, a scapegoat can serve as a warn-
ing to others. In 1631 a plot was hatched to oust France’s Cardinal Riche-
lieu from power, a plot that became known as “The Day of the Dupes.” It
almost succeeded, since it involved the upper echelons of government, in«
cluding the queen mother. But through luck and his own connivances,
Richelieu survived.
One of the key conspirators was a man named Marillac, the keeper of
the seals. Richelieu could not imprison him without implicating the queen
mother, an extremely dangerous tactic, so he targeted Marillac’s brother, a
marshal in the army. This man had no involvement in the plot. Richelieu,
however, afraid that other conspiracies might be in the air, especially in the
army, decided to set an example. He tried the brother on trurnped«up
charges and had him executed. In this way he indirectly punished the real
perpetrator, who had thought himself protected, and warned any future
conspirators that he would not shrink from sacrificing the innocent to pro-
tect his own power.
'
In fact it is often wise to choose the most innocent victim possible as a
sacrificial goat. Such people will not be powerful enough to fight you, and
their naive protests may be seen as protesting too much—may be seen, in
other words, as a sign of their guilt. Be careful, however, not to create a
martyr. It is important that ytm remain the victim, the poor leader betrayed
by the incompetence of those around you. If the scapegoat appears too
weak and his punishment too cruel, you may end up the victim of your
own device. Sometimes you should find a more powerful scapegoatm-one
who will elicit less sympathy in the long run.
In this vein, history has time and again shown the value of using a
close associate as a scapegoat. This is known as the “fall of the favorite.”
Most kings had a personal favorite at court, a man whom they singled out,
sometimes for no apparent reason, and lavished with favors and attention.
But this court favorite could serve as
at convenient scapegoat in case of a
threat to the king’s reputation. The public would readily believe in the
scapegoat’s guilt-—why would the king sacrifice his favorite unless he were
guilty? And the other couxtiers, resendul of the favorite anyway, would re-
joice at his downfall. The king, meanwhile, would rid himself of a man who
by that time had probably learned too much about him, perhaps becoming
arrogant and even disdainful of him. Choosing a close associate as a scape-
goat has the same value as the “fall of the favorite.” You may lose a friend
or aide, but in the long—term scheme of things, it is more important to hide
your mistakes than to hold on to someone who one day will probably turn
against you. Besides, you can always find a. new favorite to take his place.
Image: The Innocent Goat. On
the Day of Atonement, the high
priest brings the goat into the
temple, places his hands on its
head, and confesses the pea»
ple’s sins, transferring guilt to
the guiltless beast,
which
is
then led to the wilderness and
abandoned,
the
people’s
sins
and
blame vanishing with
him.
Authority: Folly consists not in committing Folly, but in being
incapable of concealing it. All men make mistakes, but the wise
conceal the blunders they have made, while fools make them pub~
lic. Reputation depends more on what is hidden than on what is
seen. If you can’t be good, be careful. (Baltasar Grecian, 16014658)
LAW 26
2/15
ll ll‘. \i1)\K|-ZV «‘l\|5
'lHI- (',,\'l
A monkey and cat, in
ruguery and fun
Sworn brothel-,9 twain.
lmzh owned a (‘L’)iI7II1(lI’I
masten
Wlmtever mischief in
the lttmse was donut
By Pug and Tom
was crmtriverl carh
dimstur.
.
4
.
One winter's day was
seen this hopeful pair
Close in me kitchen
fire, as usual, posted.
Amongst the rr-d-hot
rrmrlv the cook with
rare
Hm! plat, ‘(I sornr‘ nice
plump chesmuia‘ to be
rrI(1.s‘l:’€(¥’.
From whence in .vmvke
a pmzgerir odor rI).§'€,
Whose oziy /'ragraru:o
struck the rmmkuy ‘.9
t1()A‘¢¢.
“'l‘om!"suy.v sly l’u},*.
"pray amid not you
and!
Share this dessert the
muk is jrluzsed to
cater?
Had I .\'H('}: claws as
yours. l'r1' quickly‘ try:
I 4‘.',1l} me a !IamI——‘1wi1I
be a coup—rie—rnaitre.
“
So said. he seized his
colleagues ready paw,
Puller! our the fruit,
:2()6
LAW 26
PART II: MAKE USE OF THE CAT’S»l’AVV
In thefable, the Monkey grabs the paw ofhisfriend, the Cat, and uses it to
fish chestnuts out ofthefire, thus getting the nuts he craves, without hurt-
ing himself
If there is something unpleasant or unpopular that needs to be done,
it isfor too riskyforyou to do the work yourself You need an catty-{Jaw-—
someone who does the dirty, dangerous work for you. The cat ’5«paw grabs
what you need, hurts whom you need hurt, and keeps peoplefrom noticing
that you are the one responsible. Let someone else be the executioner or the
bearer ofhad news, while you bring zmlyjoy and glad tidings.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAVV I
In 59 B.C., the future queen Cleopatra of Egypt, then ten years old, wit~
nessed the overthrow and banishment of her father, Ptolemy XII, at the
hand of his elder daughters-«her
own sisters.
One of the daughters,
Berenice, emerged as the leader of the rebellion, and to ensure that she
would now rule Egypt alone, she imprisoned her other sisters and mur-
dered her own husband. This may have been necessary as a practical step
to secure her rule. But that a member of the royal family, a queen no less,
would so overtly exact such violence on her own family horrified her sub-
jects and stirred up powerful opposition. Four years later this opposition
was able to return Ptolemy to power, and he promptly had Berenice and
the other elder sisters beheaded.
In 51 B.C. Ptolemy died, leaving four remaining children as heirs. As
was the tradition in Egypt, the eldest son, Ptolemy XIII (only ten at the
time), married the elder sister, Cleopatra (now eighteen), and the couple
took the throne together as king and queen. None of the four children felt
satisfied with this; everyone, including Cleopatra, wanted more power. A
struggle emerged between Cleopatra and Ptolemy, earl: trying to push the
other to the side.
In 48 15.0., with the help of a government faction that feared Cleopa-
tra’s ambitions, Ptolemy was able to force his sister to flee the country,
leaving himself as sole ruler. In exile, Cleopatra schemed. She wanted to
rule alone and to restore Egypt to its past glory, a goal she felt none of her
other siblings could achieve; yet as long as they were alive, she could not
realize her dream. And the example of Berenice had made it clear that no
one would serve a queen who was seen murdering her own kind. Even
Ptolemy XIII had not dared murder Cleopatra, although he knew she
would plot against him from abroad.
Within a year after Cleopatra’s banishment, the Roman dictator Julius
Caesar arrived in Egypt, determined to make the country a Roman colony.
Cleopatra saw her chance: Reentering Egypt in disguise, she traveled hun-
dreds of miles to reach Caesar in Alexandria. Legend has it that she had
herself smuggled into his presence rolled up inside a carpet, which was
gracefully unfurled at his feet, revealing the young queen. Cleopatra imme
diately went to work on the Roman. She appealed to his love of spectacle
and his interest in Egyptian history, and poured on her feminine charms.
Caesar soon succumbed and restored Cleopatra to the throne.
Cleopatra’s siblings seethed—she had outrnaneuvered them. Ptolemy
XIII would not wait to
see what happened next: From his palace in
Alexandria, he summoned a great army to march on the city and attack
Caesar. In response, Caesar immediately put Ptolemy and the rest of the
family under house arrest. But Cleopatra’s younger sister Arsinoe escaped
from the palace and placed herself at the head of the approaching Egyptian
troops, proclaiming herself queen of Egypt. Now Cleopatra finally saw her
chance: She convinced Caesar to release Ptolemy from house arrest, under
the agreement that he would broker a. truce. Of course she knew he would
do the opposite—that he would fight Arsinoe for control of the Egyptian
army. But this was to Cleopatra’s benefit, for it would divide the royal fam-
ily. Better still, it would give Caesar the chance to defeat and kill her sib-
lings in battle.
Reinforced by troops from Rome, Caesar swiftly defeated the rebels.
In the Egyptians’ retreat, Ptolemy drowned in the Nile. Caesar captured
Arsinoe and had her sent to Rome as a prisoner. He also executed the nu»
merous enemies who had conspired against Cleopatra, and imprisoned
others who had opposed her. To reinforce her position
as uncontested
queen, Cleopatra now married the only sibling left, Ptolemy XIV—only
eleven at the time, and the weakest of the lot. Four years later Ptolemy
mysteriously died, of poison.
In 41 B.C., Cleopatra employed on
a second Roman leader, Marc
Antony, the same tactics she had used so well on Julius Caesar. After se-
ducing him, she hinted to him that her sister Arsinoe, still a prisoner in
Rome, had conspired to destroy him. Marc Antony believed her and
promptly had Arsinoe executed, thereby getting rid of the last of the sib
lings who had posed such a threat to Cleopatra.
Interpretation
Legend has it that Cleopatra succeeded through her seductive charms, but
in reality her power came from an ability to get people to do her bidding
without realizing they were being manipulated. Caesar and Antony not
only rid her of her most dangerous siblings—Ptolemy XIII and Arsinoe—
they decimated all of her enemies, in both the government and the mili-
tary. The two men became her cat’s—paws. They entered the fire for her,
did the ugly butnecessary work, while shielding her from appearing as the
destroyer of herlsiblings and fellow Egyptians. And in the end, both men
acquiesced to herldesire to rule Egypt not as a Roman colony but as an in-
dependent allied kingdom. And they did all this for her without realizing
how she had manipulated them. This was persuasion of the subtlest and
most powerful kind.
and rra/mmer/l it in his
jaw.
Now (.‘(lIVll’ the slzining
Mislrms of (h e farm/.
Ami uffin hrlste the
mo marauclerv
scampercd.
Tom for his share of
the plunder had the
pain.
VWtil.\‘l Pug his /mlan:
with the rlairztim
pampered.
h\BLhS.
Jam: 1)}: LA FUN IAIN!-_‘,
16214695
T|lIi(lR()\3;-ill-1.\'. TIIF
(.()I3Rr\. «VD Till",
l,«\(.|\'M.
Once u[Ir)r1
11 time there
war it Crow and /tis wife
who had built (1 next in
11 lzanymi tree./1 big
wzake crawled into {he
hollow Irurtk and are
up my chicks as they
were hmclwd. The crow
did not want to move.
since he loved the tree
dearly, So he went to
his friend the jackalfor
advire. A plan nfaclizm
was zlewlved. The crow
and his wifeflew about
in implemenmlimz.
As the wife approached
ti pond, she saw the
women of the king '5
court bathing, Willi
pearls, rzecklaccs, gems,
garments. and :1 golden
rhum laying on /he
5/mrrr. T/11-' crow-hen
seized the gulrlerr chain
in her beak and flew
toward the btmytm tree
wirh Ihe eunuchs in
pursuit. When she
reached the tree. she
dropped the chain mm
(he hole. As the kings
'
LAW 26
207
men climbed (he tree
for the r-ham, they saw
the swelling hood of
the cobra. So they
killed (he snake with
«Imr ci'uh€, f(‘Ifi(7\/(J6!
the golden cimin, and
went back to the pond.
Am! the (‘row and
his wife iéved /mppiiy
ever after.
A 'I‘A1,e mom THE
PAN('HA‘|‘AN ma,
mx:sz'rnr
‘min.
RF
mzm
Tm: (‘RAFT our rowan,
R.G HS
.1979
HUW T17
|iRU.\I)( .\.\"l' Vl'.\X 5
When Omar. son of
al-Khallab, wax‘
crmverml I0 Islam, he
wanted the news of hit
conversion to reach
everyone quickly. Hr-
went to see Jamil. ran
of Max 'mar ul-Jumalu.
The latter was re-
nowneci for the speed
with which he passed
on ,m'ret.s. [file was
mlrl anyllziizg in confi-
dmce, he let everymze
know about it immedi-
ately. Omar mil! to
him: “I haw i!(N‘l>II'lU a
Musiirrz. Do not say
arivrhirzg. Keep it dark.
[)0 not mmnbn it in
from of anyone,
"
Jamil wen: out into the
.'x‘N'<'ex and began simul-
ing; at the top of/iis
mire.‘ "Do you believe
that Omar, son of al-
Kiumair. has not
become a Muslim?
Well, do not believe
that.’ I am telling you
that he has!"
206i
LAW 26
A queen must never dirty her hands with ugly tasks, nor can a king ap
pear in public with blood on his face. Yet power cannot survive without the
constant squashing of enemies-«there will always be dirty little tasks that
have to be done to keep you on the throne. Like Cleopatra, you need a
Ca.t’s-paw.
This will usually be a person from outside your immediate circle, who
will therefore be unlikely to realize how he or she is being used. You will
find these dupes everywhere——people who enjoy doing you favors, espe
cially if you throw them a minimal bone or two in exchange. But as they
accomplish tasks that may seem to them innocent enough, or at least com-
pletely justified, they are actually clearing the field for you, spreading the
information you feed them, undermining people they do not realize are
your rivals, inadvertently furthering your cause, dirtying their hands while
yours remain spotless.
DBSERVANCE OF THE LAW 11
In the late 1920s, civil war broke out in China as the Nationalist and Com
munist parties battled for control of the country. In 1927 Chiang Kai—shek,
the Nationalist leader, vowed to kill every last Communist, and over the
next few years he nearly accomplished his task, pushing his enemies hard
until, in 1934-1935, he forced them into the Long March, a six-thousand
mile retreat from the southeast to the remote northwest, through harsh ter-
rain, in which most of their ranks were decimated. In late 1936 Chiang
planned one last offensive to wipe them out, but he was caught in a mutiny:
His own soldiers captured him and turned him over to the Communists.
Now he could only expect the worst.
Meanwhile, however, the Japanese began an invasion of China, and
much to Chiang’s surprise, instead of killing him the Communist leader,
Mao Tse~tung, proposed a deal: The Communists would let him go, and
would recognize him
as commander of their forces as well as his, if he
would agree to fight alongside them against their common enemy. Chiang
had expected torture and execution; now he could not believe his luck.
How soit these Reds had become. Without having to fight a rearguard ac-
tion against the Communists, he knew he could beat the Japanese, and
then a few years down the line he would turn around and destroy the Reds
with ease, He had nothing to lose and everything to gain by agreeing to
their terms.
The Communists proceeded to fight the Japanese in their usual fash~
ion, with hit»and-run guerrilla tactics, while the Nationalists fought a more
conventional war. Together, alter several years, they succeeded in evicting
the Japanese. Now, however, Chiang finally understood what Mao had re-
ally planned. His own army had met the bnmt of the Japanese artillery,
was greatly weakened, and would take a few years to recover. The Com~
munists, meanwhile, had not only avoided any direct hits from the japa~
nese, they had used the time to recoup their strength, and to spread out
and gain pockets of influence all over China. As soon as the war against the
Japanese ended, the civil war started aga.in—but this time the Communists
enveloped the weakened Nationalists and slowly beat them into submis-
sion. The Japanese had served as Mao’s cat’s-paw, inadvertently ploughing
the fields for the Communists and making possible their victory over Chi-
ang Kai~shel<.
Interpretation
Most leaders who had taken as powerful an enemy as Chiang Kai-shek
prisoner would have made sure to kill him. But in doing so they would
have lost the chance Mao exploited. Without the experienced Chiang as
leader of the Nationalists, the fight to drive the Japanese out might have
lasted much longer, with devastating results. Mao was far too clever to let
anger spoil the chance to kill two birds with one stone. In essence, Mao
used two cat’s-paws to help him attain total victory. First, he cleverly baited
Chiang into taking charge of the war against the Japanese. Mao knew the
Nationalists led by Chiang would do most of the hard fighting and would
succeed in pushing the Japanese out of China, if they did not have to con-
cern themselves with fighting the Communists at the same time. The Na-
tionalists, then, were the first cat’s—paw, used to evict the Japanese. But
Mao also knew that in the process of leading the war against the invaders,
the Japanese artillery and air support would decimate the conventional
forces of the Nationalists, doing damage it could take the Communists
decades to inflict. Why waste time and lives if the Japanese could do the
job quickly? It was this wise policy of using one cat’s—paw after another that
allowed the Communists to prevail.
There are two uses of the cat’s—paw: to save appearances, as Cleopatra
did, and to save energy and effort. The latter case in particular demands
that you plan several moves in advance, realizing that a temporary move
backward (letting Chiang go, say) can lead to a giant leap forward. If you
are temporarily weakened and need time to recover, it will often serve you
well to use those around you both as a screen to hide your intentions and
as a cat’s~paw to do your work for you. Look for a powerful third party who
shares an enemy with you (if for different reasons), then take advantage of
their superior power to deal blows which would have cost you much more
energy, since you are weaker. You can even gently guide them into hostili-
ties. Always search out the overly aggressive as potential cat’s-paws—they
are often more than willing to get into a fight, and you can choose just the
right fight for your purposes.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW III
Kuriyama Daizen was
an adept of Cha-no—yu (Hot Water for Tea, the
Japanese tea ceremony) and a student of the teachings of the great tea mas-
ter Sen
no Rikyu. Around
1620 Daizen learned that
a friend of his,
Hoshino Soemon, had borrowed a large sum of money (300 ryo) to help a
The news of Omafs
c0nveP.s'i(m to Islam
was spread everywliere.
And that was juxl what
he intended.
1..
‘ Ill'l‘l.l
RUSF3
OOK OF ARABIF
WISDOM AN!) (}llll.l-Z.
1HlR'I‘El:N'1n L'l:Nl'LRY
A l'(>0|. A\lJ \ V Ihli MM
A wise man,
walking alone,
Wm’ being bothered by
a fool throwmg mom,-s
at his head.
Turning /0 face him,
he said:
“My dear chap, wrll
thrown!
Please llCL‘€])l rlxese
few fnmcs.
Yuzfve worked hard
enough 10 get nmrc
than mere thanks.
Every effort deserves‘
its reward.
But see that man over
there? He can afford
More than Iran.
PI‘(’.\‘L’Il1 him with some
afyour stones: lhc>y’ll
earn a good wage."
Lurrad by the hail,
the stupid mun
Rom afflo repeal
the oulmgz-,
On the other worthy
citizen.
'1 us
[me he want '1
paid in money
for his xtnnrs.
Up ruslzczl
serving—mcn.
Amt seized him and
thrmlmd hm: and
broke all his homes.
In the courts 0f kings
(here are pests like this‘,
devoid of reuse:
7'lzey ’II makr: their
LAW 26
209
mnszrrr laugh at your
expen.w.
To .s‘u'm(:r: thzrir ('fl(‘klI‘,,
should you hand out
rough
Pzinixhmmt? Maybe
you ‘re nor .vtmn,g
mouglt.
Bauer persuade them
to attack
Samebolly efxv, who
am more than pay
iherrt back.
.\ELE('l'EU FABLES.
Jr AV or; LA Fnx'miNIv'.
1621-1695
I Hi‘. |\|)l,\\ Bllll)
A merrlmm kip! a bird
in a cage. lie was going
to India, me [mid from
wliich she hirrl zwmt’.
and asked it wlwtiier /11:
maid bring anyimng
back for 2!. The bird
{1$‘f((.’(l for in‘ frecdrml,
Inn was refused. So he
u.\‘l<cr! rim rm'rr/rant to
visit :1 jmlglt: Ill India
and announce his
caplivily lo the [rev
birds whn were there.
The mnrtrhrlrit rift] S17.
and no .S‘(I(IHk'!’ had he
sprxicm wlmn :1 wild
bird, just like his own.
fell senseless no: of :1
mac an to the ground.
Tim merchant Ilzoughr
that this must by a role»
rive afliix own bird,
und /bl: xml rlmt he
slzould have mural t/tis
detlrh.
When he got home, the
hm! a.i'k¢=zl' him whrrtller
he had brought good
news from India,
"No.".wr1'r1 the
anew'chzm!_ “I feel that
my news: is him. (Me of
2!!)
LAW 26
relative who had fallen into debt. But although Soemon had managed to
bail out his relative, he had simply displaced the burden onto himself.
Daizen knew Soemon well—-he neither cared not understood much about
money, and could easily get into trouble through slowness in repaying the
loan, which had been made by it wealthy merchant called Kawachiya
Sanemon. Yet if Daizen offered to help Soemon pay back the loam, he
would refuse, out of pride, and might even be offended.
One day Daizen visited his friend, and after touring the garden and
looking at Soemon’s prized peonies, they retired to his reception room.
Here Daizen saw a painting by the master Kano Tennyu. “Ah,” Daizen ex-
claimed, “a splendid piece of painting.
.
.
. I don’t know when I have seen
anything I like better.” After several more bouts of praise, Soemon had no
choice: “Well,” he said, “since you like it so much, I hope you will do me
the favor of accepting it.”
At first Daizen refused, but when Soemon insisted he gave in. The
next day Soemon in turn received a package from Daizen. Inside it was a
beautiful and delicate vase, which Daizen, in an accompanying note, asked
his friend to accept as a token of his appreciation for the painting that Soe~
mon had so graciously given him the day before. He explained that the
vase had been made by Sen no Rikyu himself, and bore an inscription
from Emperor Hideyoshi. If Soemon did not care for the vase, Daizen sug~
gested, he might make a gift of it to an adherent of Cha«no—yu—-perhaps
the merchant Kawachiya Sanemon, who had often expressed a desire to
possess it. “I hear,” Daizen continued, “he has a fine piece of fancy paper
[the 3()()~ryo I.O.U.] which you would much like. It is possible you might
arrange an exchange.”
Realizing what his gracious friend was up to, Soemon took the vase to
the wealthy lender. “However did you get this,” exclaimed Sanemon,
when Soemon showed him the vase. “I have often heard of it, but this is the
first time I have ever seen it. It is such a treasure that it is never allowed
outside the gate!” He instantly offered to exchange the debt note for the
flower vase, and to give Soemon 300 ryo more on top of it. But Socmon,
who did not
care for money, only wanted the debt note back, and
Sanemon gladly gave it to him. Then Soemon immediately hunied to
Daizen’s house to thank him for his clever support
Interpretation
Kuriyama Daizen understood that the granting of a favor is never simple:
If it is done withfuss and obviousness, its receiver feels burdened by an
obligation. This may give the door a certain power, but it is a power that
will eventually self-destruct, for it will stir up resentment and resistance. A
favor done indirectly and elegantly has ten times more power. Daizen
knew a direct approach would only have offended Soemon. By letting his
friend give him the painting, however, he made Soemon feel that he too
had pleased his friend with a gift. In the end, all three parties emerged from
the encounter feeling fulfilled in their own way.
In essence, Daizen made himself the cat’s-paw, the tool to take the
chestnuts out of the fire. He must have felt some pain in losing the vase, but
he gained not only the painting but, more important, the power of the
courtier. The courtier uses his gloved hand to soften any blows against him,
disguise his scars, and make the act of rescue more elegant and clean. By
helping others, the courtier eventually helps himself. Daizen’s example
provides the paradigm for every favor done between friends and peers:
never impose your favors. Search out ways to make yourself the cat’s—paw,
indirectly extricating your friends from distress without imposing yourself
or making them feel obligated to you.
One should not be too stmightfnrward. Go and see thefzmesz.
The straight trees are cut down, the crooked ones are left standing.
Kuulilya, Indian fzhiloroplmg third century Ii.(1'.
KEYS TO POWER
As a leader you may imagine that constant diligence, and the appearance
of working harder than anyone else, signify power. Actually, though, they
have the opposite effect: They imply weakness. Why are you working so
hard? Perhaps you are incompetent, and have to put in extra effort just to
keep up; perhaps you are one of those people who does not know how to
delegate, and has to meddle in everything. The truly powerful, on the other
hand, seem never to be in a hurry or overburdened. While others work
their fingers to the bone, they take their leisure. They know how to find the
right people to put in the effort while they save their energy and keep their
hands out of the fire. Similarly, you may believe that by taking on the dirty
work yourself, involving yourself directly in unpleasant actions, you im-
pose your power and instill fear. In fact you make yourself look ugly, and
abusive of your high position. Truly powerful people keep their hands
clean. Only good things surround them, and the only announcements they
make are of glorious achievements.
You will often find it necessary, of course, to expend energy, or to ef
fact an evil but necessary action. But you must never appear to be this ac-
tion’s agent. Find 3. cat’s—paw. Develop the arts of finding, using, and, in
time, getting rid of these people when their cat’s-paw role has been ful-
filled.
On the eve of an important river battle, the great third—century Chi
nese strategist Chuko Liang found himself falsely accused of secretly work
ing for the other side. As proof of his loyalty, his commander ordered him
to produce 100,000 arrows for the army within three days, or be put to
death. Instead of trying to manufacture the arrows, an impossible task,
Liang took a dozen boats and had bundles of straw lashed to their sides. In
the late afternoon, when mist always blanketed the river, he floated the
boats toward the enemy camp. Fearing a trap from the wily Chuko Liang,
the enemy did not attack the barely visible boats with boats of their own,
your rclalinm
collapsed tum‘, fell at my
feet when I mmziunwl
your captivity.
"
As won as these wurtls
were xlmken the
merclumt iv bird
mllapx::(l and fell to
the bottom of the urge.
“The news aflzis kirxxv
man '3 (loath has killed
him, run.
” /huught the
merchant. Sorrowful!)
he picked up the bird
and put it on Hlze
wirzduw.\ill. Al once
the bird ruvwcd mm’
flew to 41 nextrby mac.
“Now you know.
" 1/24:
bird mul, “(hm what
you I/laugh: was rlimse
(or was in fact good
news for VIM’. Ami how
the rrmmlge, the
suggc.sIioIz of how In
behtzvc in eI!’dt’!’ to fret’
m_yseIfi was rmnsmzzml
to me through you, my
captur. "And heflaw
mmy, free at last.
m1_|=s <>r"m1«_
DFRVISHEES.
l|)l{lIiS SH/\u,1967
LAW 26
211
l),\\'lD XVI) Il.\'l‘|l*1llV,|i\
.4! {he tum ofthe year,
what; kmgx take the
fluid, David scm ,/oab
out with his other offi-
wrs and all the Lwaeliu'
forces, and they
rxtvtzged Amman and
laid .V'i(‘gl' In Rubhah,
while David nzmuinetl
in Jerm-alum. Om’
evening David got up
front his mud: and, as
he waikrd about on {he
ruofof the pulaw, he
saw from thFri—' a
wmmm bathéng am!
xhe was very beautiful.
He vmr rn inquire who
slit‘ was: and the answer
came, “It muse‘ he
Ihztlzx/zeba. daughter of
Elium and wife of
Uriah the Hirriw
,
.
David wrote a letter to
Joub and sent Uriah
with it. HP wmm in (11?
lrtrnr: “Put Uriah
opposite the enemy
where the fighléng is
fiercest ant? than fit}!
buck, and lcswe him :0
meet his death. ".
.
.
Joab
..
. xfmitzned
Uriah :1: or point where
he knew Ilzry would
put up a xtouljighi. The
men oflhe (fly ta/lied
am and or|g1zgr,’rl.h)uh.
and some of David‘:-
guards fell; Uriah I/ze
Hzlme was zzlvo killed.
Jouh sem David a
dis';m1Ch wirh all the
news ofrhe battle.
.
.
,
When I_:’rwh'.\‘ wife
hoard {hm her husband
was‘ clvsad, size mrmrnezt
for him; and when the
period ofmrzuming
M15 oval: David set»:
for her and brought her
into hm house. She
became his wife and
bore him a SOIL.
or on
waxru.
2 5AM1.r.L. ll --I2
212
LAW 26
but showered them with arrows from the bank. As Liang’s boats inched
closer, they redoubled the rain of arrows, which stuck in the thick straw.
After several hours, the men hiding on board sailed the vessels quickly
downstream, where Chuko Liang met them and collected his 100,000
arrows.
Chuko Liang would never do work that others could do for lu‘m—-he
was always thinking up tricks like this one. The key to planning such a
strategy is the ability to think far ahead, to imagine ways in which other
people can be baited into doing the job for you.
An essential element in making this strategy work is to disguise your
goal, shrouding it in mystery, like the strange enemy boats appearing
dimly in the mist. When your rivals cannot be sure what you are after, they
will reaxzt in ways that often work against them in the long run. In fact they
will become your ca3.’s-paws. If you disguise your intentions, it is much eas-
ier to guide them into moves that accomplish exactly what you want done,
but prefer not to do yourself. This may require planning several moves in
advance, like a billiard ball that bounces off the sides a few times before
heading into the right pocket;
The early-twentieth-century American
con artist Yellow Kid Weil
knew that no matter how skillfully he horned in on the perfect wealthy
sucker, if he, a stranger, approached this man directly, the sucker might be-
come suspicious. So Weil would find someone the sucker already knew to
serve as a cat‘s—paw——-someone lower on the totem pole who was himself
an unlikely target, and would therefore be less suspicious. Weil would in-
terest this man in a scheme promising incredible wealth. Convinced the
scheme was for real, the cat’s—paw would often suggest, without prompting,
that his boss or wealthy friend should get involved: Having more cash to
invest, this man would increase the size of the pot. making bigger bucks for
all concerned. The cat‘s-paw would then involve the wealthy sucker who
had been Weil’-s target all along, but who would not suspect a trap, since it
was his trusty subordinate who had roped him in. Devices like this are
often the best way to approach a person of power: Use an associate or sub
ordinate to hook you up with your primary target. The cat’s-paw estalr
lishes your credibility and shields you from the unsavory appearance of
being too pushy in your courtship.
The easiest and most effective way to use a cat’s-paw is often to plant
information with him that he will then spread to your primary target. False
or planted information is a powerful tool, especially if spread by a dupe
whom no one suspects. You will find it very easy to play innocent and dis-
guise yourself as the source.
The strategic therapist Dr. Milton H. Erickson would often encounter
among his patients a married couple in which the wife Wanted the therapy
but the husband absolutely refused it Rather than wasting energy trying to
deal with the man directly, Dr. Erickson would see the wife alone, and as
she talked he would interject interpretations of the husband’s behavior that
he knew would rile the husband up if he heard them. Sure enough, the wife
would tell her husband what the doctor had said. After a few weeks the
husband would he so furious he would insist on joining his wife in the ses-
sions so he could set the doctor straight.
Finally, you may well find cases in which deliberately offering yourself
as the cat’s-paw will ultimately gain you great power. This is the ruse of the
perfect courtier. Its symbol is Sir Walter Raleigh, who once placed his own
cloak on the muddy ground so that Queen Elizabeth would not sully her
shoes. As the instrument that protects a master or peer from unpleasant
ness or danger, you gain immense respect, which sooner or later will pay
dividends. And remember: If you can make your assistance subtle and gra—
cious rather than boastful and burdensome, your recompense will be that
much the more satisfying and powerful.
Image: The Cat’s-Paw.
It has long claws to grab
things.
It
is
soft
and
padded. Take hold of the cat
and
use
its paw
to pluck
things out of the lire, to claw
your enemy, to play with the
mouse before devouring it.
Sometimes you hurt the
cat, but
most often it
doesn't feel
a thing.
Authority: Do everything pleasant yourself, everything unpleas-
am through third parties. By adopting the first course you win
favor, by taking the second you deflect ill will. lmp()l‘laI1l. affairs
often require rewards and punishments. Let only the good come
from you and the evil from others. (Baltasar Graciém, lti0l—l658)
LAW 26
213
214
LAW 26
REVERSAI.
The cat’s~paw and the scapegoat must be used with extreme caution and
delicacy. They are like screens that hide your own involvement in dirty
work from the public; if at any moment the screen is lifted and you are
seen
as the manipulator, the puppet master, the whole dynamic aims
around—your hand will be seen everywhere, and you will be blamed for
misfortunes you may have had nothing to do with. Once the truth is re
vealed, events will snowball beyond your control.
In 1572, Queen Catherine de’ Médicis of France conspired to do away
with Gaspard de Coligny, an admiral in the French navy and a leading
member of the Huguenot (French Protestant) community. Coliguy was
close to Catherine’s son, Charles IX, and she feared his growing influence
on the young king. So she arranged for a member of the Guise family, one
of the most powerful royal clans in France, to assassinate him.
Secretly, however, Catherine had another plan: She Wanted the Hu-
guenots to blame the Guises for killing one of their leaders, and to take re
venge. With one blow, she would erase or injure two threatening rivals,
Coligny and the Guise family. Yet both plans went awry. The assassin
missed his target, only wounding Coligny; knowing Catherine
as his
enemy, he strongly suspected it was she who had set up the attack on him,
and he told the king so. Eventually the failed assassination and the argu-
ments that ensued from it set off a chain of events that led to a bloody civil
war between Catholics and Protestants, culminating in the horrifying Mas
sacre of St. Bartholomew’s Eve, in which thousands of Protestants were
killed.
If you have to use a cat’s—paw or a scapegoat in an action of great con-
sequence, be very careful: Too much can go wrong. It is often wiser to use
such dupes in more innocent endeavors, where mistakes or miscalculations
will cause no serious harm.
Finally, there are moments when it is advantageous to not disguise
your involvement or responsibility, but rather to take the blame yourself
for some mistake. If you have power and are secure in it, you should some
times play the penitent: With a sorrowful look, you ask for forgiveness
from those weaker than you. It is the ploy of the king who makes a show of
his own sacrifices for the good of the people. Similarly, upon occasion you
may want to appear as the agent of punishment in order to instill fear and
trembling in your subordinates. Instead of the ca.t‘s~paw you show your
own mighty hand as a threatening gesture. Play such a card sparingly. If
you play it too often, fear will turn into resentment and hatred. Before you
know it, such emotions will spark a vigorous opposition that will someday
bring you down. Get in the habit of using a cat’s-paw——it is far safer.
LAW
27
PLAY ON PEOPLE’S NEED
TO BELIEVE TO CREATE A
CULTLIKE FOLLOWING
JUDGMENT
People have an a-uerwhelming desire to believe in some»
thing. Become the focal point of such desire by qflmng
them a cause,
a new faith to follow. Keep your words
vague butfull £_1f[l7‘()miSI?,' emphasize enthusiasm over m-
tionality and clear thinking. Give your new disciples rit-
uals to peifom, ask them to make sacrifices on your
behaifl In the absence of organized religion and grand,
emeses, your new beiief system will bring you imtald
powex
It wus In the clzarlatarzir
uzlvanmgrt that the indi-
viduals prezlisposed to
rredulily skortid marital
ply, that the groups of
his adherents should
enlarge lo mas:
proportions, guarantee-
ing an ever greater
scope for his m'umpIi.s:
And this was in fact to
occur, ll.l' science was
popularizied, from the
Remzzsmnce on down
rhrouglz wcceeding
cenrlzriirs. With the
imrnense growth of
krmwlredgre and its
wrtead tlmmgli prinI~
ing in mmlenri times,
the rrxmw of the half
edzwulvd, the eagerl_v
gullible prey ofihe
qllack, also increu.s‘e¢1,
[Iemrrze indeed a
nmjorify; roal power
could bf’ based on their
wixfzns. <)])ini(ms, pref-
erences. and rejections.
The ch/Ir/mun’s empire
accordingly widwied
with the modern
tlfiyseminizliorr of
knowledge; .s'irrn* hf‘
opcramrl on lhre basis
of h‘Clt!I1C(’, however
much he perverted ii,
prottzwing gold with a
Icriznit/ue borrowed
from clicrrilstry and his
womlorful balsums
with /he rl[)[)[II£Itui' of
mctlidne, he could not
appeal 10 mt cmirely
ignomrzl foe‘/c. '1"/te illit~
emze would bu
protected ugaim! lulr
uh.snrdlrim' by their
hetIl1Iz_V common sense.
llis choicest umiimz.-e
would be ztompoxcaf of
the 5't’I7lllll('I1)!(’. thme
who had exclzangecl
thvir crmmzvn sense /2):
Ll litlle dixlorred infer.
marina and Imrl
216
LAW 27
THE SCIENCE OF Cl-IARLATANISM,
OR HOW TO CREATE A CULT lN FIVE EASY STEPS
In searching, as you must, for the methods that will gain you the most
power for the least effort, you will find the creation of a cultlike following
one of the most elfective. Having a large following opens up all sorts of
possibilities for deception; not only will your followers worship you, they
will defend you from your enemies and will voluntarily take on the work of
enticing others tojoin your fledgling cult. This kind of power will lift you to
another realm: You will no longer have to struggle or use subterfuge to en-
force your will. You are adored and can do no wrong.
You might think it a gargantuan task to create such a following, but in
fact it is fairly simple. As humans, we have a desperate need to believe in
something, anything. This makes us eminently gullible: We simply cannot
endure long periods of doubt, or of the emptiness that comes from a lack of
something to believe in. Dangle in front of us some new cause, elixir, get-
rich-quick scheme, or the latest technological trend or art movement and
we leap from the water as one to take the bait. Look at history: The chroni-
cles of the new trends and cults that have made a mass following for them-
selves could fill a library. After a few centuries, a few decades, a few years,
a few months, they generally look ridiculous, but at the time they seem so
attractive, so transcendental, so divine.
Always in a rush to believe in something, we will manufacture saints
and faiths out of nothing. Do not let this gullibility go to waste: Make your»
self the object of worship. Make people form a cult around you.
The great European Charlatans of the sixteenth and seventeenth ten»
turies mastered the art of cultmaking. They lived, as we do now, in a time
of transformation: Organized religion was on the wane, science on the rise.
People were desperate to mlly around a new cause or faith. The Charlatans
had begun by peddling health elixirs and alchernic shortcuts to wealth.
Moving quickly from town to town, they originally focused
on small
groups—until, by accident, they stumbled on a truth of human nature:
The larger the group they gathered around themselves, the easier it was to
deceive.
The charlatan would station himself on a high wooden platform (hence
the term “mountebank”) and crowds would swarm around him. In a group
setting, people were more emotional, less able to reason. Had the charlatan
spoken to them individually, they might have found him ridiculous, but lost
in a crowd they got caught up in a communal mood of rapt attention. It be
came impossible for them to find the distance to be skeptical, Any deficien-
cies in the charlatan’s ideas were hidden by the zeal of the mass. Passion
and enthusiasm swept through the crowd like a contagion, and they reacted
violently to anyone who dared to spread a seed of doubt. Both consciously
studying this dynamic over decades of experiment and spontaneously
adapting to these situations as they happened, the charlatans perfected the
science of attracting and holding a crowd, molding the crowd into followers
and the followers into a cult.
The gimmicks of the Charlatans may seem quaint today, but there are
thousands of charlatans among us still, using the same tried~a:nd—true meth~
ods their predecessors refined centuries ago, only changing the names of
their elixirs and modernizing the look of their cults. We find these latter»
day charlatans in all arenas of life-~business, fashion, politics, art. Many of
them, perhaps, are following in the charlatan tradition without having any
knowledge of its history, but you can he more systematic and deliberate.
Simply follow the five steps of cultmaking that our charlatan ancestors per-
fected over the years.
Step 1: Keep It Vague; Keep It Simple. To create a cult you must first
attract attention. This you should do not through actions, which are too
clear and readable, but through words, which are hazy and deceptive. Your
initial speeches, conversations, and interviews must include two elements:
on the one hand the promise of something great and transformative, and
on the other a. total vagueness. This combination will stimulate all kinds of
hazy dreams in your listeners, who will make their own connections and
see what they want to see.
To make your vagueness attractive, use words of great resonance but
cloudy meaning, words full of heat and enthusiasm. Fancy titles for simple
things are helpful, as are the use of numbers and the creation of new words
for vague concepts. All of these create the impression of specialized knowl
edge, giving you a veneer of profunclity. By the same token, try to make the
subject ofyour cult new and fresh, so that few will understand it. Done right,
the combination of vague promises, cloudy‘ but alluring concepts, and fiery
enthusiasm will stir people’s souls and a group will form around you.
Talk :00 vaguely and you have no credibility. But it is more dangerous
to be specific. If you explain in detail the benefits people will gain by fol-
lowing your cult, you will be expected to satisfy them.
As
a corollary to its vagueness your appeal should also be simple.
Most peop1e’s problems have complex causes: deep-rooted neurosis, inter
connected social factors, roots that go way back in time and are exceed-
ingly hard to unravel. Few, however, have the patience to deal with this;
most people want to hear that a simple solution will cure their problems.
The ability to offer this kind of solution will give you great power and build
you a following. Instead of the complicated explanations of real life, return
to the primitive solutions of our ancestors, to good old country remedies, to
mysterious panaceas.
Step 2: Emphasize the Visual and the Sensual over the Intellectual.
Once people have begun to gather around you, two dangers will present
themselves: boredom and skepticism. Boredom will make people go else
where; skepticism will allow them the distance to think rationally about
whatever it is you are offering, blowing away the mist you have artfully cre-
ated and revealing your ideas for what they are. You need to arouse the
bored, then, and ward off the cynics.
encountered science
and education at some
time, thong/1 briefly
and un.s'ur¢:e.s-sful/y.
,
.
.
The gieut rnasxr of
mankind has always
been predisposed to
marvel at mysteries,
and thil‘ was especially
true! at (terrain Iiisrorrk
periurls when the
Secure foundations of
life seemed shaken and
oltfvalues, ccorzamzc or
spiritual, long accepted
as cortairzliea. could no
longer be relied upon.
The» the zzumbrmr of
the clzarlaranis dupes
mulu'p1iedr—rhe “self
killers,
" as :2 seven-
ll.'emh~c<mmry English-
man called them.
’l'llE POWER 01-‘ rue
t:nA1U.A'I‘AN.
Gkrirr, or, Fxaxmsco,
I939
llil" OWL XYHU
\V'AS (41)!)
Onztr upon a starlets
mitlriight there was rm
owl who sat on the
branch of an oak tree.
Two ground moles
tried to slip quietly by,
tmnoliced. "You!"sm'd
the owl,
“ W/m?
" they
quuvenrd. infear and
arzvmishrriezzr, for they
could not believe it was
possible for anyone [0
are them in than thick
dnrklwrs. “You two?"
said the owl. The moles
hurried away and told
the rather creatures of
the field and _forest that
the owl was the grcalrwl
and Wi.YE.S'f o/‘all
am'mal.s because he
could see in the dark
and because he could
artxwer any que.s'tt‘on.
“I'll see about that,"
said a Secretary bird,
nmrl he called on the
owl one night when it
was again very dark.
“How tmmy claws am I
holding up?
" raid the
secretary bird. "Two,"
saitl the owl, and that
was right. “Can you
give me another
expression for ‘that l.‘.’
to say
' or ’namely."‘
"
asked the secretary
bird. "To wit.
" Said the
owl. “Why does’ a lover
call on his love?" asked
the secretary biril. “To
woo," said the owl.
The secretary bird
llll.S’l(’I’llitl lmtrk In the
other creatures and
reported that the owl
was indeed Iltt,’ grerttest
aml wisest animal in
the world because he
could see in the tlarlt
and because he vault!
lUl.\'Wt'f any (/tie.
ion.
"Catt he see in the
zlu_vtt'me, too?" asked 61
red for,
“ Yes,
" echoed a
durrrmure and a
Frertch poodle. "Fan he
see in the ilaytitrte,
too?
" All the other
creatures laughed
loudly at this silly ques-
tion, and they set upon
the red fox and his
friends and drove them
out nftbe region. Then
they .l‘l‘I'II a rnemtertger
to the owl and asked
him to be their leader.
When the owl appeared
among the uhintalr it
was high noon and the
sun was sltining
brightly. He walked
very slowly, which gave
him an uppearartire of
great dignity, and he
peered about him with
large, starirzg eyes,
which gave him an air
The best way to do this is through theater, or other devices of its kind.
Surround yourself with luxury, dazzle your followers with visual splendor,
fill their eyes with spectacle. Not only will this keep them from seeing the
ridiculousness of your ideas, the holes in your belief system, it will also at-
tract more attention, more followers. Appeal to all the senses: Use incense
for scent, soothing music for hearing, colorful charts and graphs for the
eye. You might even tickle the mind, perhaps by using new technological
gadgets to give your cult a pseudo-scientific veneer-—as long as you do not
make anyone really think. Use the exotic—-distant cultures, strange cus-
toms—to create theatrical effects, and to make the most banal and ordinary
affairs seem signs of something extraordinary.
Step 3: Borrow the Forms of Organized Religion to Structure the
Group. Your cultlike following is growing; it is time to organize it. Find a
way both elevating and comforting. Organized religions have long held un-
questioned authority for large numbers of people, and continue to do so in
our supposedly secular age. And even if the religion itself has faded some,
its forms still resonate with power. The lofty and holy associations of orga-
nized religion can be endlessly exploited. Create rituals for your followers;
organize them into a hierarchy, ranking them in grades of sanctity, and giv-
ing them names and titles that resound with religious overtones; ask them
for sacrifices that will fill your coffers and increase your power. To empha-
size your gathering’s quasireligious nature, talk and act like a prophet. You
are not a dictator, after all; you are a priest, a guru, a sage, a shaman, or any
other word that hides your real power in the mist of religion.
Step 4: Disguise Your Source of Income. Your group has grown, and you
have structured it in a churchlike form. Your coffers are beginning to fill
with your followers’ money. Yet you must never be seen as hungry for
money and the power it brings. It is at this moment that you must disguise
the source of your income.
Your followers want to believe that if they follow you all sorts of good
things will fall into their lap. By surrounding yourself with luxury you be-
come living proof of the soundness of your belief system. Never reveal that
your wealth actually comes from your followers’ pockets; instead, make it
seem to come from the truth of your methods. Followers will copy your
each and every move in the belief that it will bring them the same results,
and their imitative enthusiasm will blind them to the charlatan nature of
your wealth.
Step 5: Set Up an Us-Versus—Them Dynamic. The group is new large
and thriving, a magnet attracting more and more particles. If you are not
careful, though, inertia will set in, and time and boredom will demagnetize
the group. To keep your followers united, you must now do what all reli-
gions and belief systems have done: create an us—versus—thern dynamic.
First, make sure your followers believe they are part of an exclusive
club, unified by a bond of common goals. Then, to strengthen this bond,
manufacture the notion of a devious enemy out to ruin you. There is a
force of nonbelievers that will do anything to stop you. Any outsider who
tries to reveal the charlatan nature of your belief system can now be de-
scribed as a member of this devious force.
If you have no enemies, invent one. Given
a straw man to react
against, your followers will tighten and cohere. They have your cause to
believe in and infidels to destroy.
OBSERVANCES OF ’l‘l.-i E LAW
Observance I
In the year 1653, a twenty»seven-ye-arclcl Milan man named Francesco
Giuseppe Borri claimed to have had a vision. He went around town telling
one and all that the archangel Michael had appeared to him and
an-
nounced that he had been chosen to be the mpitano generale of the Army
of the New Pope,
an army that would seize and revitalize the world.
The archangel had further revealed that Born‘ now had the power to see
people’s souls, and that he would soon discover the phi1osopher’s stone-a
longsought--after substance that could change
base metals into gold.
Friends and acquaintances who heard Borri explain the vision, and who
witnessed the change that had come over him, were impressed, for Born‘
had previously devoted himself to a life of wine, women, and gambling.
Now he gave all that up, plunging himself into the study of alchemy and
talking only of mysticism and the occult.
The transformation was so sudden and miraculous, and Borri’s words
were so filled with enthusiasm, that he began to create a following. Unfor-
tunately the Italian Inquisition began to notice him as well—they prose-
cuted anyone who delved into the occult—so he left Italy and began to
wander Europe, from Ausuia to Holland, telling one and all that “to those
who follow me all joy shall be granted.” Wherever Borri stayed he
at—
tracted followers. His method was simple: He spoke of his vision, which
had grown more and more elaborate, and offered to “look into” the soul of
anyone who believed him (and they were many). Seemingly in a trance, he
would stare at this new follower for several minutes, then claim to have
seen the person’s soul, degree of enlightenment, and potential for spiritual
greatness. If what he saw showed promise, he would add the person to his
growing order of disciples, an honor indeed.
The cult had six degrees, into which the disciples were assigned ac-
cording to what Borri had glimpsed in their souls. With work and total de
votion to the cult they could graduate to a higher degree. Borri-—-whom
they called “His Excellency,” and “Universal Doctor”--demanded from
them the strictest vows of poverty. All the goods and moneys they pos-
sessed had to be turned over to him. But they did not mind handing over
their property, for Borri had told them, “I shall soon bring my chemical
aftremendous impor«
Il1l"!("t’. "H63 Gtxdl”
scnzurrmd a Plymouth
Rock hen. And the
or/zen molt up the cry
"He's God?" So they
followed him wherever
he went and wlmri he
began to bump into
things Ilwy began to
bump into zliings, (on.
Finally he came to (1
mrzcrely highway and
he started up the
middle ufii and all the
other crcamres
followed him. Presently
a hawk. who was acting
as outridrzr, observed a
(ruck mming toward
them arfifty miles‘ an
hum; and he rcprzrlctl
to {hit secretary bird
and the secretary bird
reported to the owl.
“Tlu?re’.r danger
tlliearl.
" said the re: re-
mry bird. “To wit?
"
said the nwl. The score-
mry bird told him.
“Areri '1 you u[rtu't‘l."'
Ila asked. “Who?
" will
/he owl calmly, for he
could not .w«- (he truck.
"[Ie's God!"
rind all
the ¢:re11ture.s‘ again, and
they were still cry-in‘i,~
"Heir God!" when the
mack hi: them and run
them down. Some of
the animals‘ were
merely mjurwl, [ml
most ofthem, imiludmg
the owl. were killed.
Moral: You can fun! too
many of the people too
much alike lime.
‘rm: ‘I1mkur.R
< ARNWAL,
JAMES Ti-iuzsr-Lu
,
l894~l 96$
LAW 27
219
Tn became the fmmdpr
ofa new religion one
must be psychologi-
cally infallible in one‘.s
kriowledge (Ifu cerium
average type ofsuuls
who have not yet
recognized that KIM)‘
belong together.
FRKEDRXCII NIETZSCHI-.
1844-1 ‘J00
Mm are so simpfe of
mind, and so much
cfmmrmrrrl by tlmr
immediate ueerls. that it
arreilful mun will
a1wa_vS_firid plerzzv who
are 1-eady to he
cleczzivcél.
Ni(‘(,()l.C) Nlz\('HlAV(~J L1.
l«169— i527
Till’, Tl-'.\l[’|,F
(W llIC\l'l'll
[In die lure I 7305] the
Srolnsli quark Jumas
Graham
.
.
. was
winning a large follow-
ing and grztm richm in
Ixmdnn.
.
.
. [Graham]
maimtzimed a show af
great sL'icnti/it lL’(’]l-
niqzw. In 1772.
4
. he
had visited I"hiIuclel-
phiu. where he mm
Benjamin Franklin and
beamzr inn»rc.vml in
the lam-r‘v E'.V]7i’V'1rI!¢’Hls
with Pl£(‘Yrit‘iIV. 7’lw.vi>
upperzr to lmvrr Inspirierl
the apparatus in thr
“Temple of Ilealrh,
"
220
LAW 27
studies to a happy conclusion by the discovery of the phil0sopher’s stone,
and by this means we shall all have as much gold as we desire.”
Given his growing wealth, Barri began to change his style of living.
Renting the most splendid apartment in the city into which he had tem-
porarily settled, he would furnish it with fabulous furniture and accessories,
which he had begun to collect. He would drive through the city in a coach
studded with jewels, with six magnificent black horses at its head. He never
stayed too long in one place, and when he disappeared, saying he had
more souls to gather into his flock, his reputation only grew in his absence.
He became famous, although in fact he had never done a single concrete
thing.
From all over Europe, the blind, the crippled, and the desperate came
to visit Borri, for word had spread that he had healing powers. He asked no
fee for his services, which only made him seem more marvelous, and in-
deed some claimed that in this or that city he had performed a miracle
cure. By only hinting at his accomplishments, he encouraged people’s
imaginations to blow them up to fantastic proportions. His wealth, for ex~
ample, actually came from the vast sums he was collecting from his in-
creasingly select group of rich disciples; yet it was presumed that he had in
fact perfected the philosopher’s stone. The Church continued to pursue
him, denouncing him for heresy and witchcraft, and Borzi’s response to
these charges was a dignified silence; this only enhanced his reputation and
made his followers more passionate. Only the great are persecuted, after
all; how many understood Jesus Christ in his own time? Born’ did not have
to say a word—-his followers now called the Pope the Antichrist.
And so Borri’s power grew and grew, until one day he left the city of
Amsterdam (where he had settled for a while), absconding with huge sums
of borrowed money and diamonds that had been entrusted to him. (He
claimed to be able to remove the flaws from diamonds through the power
of his gifted mind.) Now he was on the run. The Inquisition eventually
caught up with him, and for the last Menty years of his life he was impris-
oned in Rome. But so great was the belief in his occult powers that to his
dying day he was visited by wealthy believers, including Queen Christina
of Sweden. Supplying him udth money and materials, these visitors al-
lowed him to continue his search for the elusive philosopher’s stone.
Interpretation
Before he formed his cult, Borri seems to have stumbled on a critical dis-
covery. Tiring of his life of debauchery, he had decided to give it up and to
devote himself to the occult, a genuine interest of his. He must have no
titted, however, that when he alluded to a mystical experience (rather than
physical exhaustion) as the source of his conversion, people of all classes
wanted to hear more. Realizing the power he could gain by ascxibing the
change to something external and mysterious, he went further with his
manufactured visions. The grander the vision, and the more sacrifices he
asked for, the more appealing and believable his story seemed to become.
Remember: People are not interested in the truth about change. They
do not want to hear that it has come from hard work, or from anything as
banal as exhaustion, boredom, or depression; they are dying to believe in
something romantic, otherworldly. They want to hear of angels and out—of~
body experiences. Indulge them. Hint at the mystical source of some per-
sonal change, wrap it in ethereal colors, and a cultlike following will form
around you. Adapt to people’s needs: The messiah must mirror the desires
of his followers. And always mm high. The bigger and bolder your illusion,
the better.
Observance II
In the mid-17005, word spread in Europe’s fashionable society of a Swiss
country doctor named Michael Schiippach who practiced a different kind
of medicine: He used the healing powers of nature to perform miraculous
cures. Soon well-to—do people from all over the Continent, their ailments
both serious and mild, were making the trek to the alpine village of Lang-
nau, where Schiippach lived and worked. Trudging through the mountains,
these visitors witnessed the most dramatic natural landscapes that Europe
has to offer. By the time they reached Langnau, they were already feeling
transformed and on their way to health.
Schiippach, who had become known as simply the “Mountain Doc-
tor,” had a small pharmacy in town. This place became quite a scene:
Crowds of people from many different countries would cram the small
room, its walls lined with colorful bottles filled with herbal cures. Where
most doctors of the time prescribed foul-tasting concoctions that bore in-
comprehensible Latin titles (as medicines often do still), Schiippaclfs cures
had names such as “The Oil ofjoy,” “Little Flower’s Heart,” or “Against
the Monster,” and they tasted sweet and pleasing.
Visitors to Langnau would have to wait patiently for a visit with the
Mountain Doctor, because every day some eighty messengers would arrive
at the pharmacy bearing flasks of urine from all over Europe. Schiippach
claimed he could diagnose what ailed you simply by looking at a sample of
your mine and reading a written description of your ailment. (Naturally he
read the description very carefully before prescribing a cure.) When he fl»
nally had a spare minute (the urine samples took up much of his time), he
would call the visitor into his office in the pharmacy. He would then exam-
ine this person’s urine sample, explaining that its appearance would tell
him everything he needed to know. Country people had a sense for these
things, he would say——their wisdom came from living a simple, godly life
with none of the complications of urban living. This personal consultation
would also include a discussion as to how one might bring one’s soul more
into harmony with nature.
Schiippach had devised many forms of treatment, each profoundly un~
like the usual medical practices of the time. He was a believer, for instance,
in electric shock therapy. To those who wondered whether this was in
keeping with his belief in the healing power of nature, he would explain
that electricity is a natural phenomenon; he was merely imitating the
the fabulous cwtulzllslu
man! he opmrzd in
London for the sale of
his elixim
.
.
. In the
cluefraom. where he
received patients. srrmrl
“(lie lzzrgasi air pump
in the wurltl" to a.v.~.:’.\'t
him In his “plziln.mpl1r-
ml rnvestigatiom” imu
disease, and also :1
"stupendous metallic
ccmrlucmr, ":1 rizlhly
gilded pedestal
mrmundml will: nrrorts
zm.-1 vials of "ellu:rial
and uther e.rst/rlres.
"
.
, ./lrcmcling In J.
Emzemoser. who
publislml :7 history of
magic in 1844 «I
Leipzig. (-‘mlmm 19
“hou.w
.
.
. united the
u.n.-ful with the [l[(:‘ll.\llV-
able. Everywlmne (lie
ummsr magmficcnce
was rtzsplayerl. Even in
the‘ outer court. uwrrred
an reyc—wi(mz.\'.s‘. iz
scorned as 1/tough mi.
invemitm, rmd mthes
lmd been exhausted.
On the side walls in the
(T/IlIrIll7€I$ an arc»
shaped glow was
prtwitiea’ by artifiz-ial
elermr light; star rays
tlurled for/Ix,‘ transpar-
em gl(I.\'.i't‘.\‘ ofall mlor.\'
were placed with clever
.\‘eIocIiun um! mm'lt
taste. All rlxi.\', the snmr»
cyewit
I
*
‘ «mare: us,
was raw‘
ing and
exalted the inzagimzlimt
10 the higlicsl degree.
"
Visitors were glvm u
prmmd sheet of rules
for flwzllhy llvinig. In
the Great Apollo
Aprmmem they might
join in mysterious v-im—
allsj. rtccrmzpanitrd by
chums‘: "llstil. Vital Air.
aerherml.’ «'Wagrzm'r'
Magic. hail."’Anri
while they hailed the
LAW 27
221
magic u_{m(1gnl’lism,
the windows were
durkltlmd. rttveulirzg a
ceiling smrldcrl with
eleclric .s'Irlr.\' and a
vmmg and lovely
“Rosy (jndrless of
Health" in a niche.
.
..
I~,'ver_v evening this
Temple ufllealt/1 was
rmmlcd with glmsly; ll
had bccmnv I/‘IL’ I/2l.\‘l1t'(7N
I0 visil l[ and try the
great 1wetve—fuol bed’ of
Stun’, the "(x’r.su:zl C¢'l'e.\'-
(in! Bed,
" said’ to cure
any disease.
.
.
. This
bed. I2ccr>r(.’m_i; to
[fr;It(mm.\'H’. "stand in (I
vplemtid room. into
whit?/I 41 ¢‘yIim1er1(»d
from an adjoining
«lulmber In mndmtl the
/zertling currmts
,
.
. at
(he xanze firm’ u/I .\'nrt.v
ofpleasing scents of
stnarzglhoning lmrhv
and Urzemal irzcertsc’
were also brought in
rlrmmglz glim tubes.
The heawenly Into’ itself
reslezl upon six solid
Inznsparem pillars‘; the
émilrlothes were of
purple and .\'icy~bz'ue
Ar/as silk, spread over
(3 Iilllitrffifll SOHl7("I‘.d
wizk Arubima perfumed
waters to suit the raster
oflhe I’cr.rim1 Court.
Tim chamber in w/zirrh
it wax‘ placed he called
the Sumrmm SllIl(‘I()-
rum.
.
.
. Tu add to all
this, there wen’ the
nieludious l’l(ll(£S oflhe
harrrmtzicu. .s'o_/'?fIulc?.s.
ugreealile voices. and a
great organ.
”
"rm: POWER ()F'i'HE
um
_
GRI','l'I‘_ or FRANK
sco,
1939
22..
LAW 27
power of lightning. One of his patients claimed to be inhabited by seven
devils. The doctor cured him with electrical shocks, and as he administered
these he exclaimed that he could see the devils flying out of the man’s
body, one by one. Another man claimed to have swallowed a hay wagon
and its driver, which were causing him massive pains in the chest. The
Mountain Doctor listened patiently, claimed to be able to hear the crack of
a whip in the man’s belly, promised to cure him, and gave him a sedative
and a purgative. The man fell asleep on a chair outside the pharmacy. As
soon as he awoke he vomited, and as he vomited a hay wagon sped past
him (the Mountain Doctor had hired it for the occasion), the crack of its
whip making him feel that somehow he had indeed expelled it under the
doctor’s care.
Over the years, the Mountain Doctor’s fame grew. He was consulted
by the powerful—-—even the writer Goethe made the trek to his village——and
he became the center of a cult of nature in which everything natural was
considered worthy of worship. Schiippach was careful to create effects that
would entertain and inspire his patients. A professor who visited him once
wrote, “One stands or sits in company, one plays cards, sometimes with a
young woman; now a concert is given, now a lunch or supper, and now a
little ballet is presented. With a very happy effect, the freedom of nature is
everywhere united with the pleasures of the beau monde, and if the doctor
is not able to heal any diseases, he can at least cure hypochondria and the
vapors.”
Interpretation
Schiippach had begun his career as an ordinary village doctor. He would
sometimes use in his practice some of the village remedies be had grown
up with, and apparently he noticed some results, for soon these herbal tinc-
tures and natural forms ofhealing became his specialty. And in fact his nat—
ural form of healing did have profound psychological
effects
on his
patients. Where the normal drugs of the time created fear and pain, Schiip—
pach’s treatments were comfortable and soothing. The resulting unprove-
ment in the patients mood was a critical element in the cures he brought
about. His patients believed so deeply in his skills that they willed them-
selves into health. Instead of scoffing at their irrational explanations for
their ailments, Schiippach used their hypochondria to make it seem that he
had effected a great cure.
The caseof the Mountain Doctor teaches us valuable lessons in the
creation of a cultlike following. First, you must End a. way to engage peo-
ple’s will, to make their belief in your powers strong enough that they
imagine all sorts of benefits. Their belief will have a self—fullilling quality,
but you must make sure that it is you, rather than their own will, who is
seen as the agent of nransformaiion. Find the belief, cause, or fantasy that
will make them believe with a passion and they will imagine the rest, wor«
shipping you as healer, prophet, genius, whatever you like.
Second, Schlippach teaches us the everlasting power of belief in na-
ture, and in simplicity. Nature, in reality, is full of much that is terrifying-
poisonous plants, fierce animals, sudden disasters, plagues. Belief in the
healing, comforting quality of nature is really a constructed myth, a roman«
ticism. But the appeal to nature can bring you great power, especially in
complicated and stressful times.
This appeal, however, must be handled right. Devise a kind of theater
of nature in which you, as the director, pick and choose the qualities that lit
the romanticism of the times. The Mountain Doctor played the part to per-
fection, playing up his homespun wisdom and wit, and staging his cures as
dramatic pieces. He did not make himself one with nature; instead he
molded nature into a cult, an artificial construction, To create a “natural”
effect you actually have to work hard, making nature theatrical and de-
lightfully pagan. Otherwise no one will notice. Nature too must follow
trends and be progressive.
Observance III
In 1788, at the age of fifty-five, the doctor and scientist Franz Mesmer was
at a crossroads. He was a pioneer in the study of animal magnetism-the
belief that animals contain magnetic matter, and that a doctor or specialist
can effect miraculous cures by working on this charged substam:e—but in
Vienna, where he lived, his theories had met with scorn and ridicule from
the medical establishment. In treating women for convulsions, Mesmer
claimed to have worked a number of cures, his proudest achievement
being the restoration of sight to a blind girl. But. another doctor who exam-
ined the young girl said she was as blind as ever, an assessment with which
she herself agreed. Mesmer countered that his enemies were out to slander
him by winning her over to their side. This claim only elicited
more
ridicule. Clearly the sober-minded Viennese were the wrong audience for
his theories, and so he decided to move to Paris and start again.
Renting a splendid apartment in his new city, Mesmer decorated it ap~
propriately. Stained glass in most of the windows created a religious feel-
ing, and mirrors on all the walls produced an hypnotic effect The doctor
advertised that in his apartment he would give demonstrations of the pow-
ers of animal magnetism, inviting the diseased and melancholic to feel its
powers. Soon Parisians of all classes (but mostly women, who seemed more
attracted to the idea than men did) were paying for entry to witness the
miracles that Mesmer promised.
Inside the apartment, the scents of orange blossom and exotic incense
wafted through special vents. As the initiates filtered into the salon where
the demonstrations took place, they heard harp music and the lulling
sounds of a female vocalist coming from another room. In the center of the
salon was a long oval container filled with water that Mesmer claimed had
been magnetized. From holes in the conta.iner’s metal lid protruded long
movable iron rods. The visitors were instructed to sit around the container,
place these magnetized rods on the body part that gave them pains or
problems, and then hold hands with their neighbors, sitting as close as pos-
sible to one another to help the magnetic force pass between their bodies.
Sometimes, too, they were attached to each other by cords.
Mesmer would leave the room, and “assistant rnagnetizers”—-—a.ll hand»
Hll, l’l7\\|’ll ()I‘ ,\
1 II.
In flu’ town of
Tamwml liver! :2 man
by the mmw of Re-Ii
Fcivel. Om day. as he
rut in his Izouse deeply
absorber] in his
Taénmil. he hmrzl :1
laud r10i.w= rnmizie.
Wlwn hr: went to the
window he saw
41 I1)! 0/"
little [1r£1I1kSte‘l’.\’.
" lp In
some new piece of
17ztLsch:‘r'f.' no doubt.
" In‘
tlmug/2r.
"(.‘Izildmrt,. run quit‘/<1)’
Io (he .v,vmIg<1gue,
" /10
cried, leaning out and
impruvzkirzg the firs’!
slur)‘ Ilwr mmurrvd In
him. You’/I rec: rlwrc’ a
rm m.nnrIer, and wine! a
monster! Iris (1 vrmlure
my}: five jiéc-1. three
eyes. am! a hmrd [ikv
that 0/'/1 goat, only ir‘r
gram.’
"
/md sum momgh the
clrfldrnn scumpvra! 0/]
and Rel) Feivci
returned It) his .s'Iurli(3.\‘.
Hz: miilrza’ into his
/Ivan! at he tlmuglzl uf
(Fm trick he hml played
.97; £11056 lilrlc ramcals‘.
[I warn '1 long ln'_I'<m.‘
his .s'I1uIic.\' were infor-
ru[)1ca’agru‘n. this rtmw
by running f0Uf.YlL'pY.
Whm he went :42 (kc
window he saw several
Jews running.
“WImr(,~ um yzm
rzmningf’
" ho mlluzl
om.
“ To flu’ ,sj_vI1agogus:’
"
answered Ihe Jews.
"Iluvun '1 you /ward?
'l'here’r u sou monsm-,
(hart/.s' u irreazurw with
five legs‘, three eves, and
a beard like that ofu
goal‘, tmly iI'.\ glwenl"
Reb /‘ave! lauglzml
will: glen’, thinking of
the trick /m had pla_w'£/.
LAW 27
223
und sat down again to
his Talmud.
But no somwr had he
begun to conczantrum
when surirlcnly he
heard a ditming tumult
outside. And what did
he See.’ A great crowd
ofmen, women and
children, all running
toward the .i'ynagugtw.
“What's up?” he cried,
sticking his head out of
the window.
“What a question.’
Why, don '1‘ you know?”
they atzswered. "Right
in from of the synav
gogue tltereii (I suu
monster. Ii’; :1 crmrure
with five logy, three
eyes, and a board like
that oft: goat, only
its ween!"
And as‘ the crowd
hurried by, Reh Feivcl
sudzlerily tiotirred that
the rabbi himsclf was
among them.
“Lord of the world!"
he exclaimed. “lfthe
rabbi himself 15
running with them
vurely there niust be
something happening.
Where there‘: smoke
then: .5 fire!"
Without further
thought Rel) Fezvel
grabbed Iris hat, left his
house, and also
began running.
“Who can tell?" he
mutrmcd to Iumsclfas
he ran, all out of
breath, toward the
synagogue.
A 1'iu:Asi:RY or
J)-.WISH F()l,KLO[<E.
NAYHAN AU§UBtL, 21)..
1948
some and strapping young men—would enter with jars of magnetized
water that they would sprinkle on the patients, rubbing the healing fluid on
their bodies, massaging it into their skin, moving them toward a trancelike
state. And after
a few minutes
a kind of delirium would overcome the
women. Some would sob, some would shriek and bear their hair, others
would laugh hysterically. At the height of the delirium Mesmer would
reenter the salon, dressed in a flowing silk robe embroidered with golden
flowers and carrying a white magnetic rod. Moving around the container,
he would stroke and soothe the patients until calm was restored. Many
women would later attribute the strange power he had on them to his
piercing look, which, they thought, was exciting or quieting the magnetic
fluids in their bodies.
Within months of his arrival in Paris, Mesmer became the rage. His
supporters included Marie—Antoinette herself, the queen of France, wife of
Louis XVI. As in Vienna, he was condemned by the official faculty of med-
icine, but it did not matter. His growing following of pupils and patients
paid him handsomely.
Mesmer expanded his theories to proclaim that all humanity could be
brought into harmony through the power of magnetism, a concept with
much appeal during the French Revolution. A cult of Mesrnerism spread
across the country; in many towns, “Societies of Harmony” sprang up to
experiment with magnetism. These societies eventually became notorious:
They tended to be led by libertines who would turn their sessions into a
kind of group orgy.
At the height of Mesmer‘s popularity, a French commission published
a report based on years of testing the theory of animal magnetism. The
conclusion: Magneu'sm’s effects on the body actually came from a kind of
group hysteria and autosuggestion. The report was well documented, and
mined Mesmer’s reputation in France. He left the country and went into
retirement. Only a few years later, however, imitators sprang up all over
Europe and the cult of Mesmerism spread once again, its believers more
numerous than ever.
Interpretation
Mesmer’s career can be broken into two parts. When still in Vienna, he
clearly believed in the validity of his theory, and did all he could to prove
it. But his growing frustration and the disapproval of his colleagues made
him adopt another strategy. First he moved to Paris, where no one knew
him, and where his extravagant theories found a more fruitful soil. Then he
appealed to the French love of theater and spectacle, making his apartment
into a kind of magical world in which a sensory overload of smells, sights,
and sounds entranced his customers. Most important, from now on he
practiced his magnetism only on a group. The group provided the setting
in which the magnetism would have its proper effect, one believer infecting
the other, overwhelming any individual doubter.
Mesmer thus passed from being a confirmed advocate of magnetism
tn the role of a charlatan using every trick in the book to captivate the pub-
lie. The biggest trick of all was to play on the repressed sexuality that bub-
bles under the surface of any group setting. In a group, a longing for social
unity, a longing older than civilization, cries out to be awakened. This de~
sire may be subsumed under a unifying cause, but beneath it is a repressed
sexuality that the charlatan knows how to exploit and manipulate for his
own purposes.
This is the lesson that Mesmer teaches us: Our tendency to doubt, the
distance that allows us to reason, is broken down when we join a group.
The warmth and infectiousness of the group overwhelm the skeptical indi-
vidual. This is the power you gain by creating a cult. Also, by playing on
people’s repressed sexuality, you lead them into mistaking their excited
feelings for signs of your mystical strength. You gain untold power by
working on people’s unrealized desire for
a. kind of promiscuous and
pagan unity.
Remember too that the most effective cults mix religion with science.
Take the latest technological trend or fad and blend it with a noble cause, a
mystical faith, a new form of healing. People’s interpretations of your hy—
brid cult will run rampant, and they will attribute powers to you that you
had never even thought to claim.
Image: The Magnet. /in
unseen force draws objects to it,
which in turn become magnetized themselves, drawing other
pieces to them. the magnetic power of me whole constantly
increasing. But take away the original magnet and it all falls
apart. Become the magnet, the invisible force that attracts
people’s imaginations and holds them together. Once they
have Clustered around you, no power can wrest them away.
Authority: The charlatan achieves his great power by simply opening
a possibility for men to believe what they already want to believe.
.
.
.
The credulous cannot keep at
a distance; they crowd around the
wonder worker, entering his personal aura, surrendering themselves
to illusion with a heavy solemnity, like cattle. (Grete de Francesco)
LAW 27
2:25
R EVE RSAL
One reason to create a following is that a group is often easier to deceive
than an individual, and turns over to you that much more power. This
comes, however, with a danger: If at any moment the group sees through
you, you will find yourself facing not one deceived Soul but an angry crowd
that will tear you to pieces as avidly as it once followed you. The Charlatans
constantly faced this danger, and were always ready to move out of town as
it inevitably became clear that their elixirs did not work and their ideas
were sham. Too slow and they paid with their lives. In playing with the
crowd, you are playing with fire, and must constantly keep an eye out for
any sparks of doubt, any enemies who will turn the crowd against you.
When you play with the emotions of a crowd, you have to know how to
adapt, attuning yourself instantaneously to all of the moods and desires that
a group will produce. Use spies, be on top of everything, and keep your
bags packed.
For this reason you may often prefer to deal with people one by one.
Isolating them from their normal milieu can have the same effect as putting
them in a group—it makes them more prone to suggestion and intimida-
tion. Choose the right sucker and if he eventually sees through you he may
prove easier to escape than a crowd.
28
ENTER ACTION
WITH BOLDNESS
JUD G M ENT
Ifyou are unsure ofa course ofactian, do not attempt it.
Your doubts and hesitatimzs will in/eat your execution.
Timidity is dangerous: Better to enter with boldness. Any
mistakes you commit thmugh audacity
are easily
cor-
rected with more audacity. Everyone admires the hold; no
one honors the timid.
Illlz
I \\ U v\I)\ Ii\ll R|.|h
The path of/1li?a.rur¢*
never lA'ad.s' to glory.’
The prodigious
achievements of
llrt'rule,s' were the
result ofhigh mitten-
lure, and though there’
is little, either in fable
or /tis‘It17v, to .\'lt(1w that
he had any rivals, still it
is t‘¢’c4)r(lrd [hat a
knight errant, in
company with a fellow
txdvcnzurcr, sought his
_/ortima in a romzmtir
country. He had not
Irawlr*r1_far what his"
mmpiinitm oliserwrrl a
past, on which was
written the following
lrl,S'(‘,t’l[)l‘i(’Irt. “Iiravs
advlmiurcr. ifyou have
a zleiim (0 ilixmver that
which has never been
.\c't‘I1 by any knigltl
crrram, you have only
I!) pass’ this I0rrent_ and
than take in your arrns
an elephant ofrtmw
and carry it in one
breath to the .\untmi( of
this mountain, whose
nohh: head .wi'rru‘
blemlccl with the .» y.’
"But.
" mid /ht‘ knight:
L‘()m[)(U1l()n, “the water
may be deep as well as
rapid, and though.
riotwithsramling, we
should [m.\‘.\' it, why
shottltl we be maim-
hrzrcrl with the
alepli/irit? What :1
?‘I(ll(‘L<l/Gus imdi=r1ah-
ittgf" /lml /ihilosopl2i-
rally and with nice
calculation, he
observed that the
£’l('p’lllIll might he
carried four steps: but
for cmtveying it to (hr
mp ofthc mozmtairi in
one breath, that was
not in lhzr power afa
mortal, mtlers it should
225
L AW 2 3
BOl.l)NF.SS AND HESITATION: A Brief Psychological Comparison
Boldness and hesitation elicit very different psychological responses in their
targets: Hesitalion puts obstacles in your path, boldness eliminates them.
Once you understand this, you will find it essential to overcome your nat-
ural timidity and practice the art of audacity. The following are among the
most pronounced psychological efiects of boldness and tirnidity.
The Bolder the Lie the Better. We all have weaknesses, and our efforts
are never perfect. But entering action with boldness has the magical effect
of hiding our deficiencies. Con artists know that the bolder the lie, the
more convincing it becomes. The sheer audacity of the story makes it more
credible, distracting attention from its inconsistencies When putting to-
gether a con or entering any kind of negotiation, go further than you
planned. Ask for the moon and you will be surprised how often you get it.
Lions Circle the Hesitant Prey. People have a sixth sense for the weak-
nesses of others. If, in a first encounter, you demonstrate your willingness
to compromise, back down, and retreat, you bring out the lion even in peo-
ple who are not necessarily bloodthirsty. Everything depends on percep-
tion, and once you are seen as the kind of person who quickly goes on the
defensive, who is willing to negotiate and be amenable, you will be pushed
around without mercy.
Boldness Strikes Fear; Fear Creates Authority. The bold move makes
you seem larger and more powerful than you are. If it comes suddenly,
with the stealth and swiftness of a snake, it inspires that much more fear. By
intimidating with a bold move, you establish a precedent: in every subse-
quent encounter, people will be on the defensive, in terror of your next
strike.
Going Halfway with Half a Heart Digs the Deeper Grave. If you
enter an action with less than total confidence, you set up obstacles in your
own path. When a problem arises you will grow confused, seeing options
where there are none and inadvertently creating more problems still. Re-
treating from the hunter, the timid hare scurries more easily into his snares.
Hesitation Creates Gaps, Boldness Obliterates Them. When you take
time to think, to hem and haw, you create a gap that allows others time to
think as well. Your timidity infects people with awkward energy, elicits em-
barrassment. Doubt springs up on all sides.
Boldness destroys such gaps. The swiftness of the move and the energy
of the action leave others no space to doubt and worry. In seduction, hesi-
tation is fatal—it makes your victim conscious of your intentions. The bold
move crowns seduction with triumph: It leaves no time for reflection.
Audacity Separates You from the Herd. Boldness gives you presence
and makes you seem larger than life. The timid fade into the wallpaper, the
bold draw attention, and what draws attention draws power. We cannot
keep our eyes off the audacious———we cannot wait to see their next bold
move.
OBSERVANCES OF THE LAW
Observance I
In May of 1925, five of the most successful dealers in the French scrap
metal business found themselves invited to an “official” but “highly confi-
dential” meeting with the deputy director general of the Ministry of Post
and Telegraphs at the Hotel Criilon, then the most luxurious hotel in Paris.
When the businessmen arrived, it was the director general himself, a Mon-
sieur Lustig, who met them in a swank suite on the top floor.
The businessmen had no idea why they had been summoned to this
meeting, and they were bursting with curiosity. After drinks, the director
explained. “Gentlemen,” he said, “this is an urgent matter that requires
complete secrecy. The government is going to have to tear down the Eiffel
Tower.” The dealers listened in stunned silence as the director explained
that the tower, as recently reported in the news, desperately needed re
pairs. It had originally been meant as a temporary structure (for the Expo»
sition of 1889), its maintenance costs had soared over the years, and now,
in a time of a fiscal crisis, the government would have to spend millions to
fix it. Many Parlsians considered the Eiffel Tower an eyesore and would be
delighted to see it go. Over time, even the tourists would forget about it—it
would live on in photographs and postcards. “Gentlemen,” Lustig said,
“you are all invited to make the government an offer for the Eiffel Tower.”
He gave the businessmen sheets of government stationery filled with
figures, such as the tonnage of the tower’s metal. Their eyes popped as they
calculated how much they could make from the scrap. Then Lustig led
them to a waiting limo, which brought them to the Eiffel Tower. Flashing
an official badge, he guided them through the area, spicing his tour with
amusing anecdotes. At the end of the visit be thanked them and asked
them to have their offers delivered to his suite within four days.
Several days after the offers were submitted, one of the five, a Mon-
sieur P., received notice that his bid was the winner, and that to secure the
sale he should come to the suite at the hotel within two days, bearing a cer-
tified check for more than 250,000 francs (the equivalent today of about
$1,000,000)--—a quarter of the total price. On delivery of the check, he
would receive the documents confirming his ownership of the Eiffel Tower.
Monsieur P. was excited—-he would go down in history as the man who
had bought and torn down the infamous landmark. But by the time he ar-
rived at the suite, check in hand, he was beginning to have doubts about
the whole affair. Why meet in a hotel instead of a government building?
Why hadrft he heard from other offieials? Was this a hoax, a scam? As he
listened to Lustig discuss the arrangements for the scrapping of the tower,
he hesitated, and contemplated backing out.
he the dwarffigurz? of
an eIeplmI£I,fi1oIzly tr)
be placed on the lap of
a stick; and (lien what
honor would more be
in such an advcznurel-"
"There i$,".vui1} ht’,
“some decepuion ."/1 rlrix
writing. It is an enigma
only fit to amuse a
Child, I slmli (ll?l’P_fl'>f€
leave you and your
elvplzant.
"
The reasmzer than
departed: but the
(«l(lV€FIf£€7‘0l\‘.S‘ "It'll!
ruslzed with his eyes
closed across the water.‘
neitlwz depth nor
I-‘iolencz prewmted
him, and according: to
the inscription he saw
Ihi? elephant lying on
Ilte opposite bank.
[Iv took it and carrier!
it to the tap c>/‘the hill,
where he saw a town. A
¥lIr’l(’l< from the
elcplmur uiamzerl the
people ufthe city. wlm
rose in arms.‘ but the
urlventurer, nothing
dazmtezl, was (later-
mi.-mi £0 die :1 llrtru.
‘Flu: people. however,
were awed by his pres-
ence, and he was avion-
islzetl to hear them;
proclaim him succexsor
to rlmlr king, who /mzl
rec-emly died.
Great enatr//ri.«'e.s are
only aciiieveri by
rzdwrnmrous spirits.
They who azlculurr
with you great niccty
cvz'r_y difficulry and
obstacle which is likely
to lie in their way, low
that limo’ in lwsinztirm.
which the mow daring
seize and remler avail-
able to the Ia/ties-I
purposes.
FABLLS,
.lF..-KN ma LA l"()t~<"lr\l!\i;.
1021-1695
LAW 23
‘.329
Always set in work
without rnisgivrngs on
the .cmreu/’i1npru-
dcncc. Fear affailure
in the mind ufu
pcrfnrrmar is, for an
onlimkrrr, alrmriy
evidemse of/kzilure.
.
.
.
Actions’ are dangerous
when there is doubt as
to their wi.\'zlorn.,'
it would be safer
to do rzotliirzg.
llAi:rA$AR (‘vRAL‘1A,~‘.
l60l
1658
‘IHI-ZS‘l(>I{\ M-
|ll»|IEz\l.\l.
In a lowly thatched
outrage in (he Norman
Valley lll(’r(’ lived (1
[mar L:nu[rle_ Mr. and
Mrs. lluh Sacng.
The hmhaml mm,/inn!
/1iI?1.§¢’l/ft)?’ .s‘r:v(‘.n years
and nnly rmd Imnkx in
Ills cold room.
.
.
.
Um’ duv his wife, all in
tears, Mild to him:
“look lwre, my goml
man! What is (he use of
all your book reading?
lhnvo spent my youth
in washing and sewing
for other people and
yet I have no .\'pan*
jackrrr orxkirt to wear
and I Imve had no fowl
to cut during llzepusl
Ihrec 11m/5. I um hungry
and cold, I can stand
it no monhl"
.
. .1IearingIhese
wants, the ntiddln-aged
xclzolur closer] his
Imuk
..
. rave In hixfeel
and
.
.
. witlwur suyirzg
urmrlwr wrml, hr’ wrnl
(mt oftlmms:
.
.
. ./lrriv-
/rig in the heart Ufihe
230
LAW 23
Suddenly, however, he realized that the director had changed his tone.
Instead of talking about the tower, he
was complaining about his low
salary, about his wife’s desire for a fur coat, about how galling it was to
work hard and be unappreciated. It dawned on Monsieur P. that this high
government official was asking for a bribe. The effect on him, though, was
not outrage but relief. Now he was sure that Lustig was for real, since in all
of his previous encounters with French bureaucrats, they had inevitably
asked for a little greasing of the palm. His confidence restored, Monsieur P.
slipped the director several thousand francs in bills, then handed him the
certified check. In return he received the documentation, including an im-
pressive—looking bill of sale. He left the hotel, dreaming of the profits and
fame to come.
Over the next few days, however,
as Monsieur P. waited for corre-
spondence from the government, he began to realize that something was
amiss. A few telephone calls made it clear that there was no deputy direc-
tor general Lustig, and there were no plans to destroy the Eiffel Tower: He
had been bilked of over 250,000 francs!
Monsieur P. never went to the police. He knew what kind of reputa-
tion he would get if word got out that he had fallen for one of the most ab
surdly audacious cons in history. Besides the public humiliation, it would
have been business suicide.
Interpretation
Had Count Victor Lustig, con artist extraordinaire, tried to sell the Arc de
Triomphe, a bridge over the Seine, a statue of Balzac, no one would have
believed him. But the Eiffel Tower was just too large, too improbable to be
part of a con job. In fact it was so improbable that Lustig was able to return
to Paris six months later and “resell” the Eiffel Tower to a different scrap-
iron dealer, and for a higher price-—a sum in francs equivalent today to
over $1,500,000!
Largeness of scale deceives the human eye. It distracts and awes us,
and is so self-evident that we carmot imagine there is any illusion or decep-
tion afoot. Arm yourself with bigness and boldness—stretch your decep-
tions as far as they will go and then go further. If you sense that the sucker
has suspicions, do as the intrepid Lustig did: Instead of backing down, or
lowering his price, he simply raised his price higher, by asking for and get-
ting a bribe. Asking for more puts the other person on the defensive, cuts
out the nibbling effect of compromise and doubt, and overwhelms with its
boldness.
Observance II
On his deathbed in 1533, Vasily III, the Grand Duke of Moscow and ruler
of a semi-united Russia, proclaimed his three-year-old son, Ivan IV, as his
successor. He appointed his young wife, Helena,
as regent until Ivan
reached his majority and could rule on his own. The aristocracy—the bo-
yars—secretly rejoiced: For years the dukes of Moscow had been trying to
extend their authority over the boyars’ turf. With Vasily dead, his heir a
mere three years old, and a young woman in charge of the dukedom, the
boyars would be able to roll back the dukes’ gains, wrest control of the
state. and humiliate the royal family.
Aware of these dangers, young Helena tumecl to her trusted friend
Prince Ivan Obolensky to help her rule. But after five years as regent she
suddenly died——poisoned by a member of the Shuisky family, the most
fearsome boyar clan. The Shuisky princes seized control of the govern-
ment and threw Obolensky in prison, where he starved to death. At the age
of eight, Ivan was now a despised orphan, and any boyar or family mem-
ber who took an interest in him was immediately banished or killed.
And so Ivan roamed the palace, hungry, ill clothed, and often in bid
ing from the Shuiskys, who treated him roughly when they saw him. On
some days they would search him out, clothe him in royal robes, hand him
a. scepter, and set him on the throne——a kind of mock ritual in which they
lampooned his royal pretensions. Then they would shoo him away. One
evening several of them chased the Metropolitan———the head of the Russian
chu;rch—through the palace, and he sought refuge in Ivan’s room; the boy
watched in horror as the Shuiskys entered, hurled insults, and beat the
Metropolitan mercilessly.
Ivan had one friend in the palace, a boyar named Vorontsov who con»
soled and advised him. One day, however,
as he, Vorontsov, and the
newest Metropolitan conferred in the palace refectory, several Shuiskys
burst in, heat up Vorontsov, and insulted the Metropolitan by hearing and
treading on his robes. Then they banished Vorontsov from Moscow.
Throughout all this Ivan maintained a strict silence. To the boyars it
seemed that their plan had worked: The young man had turned into a ter-
rified and obedient idiot. They could ignore him now, even leave him
alone. But on the evening of December 29, I543, Ivan, now thirteen, asked
Prince Andrei Shuisky to come to his room. When the prince arrived, the
room was filled with palace guards. Young Ivan then pointed his finger at
Andrei and ordered the guards to arrest him, have him killed, and throw
his body to the bloodhounds in the royal kennel. Over the next few days
Ivan had all of Andrei’s close associates arrested and banished. Caught off—
guard by his sudden boldness, the boyars now stood in mortal terror of this
youth, the future Ivan the Terrible, who had planned and waited for five
years to execute this one swift and bold act that would secure his power for
decades to come.
Interpretation
The world is full ofboyars--men who despise you, fear your ambition, and
jealously guard their shrinking realms of power. You need to establish your
authority and gain respect, but the moment the boyars sense your growing
boldness, they will act to thwart you. This is how Ivan met such a situation:
He lay low, showing neither ambition nor discontent. He waited, and when
the time came he brought the palace guards over to his side. The guards
had come to hate the cruel Shuiskys. Once they agreed to Ivan’s plan, he
struck with the swiftness of a snake, pointing his finger at Shuisky and giv-
ing him no time to react
Negotiate with a boyar and you create opportunities for him. A small
ciry, he .\'t0p]7ed a pzzsx»
iug gentleman. “Ilnllrz,
my friend.’ Who is; Ihc
richest mam in town?
"
“Poor c:mmr_vman:’
Don’; yrm know Hyon»
SKI, the millionaire? IIi,\-
glirrering tile-ronfzed
house pierced by (welw
gate.\‘ is just over there.
Huh Srceng bent his
steps so the rich man It
house. Having entcrezl
the big gate. he flung
the guesr-roam door
open and adzlreryed the
/wrt: "I need I 0.000
yang for rrapiml for my
¢:omm('rr‘.iai I)u.~'inc.\-s
and I won! you to ((1114
me the fllrlnry.
”
"/ilrigfzr, sir. Where
.\'IU!II [rend the
m()ney.‘7"
“ To the xlaimng Market
in can-, nfa mumm-
xion merchant.
"
“Very well, xix. I will
draw on Kim, who
(loses the bigger!
czwnzmisrirzn business’ in
the /ltrséng Mar/mt.
You ‘II get the monrey
(here.
"
"Good-bye, sir."
V/hon Huh Sm.’/‘lg was
gone, all the other
gucsrr in the mom
asked Byfzn-.c.ri why he
gave so nmclz nmnev In
12 bcggurliire stranger
whose family name was
unknown to him. But
the rich man rrrplir.-41
with u rrmmpharztfacn.‘
“Even though he war
in ragged (‘Ir/Ihei, he
.rpukr’ r:lr:m'1y to /he
point without bermying
shame or infsrirzriry.
unlike i-ommmz people
who want to borrow
money for 1! bad debt,
Such ti mun as he is
ritlmr mad or self-
rorzfidmr in doing
business. But judging
from his iiacmrlers (’_VvL\'
amt booming voice he
LAW 23
3231
IS Ill! l1flC()YV‘lI?I0fl ?T?(1l"l
with 41 S[€p£’I'hl£f!l£]!!
brain. worthy afmy
trust. I know money
and I know men.
Money often makes a
man small, but 11 mm
like him makes big
mormy. I am only glad
to have helped :1 big
man do big business."
nr.mNn rm? Sl‘l-/N}‘:S
OF RUYAL PALACES
IN KOREA,
HA TAh—Hu~L;,
1983
Fear. which alvmyx
magnifies objects, give:
a body to all their
flznries. which mks: for
its form whatever they
conceive to exist m
their memiey tlmughm
so that fearful persons
selrlnrvz fail in fall into
real inmn veniertzres,
occasioned by imagi-
nary dangers.
.
.
. And
thee duke. whose
pnrdnminum character
was In be alwuysfult of
fear and tJfdiS!rI1.s‘t,
was. of all men I have
ever reen, the most
capable offalling into
falw steps by the dread
he had nffailing inlo
Ihcm; hr,-ing in that like
tmm hares.
CAKi’)l.‘«'AL DE Ru 2.,
l 613- 1:379
LAW 28
compromise becomes the toehold he needs to tear you apart. The sudden
bold move, without discussion or warning, obliterates these toeholds, and
builds your authority, You terrify doubters and despisers and gain the con-
fidence of the many who admire and glorify those who act boldly.
Observance lll
In 1514 the twenty—two-year-old Pietro Aretino was working as a lowly as-
sistant scullion to a wealthy Roman family. He had ambitions of greatness
as a writer, to enflame the world with his name, but how could a mere
lackey hope to realize such dreams?
That year Pope Leo X received from the king of Portugal an embassy
that included many gifts, most prominent among them a great elephant,
the first in Rome since imperial times. The ponhff adored this elephant and
showered it with attention and gifts. But despite his love and care, the ele
pliant, which was called Hanna, became deathly ill. The pope summoned
doctors, who administered
a five—hundred-pound purgative to the ele
pliant, but all to no avail. The animal died and the pope went into mourn-
ing. To console himself he summoned the great painter Raphael and
ordered him to create a life-sized painting of Hanno above the animals
tomb, bearing the inscription, “What nature took away, Raphael has with
his art restored.”
Over the next few days, a pamphlet circulated throughout Rome that
caused great niernment and laughter. Entitled “The Last Will and Testa-
ment of the Elephant Hanna,” it read, in part, “To my heir the Cardinal
Santa Croce, I give my knees, so that he can imitate my genuilections.
.
.
.
To my heir Cardinal Santi Quattro, I give my jaws, so that he can more
readily devour all of Christ’s revenues.
.
.
. To my heir Cardinal Medici, I
give my ears,
so that he can hear everyone’s doings.
.
. .” To Cardinal
Grassi, who had a reputation for lechery, the elephant bequeathed the ap
propriate, oversized part of his own anatomy.
On and on the anonymous pamphlet went, sparing none of the great
in Rome, not even the pope. With each one it took aim at their best—known
weakness. The pamphlet ended with verse, “See to it that Aretino is your
friend / For he is a bad enemy to have. I His words alone could ruin the
high pope / So God guard everyone from his tongue.”
Interpretation
With one short pamphlet, Aretino, son of a poor shoemaker and a servant
himself, hurled himself to fame. Everyone in Rome rushed to find out who
this daring young man was. Even the pope, amused by his audacity, sought
him out and ended up giving him ajob in the papal service. Over the years
he came to be known as the “Scourge of Princes,” and his biting tongue
earned him the respect and fear of the great, from the king of France to the
Hapsburg emperor.
The Aretino strategy is simple: When you are as small and obscure as
David was, you must find a Goliath to attack. The larger the target, the
more attention you gain. The bolder the attack, the more you stand out
from the crowd, and the more admiration you eam. Society is full of those
who think daring thoughts but lack the guts to print and publicize them.
Voice what the public feels--the expression of shared feelings is always
powerful. Search out the most prominent target possible and sling your
boldest shot. The world will enjoy the spectacle, and will honor the under-
dog—you, that is-—with glory and power.
KEYS TO POWER
Most of us are timid. We want to avoid tension and conflict and we want to
be liked by all. We may contemplate a bold action but we rarely bring it to
life. We are terrified of the consequences, of what others might think of us,
of the hostility we will stir up if we dare go beyond our usual place.
Although we may disguise our timidity as a concern for others, a de-
sire not to hurt or offend them, in fact it is the opposite—we are really self-
absorbed, worried about ourselves and how others perceive us. Boldness,
on the other hand, is outer-directed, and often makes people feel more at
ease, since it is less self-conscious and less repressed.
This can be seen most clearly in seduction. All great seducers succeed
through effrontery. Casanova’s boldness was not revealed in a daring ap-
proach to the woman he desired, or in intrepid words to flatter her; it con-
sisted in his ability to surrender himself to her completely and to make her
believe he would do anything for her, even risk his life, which in fact he
sometimes did. The woman on whom he lavished this attention under-
stood that he held nothing back from her. This was infinitely more flatter-
ing than compliments. At no point during the seduction would he show
hesitation or doubt, simply because he never felt it.
Part of the charm of being seduced is that it makes us feel engulfed,
temporarily outside of ourselves and the usual doubts that permeate our
lives. The moment the seducer hesitates, the charm is broken, because we
become aware of the process, of their deliberate effort to seduce us, of
their self-consciousness. Boldness directs attention outward and keeps
the illusion alive. It never induces awkwardness or embarrassment. And
so we admire the bold, and prefer to be around them, because their self-
confidence infects us and draws us outside our own realm of inwardness
and reflection.
Few are born bold. Even Napoleon had to cultivate the habit on the
battlefield, where he knew it was a matter of life and death. In social set
tings he was awkward and timid, but he overcame this and practiced bold-
ness in every part of his life because he saw its tremendous power, how it
could literally enlarge it man (even one who, like Napoleon, was in fact
conspicuously small). We also see this change in Ivan the Terrible: A harm-
less boy suddenly transforms himself into a powerful young man who com-
mands authority, simply by pointing a finger and taking hold action.
You must practice and develop your boldness. You will often find uses
for it. The best place to begin is often the delicate world of negotiation, par-
Tflli HO Y .’l.'\l‘l
Tfili N ETTl J’,
A boy playing in the
fields got srwzg by a
nettle. He ran home to
his mother, telling her
that he had but Iouched
rim! nasty weed, and it
had stung him. “It was
just your touching it,
my boy,"sai1l the
mnthflf. “that caused it
to sting you; the next
rime you meddle with a
nettle, grasp it tightly,
and it will do you
no him.
”
Do boldly what you do
at all.
FAHLES,
A as or,
sncm CENTURY Er).
lI\‘)\V T0 BF,
VliI'l‘l)l'll()llE-4 l.\ l..('l\r'l',
But with there who
have made an impres-
sion upon your heart, I
have noticed that you
are timid. This quality
might affecl a bour-
geoise, but you mu.rt
attack the heart afa
woman ofllxr world
with other weapons.
.
.
.
I well you an belmlfaf
women: lheff,’ l5 P10! 073?
ofizs who does no!
prefer a lime rough
handling to (on much
considemtimx. Men
lose rlzroaigll blunder-
ing more hearts than
virme saves. The more
limidity a lover shows
will; as the more i!
concerns our pride to
goal} him on; the more
respect he has for our
LAW 28
233
2.94
resz's1zzm‘e. the more
respeci we demaml of
him. We H’IJl«tl{l will-
ingly .s'u_v lo you man:
"Ali, in pi!)/3 name do
not .~'uppo.rc us to lm so
very virtuous; you are
fgmmg u,.\‘ to have tun
much ofil.
.
.
Wt’ are continually
xmtggling to hide the
[act (ha! we futvrv
p('rmf!te(l tzurxelvex to
ho (overt. Put :1 wrmmn
in r: posiiizm to say that
slur has }rieirl:>a' only to
at .s'pecie. of w'(.>lem:e, or
to surprise: perszmrle
her {hat you do not
mzdcrmlm: her, and I
will r1lI,S'!1'€7f()r her
heart.
A little more
boldness on your pan
would put you both at
your case. Do you
I‘t?rIl¢‘rI1l1(rr what M. de
la Rochcfoucauld {old
you Imely.‘ “A reason-
able man in law? may
act like av mmlman,
bu! he slwultl mu
am! cmmm not like
an idiot.
"
1 IFE, LETTERS, ANT}
I-‘m('m<F,A.~1 vuu,os0m4r
or NINON mi 1.1-;
‘
;\iNoN or Li1N('1.\'J:¥
16204 705
LAW 2 B
ticularly those discussions in which you are asked to set your own price.
How ofien we put ourselves down by asking for too little. When Christa
pher Columbus proposed that the Spanish court finance his voyage to the
Americas, he also made the insanely bold demand that he be called
“Grand Admiral of the Ocean.” The court agreed. The price he set was the
price he received--he demanded to be treated with respect, and so he was.
Henry Kissinger too knew that in negotiation, bold demands work better
than starting off with piecemeal concessions and trying to meet the other
person halfway. Set your value high, and then, as Count Lusfig did, set it
higher.
~
Understand: If boldness is not natural, neither is timidity. It is an ac-
quired habit, picked up out of a. desire to avoid conflict. If timidity has
taken hold of you, then, root it out Your fears of the consequences of a
bold action are way out of proportion to reality, and in fact the conse
quences of timidity are worse. Your value is lowered and you create a self~
fulfilling cycle of doubt and disaster. Remember: The problems created by
an audacious move can be disguised, even remedied, by more and greater
audacity.
Image: The Lion and the
Hare. The lion creates no
gaps in his way——his
movements
are
too
swift, hisjaws too quick
and powerful. The
timid hare will do any-
thing to escape danger,
but in its haste
to
retreat and flee, it backs
into traps, hops smack
into its enemies’ jaws.
Authority: I certainly think that it is better to be impetuous than
cautious, for fortune is a woman, and it is necessary, if you wish to
master her, to conquer her by force; and it can be seen that she lets
herself be overcome by the bold rather than by those who proceed
coldly. And therefore, like
a woman, she is always a friend to
the young, because they
are less cautious, fiercer, and master
her with greater audacity. (Niccolo Machiavelli, 1469-1527)
REVERS/\L
Boldness should never be the strategy behind all of your actions. It is a tac-
tical instrument, to be used at the right moment. Plan and think ahead, and
make the final element the bold move that will bring you success. In other
words, since boldness is a learned response, it is also one that you leam to
control and utilize at will. To go through life armed only with audacity
would be tiring and also fatal. You would offend too many people, as is
proven by those who cannot control their boldness, One such person was
Lola Montez; her audacity brought her triumphs and led to her seduction
of the king of Baxfatia. But since she could never rein in her boldness, it
also led to her downfall—-in Bavaria, in England, wherever she turned. It
crossed the border between boldness and the appearance of cruelty, even
insanity. Ivan the Terrible suffered the same fate: When the power of bold-
ness brought him success, he stuck to it, to the point where it became a life
long pattern of violence and sadism. He lost the ability to tell when
boldness was appropriate and when it was not.
Timidity has no place in the realm of power; you will often benefit,
however, by being able to feign it. At that point, of course, it is no longer
iimidity but an offensive weapon: You are luring people in with your show
ofshyness, all the better to pounce on them boldly later.
LAW 2 B
235
29
PLAN ALL THE WAY
TO THE END
J U D GM ENT
The ending is everything. Plan all the may to it, taking
into account all the possible consequences, obstacles, and
twists offirrtune that might reverse your hard work and
give the glory to at/zers. By planning to the end you will
not be overwhelmed by circumstances and you wid know
when to stop. Gently guide fortune and help determine
thefuture by thinkingfar ahead.
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
In 1510 a ship set out from the island of Hispaniola (now Haiti and the
Dominican Republic) for Venezuela, where it was to rescue a besieged
Spanish colony. Several miles out of port, a stowaway climbed out of a
provision chest: Vasco Nufiez de Balboa, a noble Spaniard who had come
to the New World in search of gold but had fallen into debt and had es-
taped his creditors by hiding in the chest.
Balboa had been obsessed with gold ever since Columbus had re-
turned to Spain from his voyages with tales of a fabulous but as yet undis-
covered kingdom
called
El
Dorado.
Balboa
was
one
of
the
first
adventurers to come in search of Colurnbus’s land of gold, and he had de-
cided from the beginning that he would be the one to find it, through
sheer audacity and single—mindedness. Now that he was free of his credi-
tors, nothing would stop him.
Unfortunately the ship’s owner, a wealthy jurist named Francisco Fer-
nandez de Enciso, was furious when told of the stowaway, and he ordered
that Balboa be left on the first island they came across. Before they found
any island, however, Enciso received news that the colony he was to res-
cue had been abandoned. This was Balboa’s chance. He told the sailors of
his previous voyages to Panarna, and of the rumors he had heard of gold
in the area. The excited sailors convinced Enciso to spare Balboa’s life,
and to establish a colony in Panama. Weeks later they named their new
settlement “Darien.”
Darien’s first governor was Enciso, but Balboa was not a man to let
others steal the initiative. He campaigned against Enciso among the
sailors, who eventually made it clear that they preferred him as governor.
Enciso fled to Spain, fearing for his life. Months later, when a representa-
tive of the Spanish crown arrived to establish himself as the new, official
governor of Darien, he was turned away. On his return voyage to Spain,
this man drowned; the drowning was accidental, but under Spanish law,
Balboa had murdered the governor and usurped his position.
Balb0a’s bravado had got him out of scrapes before, but now his
hopes of wealth and glory seemed doomed. To lay claim to El Dorado,
should he discover it, he would need the approval of the Spanish king-—
which, as an outlaw, he would never receive. There was only one solution.
Panamanian Indians had told Balboa of a vast ocean on the other side of
the Central American isthmus, and had said diat by traveling south upon
this western coast, he would reach a fabulous land of gold, called by a
name that to his ears sounded like “Biru.” Balboa decided he would cross
the treacherous jungles of Panama and become the first European to bathe
his feet in this new ocean. From there he would march on El Dorado. If he
did this on Spain’s behalf, he would obtain the eternal gratitude of the
king, and would secure his own reprieve—-only he had to act before Span-
ish authorities came to arrest him.
In 1513, then, Balboa set out, with 190 soldiers. Halfway across the
isthmus (some ninety miles wide at that point), only sixty soldiers re-
Thero arc very few
men —aml they are [/10
exec/7tionA'—wl'to are
able to think amlfeel
beyond the present
moment
CARL vow C1./xusewnz.
1780- 1831
Till’. 'I \X 0 I“I€(?(l5
Two frogs dwelt in the
sums! pool. The pool
being drier! up under
the summer’: heat, rhey
left ii, and set out
together to seek
(mother home. As they
went along Ilwy
rlmncerl to pays (1 deep
well, amply supplied
with water, on Scemg
which one of the frogs
said to Iluc arlwrz “Let
us descend and nmke
our abode in this well,
it willfurnisli us with
shelter and food.
" The
other replied Wtl/I
greater caurinrlr
“But suppose the water
shrmldfail us. how can
we get our aguinfmm
so grew 11 tlepllt?"
Do nothing without 11
regard to the conse-
£[M€IlC€5'.
EABLES.
AESOP.
SIXTH CENTURY Hr‘.
LAW 29
237
Look to the end, no
/nutter what it is you
an-, <'0rz.wrlm'ir2_1{. Often
enough. God gives a
man a glimpse of
hap[1ines.s. and then
mierly ruins him.
Tlll-1HlS‘l'()Rll"S,
lli.R0mm
,
Fll<‘I'Il L’i~:N'1‘i,R~r u.
,.
Wlli Kl\(.
TH
‘ ‘ll H
v\.\D Tlfli SI Rillinfl
In tlmfiem timer 1: king
ofTm‘mry was out
walking with mine of
his noblemen. A! the
rrmrlxide was an ahdul
(ii wzmderirig Sufi),
who cried out.‘
“Whoever will give me
a hundred dinars, I will
give him srmm
good advice.
"
The kingsm;>ped. and
xairl: "Abdul, wlmr it
(his good uclvice for a
hmzdred diners?
"Sir." answered the
abrlal, "m'cl’er (lie sum
10 be given to me, am)’ I
will tell it you immedi-
ately.
" The king did .m,
e.rpu‘iing in [war same-
thing vxmxordiniiry.
The zlervish said /0
him: “My adv:
IS this:
Never hvgin (my!/iing
until you have reflected
what will be rho end of
it."/if this the rzirbles
and everyone else
[7l<’.S’(f7lI laughed, mying
that the ahdnl hem’ been
wise so ask for his
money in advztnce But
the king swirl.’ "You
have no reaxmz to
laugh al the good
advice this ahdrll ltas
given me. No one is
LAW 29
mained, many having succumbed to the harsh conditions——the blood-
sucking insects, the torrential rainfall, fever. Finally, from a mountaintop,
Balboa became the first European to lay eyes on the Pacific Ocean. Days
later he marched in his armor into its waters, bearing the banner of Castile
and claiming all its seas, lands, and islands in the name of the Spanish
throne.
Indians from the area greeted Balboa with gold, jewels, and precious
pearls, the like of which he had never seen. When he asked where these
had come from, the Indians pointed south, to the land of the Incas. But
Balboa had only a few soldiers left. For the moment, he decided, he
should return to Darien, send the jewels and gold to Spain as a token
of good will, and ask for a large army to aid him in the conquest of El
Dorado.
When news reached Spain of Balboa’s bold crossing of the isthmus,
his discovery of the western ocean, and his planned conquest of El Do-
rado, the former criminal became a hero. He was instantly proclaimed
governor of the new land. But before the king and queen received word of
his discovery, they had already sent a dozen ships, under the command of
a man named Pedro Arias Davila, “Pedrarias,” with orders to arrest Bal-
boa for murder and to take command of the colony. By the time Pedrarias
arrived in Panama, he had learned that Balboa had been pardoned, and
that he was to share the governorship with the former outlaw.
All the same, Balboa felt uneasy. Gold was his dream, El Dorado his
only desire. In pursuit of this goal he had nearly died many times over,
and to share the wealth and glory with a newcomer would be intolerable.
He also soon discovered that Pedraxias was a jealous, bitter man, and
equally unhappy with the situation. Once again, the only solution for Bel»
boa was to seize the initiative by proposing to cross the jungle with a
larger army, carrying shipbuilding materials and tools. Once on the Pa—
cific coast, he would create an armada. with which to conquer the Incas.
Surprisingly enough, Pedrarias agreed to the plan—--perhaps sensing it
would never work. Hundreds died in this second march through the jun-
gle, and the timber they carried rotted in the torrential rains. Balboa, as
usual, was undaunted»-no power in the world could thwart his plan—and
on arriving at the Pacific he began to cut down trees for new lumber. But
the men remaining to him were too few and too weak to mount an inva-
sion, and once again Balboa had to return to Darien.
Pedrarias had in any case invited Balboa back to discuss a new plan,
and on the outskirts of the settlement, the explorer was met by Francisco
Pizarro, an old friend who had accompanied him on his first crossing of
the isthmus. But this was a trap: Leading one hundred soldiers, Pizarro
surrounded his former friend, arrested him, and returned him to Fe
draiias, who tried him on charges of rebellion. A few days later Ba.lboa’s
head fell into a basket, along with those of his most trusted followers.
Years later Pizarro himself reached Peru, and Balboa’s deeds were for-
gotten.
Interpretation
Most men are ruled by the heart, not the head. Their plans are vague, and
when they meet obstacles they improvise. But improvisation will only
bring you as far as the next crisis, and is never a substitute for thinking
several steps ahead and planning to the end.
Balboa had a dream of glory and wealth, and a vague plan to reach it.
Yet his bold deeds, and his discovery of the Pacific, are largely forgotten,
for he committed what in the world of power is the ultimate sin: He went
part way, leaving the door open for others to take over. A real man of
power would have had the prudence to see the dangers in the distance——
the rivals who would want to share in the conquests, the vultures that
would hover once they heard the word “gold.” Balboa should have kept
his knowledge of the Incas secret until after he had conquered Peru. Only
then would his wealth, and his head, have been secure. Once Pedrarias ar-
rived on the scene, a man of power and prudence would have schemed to
kill or imprison him, and to take over the army he had brought for the
conquest of Peru. But Balboa was locked in the moment, always reacting
emotionally, never thinking ahead.
What good is it to have the greatest dream in the world if others reap
the benefits and the glory? Never lose your head over
a vague, open-
ended drearn—plan to the end.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In 1863 the Prussian premier Otto von Bismarck surveyed the chessboard
of European power as it then stood. The main players were England,
France, and Austria. Prussia itself was one of several states in the loosely
allied German Federation. Austria, dominant member of the Federation,
made sure that the other German states remained weak, divided and sub»
missive. Bismarck believed that Prussia was destined for something far
greater than servant boy to Austria.
This is how Bismarck played the game. His first move was to start a
war with lowly Denmark, in order to recover the former Prussian lands of
Schleswig—Holstein, He knew that these rumblings of Prussian indepen-
dence might worry France and England, so he enlisted Austria in the war,
claiming that he was recovering Schleswig-Holstein for their benefit. ln a
few months, after the war was decided, Bismarck demanded that the
newly conquered lands be made part of Prussia. The Austrians of course
were furious, but they compromised: First they agreed to give the Prus-
aians Schleswig, and
a year later they sold them Holstein. The world
began to see that Austria was weakening and that Prussia was on the rise.
Bismarck’s next move was his boldest: In 1866 he convinced King
William of Prussia to withdraw from the German Federation, and in doing
so to go to war with Austria itself. King William’s wife, his son the crown
prince, and the princes of the other German kingdoms vehemently op-
posed such a war. But Bismarck, undaunted, succeeded in forcing the con-
flict, and Prussia’s superior army defeated the Austrians in the brutally
miuwarr: of the fact mm
we should think well
before doing anything.
But we are zlui/y guilty
ofrmr rcmtambraring.
and the cor1s¢'quenr.'e.s
are evil. fwiry much
vulut.’ !l'Ii.r dervish '5
advice,
"
The king decizied to
bear the aa'vice always
in Iuir mind, and coin»
mamled it m be written
in gold on Ilie walls
and even engmved on
/zis Sl[V(‘J'[)l£1!<’?.
Not long flficrwanl a
ploller drasirzed to kill
the king. He bribed the
r’(1y££1.YIN'g(!t')n with a
pmmise of {he prime
rninistzrrxhip ifhe’ rlmm
a poisoned la/‘we; into
the king ‘X arm. Wlmi
the time mm: to let
sanm of the kings
hlaorl. ll silver basin
was placed ((7 catch the
blond. Sur1'(1enly the
rurgevn became smart‘
of the words engraved
upon lz: "Nmmr I;-rgin
rmlvtlzing umil you have
ref!(I(.‘lm'l what will be
the and of it." It was
only (hm llza! he real-
ized that if/he planer
betramrt king he muld
lmw lhe surgeon killed
imtimtly, and would
not need to fulfill my
bargain.
The king. weing that
Vhr‘ surgeon was now
trembling. asked him
what was wrong with
him. And so he
(70IIf¢‘S5t’(l the truth. at
that very moment.
‘Ila-' plotter was seizetl;
and {lie king sem_for all
the people who hurt
hem prescrliz when this
abclal gave his advice,
and said In i‘llt?I1l.‘ “Do
you still laugh at the
rle/wish?
"
(7.-\R,4\V/\N or DRFAMS.
lI>RllaS SHAII, 1968
LAW 29
239
He who nSk.tfnrtun0~
Iellers me future
unwittingly farfelfs zm
inm1rinlin’u1ti0Il of
coming events that is a
thousand times rnore
exact Ihan imyzhing
they may say
WAIJYER BENJAMIN.
l 8‘}2-- l 940
240
LAW 29
short Seven Weeks War. The king and the Pmssian generals then wanted
to march on Vienna, tak.i.ug as much land from Austria as possible. But
Bismarck stopped them--now he presented himself as
on the side of
peace. The result was that he was able to conclude a treaty with Austria
that granted Prussia and the other German states total autonomy. Bis-
marck could now position Prussia. as the dominant power in Germany and
the head of a newly formed North German Confederation.
The French and the English began to compare Bismarck to Attila the
Hun, and to fear that he had designs on all of Europe. Once he had started
on the path to conquest, there was no telling where he would stop. And,
indeed, three years later Bismarck provoked a war with France. First he
appeared to give his permission to France’s annexation of Belgium, then
at the last moment he changed his mind. Playing a caband-mouse game,
he infuriated the French emperor, Napoleon Ill, and stirred up his own
king against the French. To no one’s surprise, war broke out in 1870. The
newly formed German federation enthusiastically joined in the
war
on France, and once again the Prussian military machine and its allies
destroyed the enemy army in a matter of months. Although Bismarck
opposed taking any French land, the generals convinced him that Alsace-
Lorraine would become part of the federation.
Now all of Europe feared the next move of the Prussian monster, led
by Bismarck, the “Iron Chancellor.” And in fact a year later Bismarck
founded the German Empire, with
the
Prussian king
as the newly
crowned emperor and Bismarck himself a prince. But then something
strange happened: Bismarck instigated no more wars. And while the other
European powers grabbed up land for colonies in other continents, he se-
verely limited Germany’s colonial acquisitions. He did not want more
land for Germany, but more security. For the rest of his life he struggled to
maintain peace in Europe and to prevent further wars. Everybody as-
sumed he had changed, mellowing with the years. They had failed to un-
derstand: This was the final move of his original plan.
Interpretation
There is a simple reason why most men never know when to come off the
attack: They form no concrete idea of their goal. Once they achieve vic-
tory they only hunger for more. To stop-—to aim for a goal and then keep
to it——seems almost inhuman, in fact; yet nothing is more critical to the
maintenance of power. The person who goes too far in his triumphs cre-
ates a reaction that inevitably leads to a decline. The only solution is to
plan for the long run. Foresee the future with as much clarity as the gods
on Mount Olympus, who look through the clouds and see the ends of all
things.
From the beginning of his career in polifics, Bismarck had one goal:
to form an independent German state led by Prussia. He instigated the
war with Denmark not to conquer territory but to stir up Prussian nation-
alism and unite the country. He incited the war with Austiia only to gain
Prussian independence. (This was why he refused to grab Austrian terri-
tory.) And he fomented the war with France to unite the German king-
doms against a common enemy, and thus to prepare for the formation of a
united Germany.
Once this was achieved, Bismarck stopped. He never let triumph go
to his head, was never tempted by the siren call of more. He held the rei.ns
tightly, and whenever the generals, or the king, or the Prussian people de-
manded new conquests, he held them back. Nothing would spoil the
beauty of his creation, certainly not a false euphoria that pushed those
around him to attempt to go past the end that he had so carefully planned.
Experience shows that, if anef0Teset4.9_f1“amfaT away the designs to be
undertaken, one can act with speed when the moment comes to execute them.
Cardimzf ftichelieru, 1585-1642
KEYS TO POWER
According to the cosmology of the ancient Greeks, the gods were thought
to have complete vision into the future. They saw everything to come,
right down to the intricate details. Men, on the other hand, were seen as
victims of fate, trapped in the moment and their emotions, unable to see
beyond immediate dangers. Those heroes, such as Odysseus, who were
able to look beyond the present and plan several steps ahead, seemed to
defy fate, to approximate the gods in their ability to determine the future.
The comparison is still va.1id—those among us who think further ahead
and patiently bring their plans to fruition seem to have a godlike power.
Because most people are too imprisoned in the moment to plan with
this kind of foresight, the ability to ignore immediate dangers and plea-
sures translates into power. It is the power of being able to overcome the
natural human tendency to react to things as they happen, and instead to
train oneself to step back, imagining the larger things taking shape beyond
one’s immediate vision. Most people believe that they are in fact aware of
the future, that they are planning and thinking ahead. They are usually de-
luded: What they are really doing is succumbing to their desires, to what
they want the future to be. Their plans are vague, based on their imagina-
tions rather than their reality. They may believe they are thinking all the
way to the end, but they are really only focusing on the happy ending, and
deluding themselves by the strength of their desire.
In 415 B.C., the ancient Athenians attacked Sicily, believing their ex-
pedition would bring them riches, power, and a glorious ending to the six-
teen-year Peloponnesian War. They did not consider the dangers of an
invasion so far from home; they did not foresee that the Sicilians would
light all the harder since the battles were in their own homeland, or that
all of Athens’s enemies would band together against them, or that war
would break out on several fronts, stretching their forces way too thin.
The Sicilian expedition was a complete disaster, leading to the destruction
LAW 2!)
.24!
of one of the greatest civilizations of all time. The Athenians were led into
this disaster by their hearts, not their minds. They saw only the chance of
glory, not the dangers that loomed in the distance.
Cardinal de Retz, the seventeenth-century Frenchman who prided
himself on his insights into human schemes and why they mostly fail, ana-
lyzed this phenomenon. In the
course of a rebellion he spearheaded
against the French monarchy in 1651, the young king, Louis XIV, and his
court had suddenly left Paris and established themselves in a palace out-
side the capital. The presence of the king so close to the heart of the revo-
lution had been a tremendous burden on the revolutionaries, and they
breathed a sigh of relief. This later proved their downfall, however, since
the court’s absence from Paris gave it much more room to maneuver.
“The most ordinary cause of people’s mistakes,” Cardinal de Retz later
wrote, “is their being too much frightened at the present danger, and not
enough so at that which is remote.”
The dangers that are remote, that loom in the distance-—if we can see
them as they take shape, how many mistakes we avoid. How many plans
we would instantly abort if we realized we were avoiding a small danger
only to step into a larger one. So much of power is not what you do but
what you do not do——the rash and foolish actions that you refrain from be-
fore they get you into trouble. Plan in detail before you act—do not let
vague plans lead you into trouble. Will this have unintended
conse-
quences? Will I stir up new enemies? Will someone else take advantage of
my labors? Unhappy endings
are much
more
common than happy
ones——do not be swayed by the happy ending in your mind.
The French elections of 1848 came down to a struggle between Louis-
Adolphe Thiers, the man of order, and General Louis Eugene Cavaignac,
the rabble-rouser of the right When Thiers realized he was hopelessly be-
hind in this high—stakes race, he searched desperately for a solution. His
eye fell on Louis Bonaparte, grand-nephew of the great general Napoleon,
and a lowly deputy in the parliament. This Bonaparte seemed a bit of an
imbecile, but his name alone could get him elected in a country yearning
for a strong ruler. He would be Thiers’s puppet and eventually would be
pushed offstage. The first part of the plan worked to perfection, and
Napoleon was elected by a large margin. The problem was that Thiers
had not foreseen one simple fact: This “imbecile” was in fact a man of
enormous ambition. Three years later he dissolved parliament, declared
himself emperor, and ruled France for another eighteen years, much to
the horror of Thiers and his party.
The ending is everything. It is the end of the action that determines
who gets the glory, the money, the prize. Your conclusion must be crystal
clear, and you must keep it constantly in mind. You must also figure out
how to ward off the vultures circling overhead, trying to live off the car-
cass of your creation. And you must anticipate the many possible crises
that will tempt you to improvise. Bismarck overcame these dangers be-
cause he planned to the end, kept on course through every crisis, and
never let others steal the glory. Once he had reached his stated goal, he
withdrew into his shell like a turtle. This kind of selfcontrol is godlike.
When you see several steps ahead, and plan your moves all the way
to the end, you will no longer be tempted by emotion or by the desire to
improvise. Your clarity will rid you of the anxiety and vagueness that are
the primary reasons why so many fail to conclude their actions success-
fully. You see the ending and you tolerate no deviation.
lm age:
The Gods on
Mount Olympus.
Looking down
on
human actions from the
clouds, they see in advance the
endings of all the great dreams that
lead
to
disaster
and
tragedy,
And
they laugh at our inability to
see beyond
the moment, and at how we delude ourselves.
Authority: How much easier it is never to get in than to get yourself
out! We should act contrary to the reed which, when it first appears,
throws up a long straight stem but afterwards, as though it were ex-
hausted
.
.
. makes several dense knots, indicating that it no longer
has its original vigor and drive. We must rather begin gently and
coolly, saving our breath for the encounter and our vigorous thrusts
for finishing off the job. In their beginnings it is we who guide affairs
and hold them in our power; but so often once they are set in motion,
it is they which guide us and sweep us along. (Montaigne. 1533-1592)
LAW 29
243
244
LAW 29
REVERSAL
It is a cliché among strategists that your plan must include alternatives and
have a degree of flexibility. That is certainly true. If you are locked into a
plan too rigidly, you will be unable to deal with sudden shifts of fortune.
Once you have examined the future possibilities and decided on your tar-
get, you must build in alternatives and be open to new routes toward your
goal.
Most people, however, lose less from overplanning and rigidity than
from vagueness and a tendency to improvise constantly in the face of Ci1‘~
cumstance. There is no real purpose in contemplating a reversal to this
Law, then, for no good can come from refusing to think far into the future
and planning to the end. If you are clear and fapthinking enough, you
will understand that the future is uncertain, and that you must be open to
adaptation. Only having 3. clear objective and a far-reaching plan allows
you that freedom.
30
MAKE YOUR
ACCOMPLISHMENTS
SEEM EFFORTLESS
JUDGMENT
Your actions must seem natural and executed with ease.
All the toil and pmdice that go into them, and also all
the clever hicks, must be concealed. When you (let, not ef-
fortlessly, as zfyou could do much more. Avoid the temp-
tation qf mrealing how hard you w01iz——-it only raises
questions. Teach no one your tricks or they wiii be used
against you.
245
l\ \\U §v\‘I\Y!
'\tl,\"l‘|'.i{ \I{T|h‘l‘
Dam Mt1.vrm1um' mire
sml for litrmyu to
zleconuc (1 pair of gold
.\'rrw'n.\- wven /r-er high.
The artist mid he
thought hEuck—:mrl—
wliita Sk1’l('}’i'{5i‘ would
sat‘! them, and went
home ttgdin ttfwr
t'otm‘rlt-rim: I/mm tram
fully. The man rtzztrniny
he came early and
made Lt large quantity
ofink into wlriciz he
dippctl o hrtrxexitme he
had hmugflit with him,
am! Ih£’V1 prm'€r*tie’d to
tnrtkr irnprmisitvrts of
this all over one of the
NC!
' ’I'Iu’t1. with a
Iarge brmh. he drew a
mtmln/r oflines aL'ro.s'.x'
them. Mcmtwlxilv
M./wamtmc had mme
m to watch his work’,
and ti! this he would
ctttlttitin his it'ri1il(i()It nu
longer. and tmmerittg,
“What It beastly nw.s.s'.'"
he .1'trm[(- away to lets
own [l]Ial‘(Nit’n!.$. The
re'miIwr.\' mld 'l‘amtyu
lit? was in a very bad
h"m])!‘I‘ imleetl. “He
.vhottldrt't look on wlzi/1%
I am at work, (hon,
"
niplietl the painter. "lie
xhoulrl wait till 1'! is
/inixhctl.
" Thm he took
up (I xtnttlirer ftrnxh and
dtmiml in touches‘ here
and (hum, and as he did
X0 i/xt‘prirxti' of the
Imt-.m-xlwe mum! mm
(‘Hi/)5‘, whifzz the big
broad fi'U'4tk(’.S' became
ruslmv. He then turned
to the other .\L’reL*r1 and
.vp[u.vI1r'tl {Imps nfink
all twrr it, and when he
had tu1¢led a few Ixrush»
xtmkes here and there
they bx.-nmzv rt ffzghr of
246
LAW so
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I
The Japanese tea ceremony called Cha~no—yu (“Hot Water for Tea”) has
origins in ancient times, but it reached its peak of refinement in the six~
teenth century under its most renowned practitioner, Sen no Rjlcyu. Al-
though not from a noble family, Rikyu rose to great power, becoming the
preferred tea master of the Emperor Hideyoshi, and an important adviser
on aesthetic and even political matters. For Rikyu, the secret of success
consisted in appearing natural, concealing the effort behind one’s work.
One day Rikyu and his son went to an acquaintance’s house for a tea
ceremony. On the way in, the son remarked that the lovely antique—look~
ing gate at their host’s house gave it an evocatively lonely appearance. “I
don’t think so,” replied his father, “it looks as though it had been brought
from some mountain temple along way off, and as if the labor required to
import it must have cost a lot of money.” If the owner of the house had put
this much effort into one gate, it would show in his tea ceremony-—-and in-
deed Sen no Rikyu had to leave the ceremony early, unable to endure the
affectation and effort it inadvertently revealed.
On another evening, while having tea at a friend’s house, Rikyu saw
his host go outside, hold up a lantem in the darkness, cut a lemon off a tree,
and bring it in. This charmed Rikyu--the host needed a. relish for the dish
he was serving, and had spontaneously gone outside to get one. But when
the man offered the lemon with some Osaka rice cake, Rikyu realized that
he had planned the cutting of the lemon all along, to go with this expensive
delicacy. The gesture no longer seemed spontane0us—~it was a way for the
host to prove his cleverness. He had accidentally revealed how hard he
was trying. Having seen enough, Rikyu politely declined the cake, excused
himself, and left.
Emperor Hideyoshi once planned to visit Rikyu for a. tea ceremony.
On the night before he was to come, snow began to fall. Thinking quickly,
Rikyu laid round cushions that fit exactly on each of the steppingvstones
that led through the garden to his house. Just before dawn, he rose, saw
that it had stopped snowing, and carefully removed the cushions. When
Hideyoshi arrived, he marveled at the simple beauty of the sight-—tl1e per-
fectly round stepping stones, unencumbered by snow——-and noticed how it
called no attention to the manner in which Rikyu had accomplished it, but
only to the polite gesture itself.
After Sen no Rikyu died, his ideas had a profound influence on the
practice of the tea ceremony. The Tokugawa shogun Yorinobu, son of the
great Emperor Ieyasu, was a student of Rikyu's teachings. In his garden he
had a stone lantern made by a famous master, and Lord Sakai Tadakatsu
asked if he could come by one day to see it. Yoriuobu replied that he would
be honored, and commanded his gardeners to put everything in order for
the visit. These gardeners, unfamiliar with the precepts of Cha-no~yu,
thought the stone lantern misshapen, its windows being too small for the
present taste. They had a local workman enlarge the windows. A few days
before Lord Sakai’s visit, Yorinobu toured the garden. ‘When he saw the al-
tered windows he exploded with rage, ready to impale on his sword the
fool who had mined the lantern, upsetting its natural grace and destroying
the whole purpose of Lord Sakafs visit.
When Yorinobu calmed down, however, he remembered that he had
originally bought two of the lanterns, and that the second was in his garden
on the island of Kishu. At great expense, he hired a whale boat and the
finest rowers he could find, ordering them to bring the lantern to him
within two days—a difficult feat at best, But the sailors rowed day and
night, and with the luck of a good wind they arrived just in time. To ‘[011-
nobu’s delight, this stone lantern was more magnificent than the first, for it
had stood untouched for twenty years in a bamboo thicket, acquiring
2-1
brilliant antique appearance and a delicate covering of moss. When Lord
Sakai arrived, later that same day, he was awed by the lantern, which was
more magnificent than he had imag1'ned———so graceful and at one with the
elements. Fortunately he had no idea what time and effort it had cost Yori-
nobu to create this sublime effect.
interpretation
To Sen no Rikyu, the sudden appearance of something naturally, almost
accidentally graceful was the height of beauty. This beauty came without
warning and seemed effortless. Nature created such things by its own laws
and processes, but men had to create their effects through labor and con-
trivance. And when they showed the effort of producing the effect, the e£
feet was spoiled. The gate came from too far away, the cutting of the lemon
looked contrived.
You will often have to use tricks and ingenuity to create your effects-—
the cushions in the snow, the men rowing all night——but your audience
must never suspect the work or the thinking that has gone into them. Na-
ture does not reveal its tricks, and what imitates nature by appearing effort-
less approximates nature’s power.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW H
The great escape artist Harry Houdini once advertised his act as “The lm~
possible Possible." And indeed those who witnessed his dramatic escapes
felt that what he did onstage contradicted commonsense ideas of human
capacity.
One evening in 1904, an audience of 4,000 Londoners filled a theater
to watch Houdini accept a challenge: to escape from
a. pair of manacles
billed as the strongest ever invented. They contained six sets of locks and
nine tumblers in each cuff; a Birmingham maker had spent five years con-
structing them. Experts who examined them said they had never seen any-
thing so intricate, and this intricacy was thought to make them impossible
to escape.
The crowd watched the experts secure the manacles on Houdini’s
wrists. Then the escape artist entered a black cabinet on stage. The minutes
swallows over willow
trees. When Mrimmum-,
saw the fimshed work
he was as m-*erjr>y(’(I at
the artist‘: skill ar Ire
had previously been
annoyed at the (eppun
em mess he was
making of the .s'crm:n.r.
CHA—Nc-Yu:
l‘il1‘JAPANLSl"l"l’A
CEREMUN
'
A. L. S.-\I)l.l£H. 1962
'|Ill‘. \\ Ill >4l‘l,l.‘£(.
'~1~\!é'i'l:R
Tlzere was once at
wrestling rmzsler who
was vmwd in 360 feirlts
and holds. Hr‘. look A
.s'peL‘iaI liking to one of
his pupils, In whom hr:
mug/ll 359 of them over
(2 periml 1,»/"time. Some-
how he never gm
armmd to the Ins! triclc.
As mrmtfn’ went by Ilut
young man Iiecalw so
profirmrtt in the all that
he beyletl everyone who
zlumd In fare him in I121!
ring. He was so proud
vfhir prowess that one
sin): hr buaszerl before
tire suliszlz that he czmlri
readily whip his rnaszer,
were it not our of
rn.s']7t'(‘t for his age am!
gratitllzle fur his
tutelage.
The sultan became
iI1€{’P1.S'(‘(.ftIl this irrcven
sure and ordered an
immediate: mezlch with
the royal czmrt in
urtendmzce.
/1! the gang Illa youth
lmrged forward with :1
lusty yell. only to be
confront;-,d with the
unfamiliar 3510111 )‘t*1'nI.
The masler seized his
former pupil, lifted him
high above his head,
Imdflung him crashing
m the ground. The
sultan and the Insem-
bly let out a loud cheer.
When the rultun asked
the masier how hr: was
able to overcome rack
11 strong opponent, fhe
rnmter corifcxsed that
he had reserved a secret
technique for himseif
for jllsl such 11 crmlirtr
gem-y. Then he related
the Iamemulion of a
marlcr of archery, who
laugh: everything he
knew. "No one has
Ierzrnm! archery from
me,
" the poor fellow
cornphiined, “who has
rint men‘ to use me as :2
buff in the end.
"
A srour or S/mm.
AS TOLD 1N
ms CRAI-“I or POW!-;R.
R.G. H. 511:, 1979
248
.
LAW 30
went by; the more time passed, the more certain it seemed that these man»
acles would be the first to defeat him. At one point he emerged from the
cabinet, and asked that the cuffs be temporarily removed so that he could
take off his coat—it was hot inside. The challengers refused, suspecting his
request was a trick to find out how the locks worked. Undeterred, and with
out using his hands, Houdini managed to lift the coat over his shoulders,
turn it inside out, remove a penknife from his vest pocket with his teeth,
and, by moving his head, out the coat off his arms. Freed from the coat, he
stepped back into the cabinet, the audience roaring with approval at his
grace and dexterity.
Finally, having kept the audience wailing long enough, Houdini
emerged from the cabinet a second time, now with his hands free, the man-
acles raised high in triumph. To this day no one knows how he managed
the escape. Although he had taken close to an hour to free himself, he had
never looked concerned, had shown no sign of doubt. Indeed it seemed by
the end that he had drawn out the escape as a way to heighten the drama,
to make the audience worry-—-for there was no other sign that the perfon
mance had been anything but easy. The complaint about the heat was
equally part of the act. The spectators of this and other Houdini perfon
mances must have felt he was toying with them: These manacles are noth~
ing, he seemed to say, I could have freed myself a lot sooner, and from a
lot worse.
Over the years, Houdini escaped from the chained carcass of an em
balmed “sea monster”
(3. half octopus, half whalelike beast that had
beached near Boston); he had himself sealed inside an enormous envelope
from which he emerged without breaking the paper; he passed through
brick walls; he wriggled free from straitjackets while dangling high in the
air; he leaped from bridges into icy waters, his hands manacled and his legs
in chains; he had himself submerged in glass cases full of water, hands pad-
locked, while the audience watched in amazement as he worked himself
free, struggling for close to an hour apparently without breathing. Each
time he seemed to court certain death yet survived with superhuman
aplomb. Meanwhile, he said nothing about his methods, gave no clues as
to how be accomplished any of his tricks——~he left his audiences and critics
speculating, his power and reputation enhanced by their struggles with the
inexplicable. Perhaps the most baffling trick of all was making a ten—thou-
sa.ud—pound elephant disappear before an audience’s eyes, a feat he re
peated on stage for over nineteen weeks. No one has ever really explained
how he did this, for in the auditorium where he performed the trick, there
was simply nowhere for an elephant to hide.
The effortlessness of Houdin1"s escapes led some to think he used oc-
cult forces, his superior psychic abilities giving him special control over his
body. But a German escape artist named Kleppini claimed to know Hon»
dini’s secret: He simply used elaborate gadgets. Kleppini also claimed to
have defeated Houdini in a handcuff challenge in Holland.
Houdini did not mind all kinds of speculation floating around about
his methods, but he would not tolerate an outright lie, and in 1902 he chal-
lenged Kleppini to a handcuff duel. Kleppini accepted. Through a spy, he
found out the secret word to unlock a pair of French combination-lock
cuffs that Houdini liked to use. His plan was to choose these cuffs to escape
from onstage. This would definitively debunk Houdini—his “genius” sim-
ply lay in his use of mechanical gadgets.
On the night of the challenge, just as Kleppini had planned, Houdini
offered him a choice of cuffs and he selected the ones with the combination
lock. He was even able to disappear with them behind a screen to make a
quick test, and reemerged seconds later, confident of victory.
Acting as if he sensed fraud, Houdini refused to lock Kleppini in the
cuffs. The two men argued and began to fight, even wrestling with each
other onstage. After a few minutes of this, an apparently angry, frustrated
Houdini gave up and locked Kleppini in the cuffs. For the next few minutes
Kleppini strained to get free. Something was wrong——minutes earlier he
had opened the cuffs behind the screen; now the same code no longer
worked. He sweated, racking his brains. Hours went by, the audience left,
and finally an exhausted and humiliated Kleppini gave up and asked to be
released.
The cuffs that Kleppini himself had opened behind the screen with the
word
“C—L—E-F—S” (French for “keys”) now clicked open only with the
word “F-R-A-U-D. ”Kleppini never figured out how Houdini had accom-
plished this uncanny feat.
Interpretation
Although we do not know for certain how Houdini accomplished many of
his most ingenious escapes, one thing is clear: It was not the occult, or any
kind of magic, that gave him his powers, but hard work and endless prac-
tice, all of which he carefully concealed from the world. Houdini never left
anything to chance-—-day and night he studied the workings of locks, re-
searched centuries-old sleight—of-hand tricks, pored over books on mechan
ics, whatever he could use. Every moment not spent researching he spent
working his body, keeping himself exceptionally limher, and learning how
to control his muscles and his breathing.
Early on in Houdini’s career, an old Japanese performer whom he
toured with taught him an ancient trick: how to swallow an ivory ball, then
bring it back up. He practiced this endlessly with a small peeled potato tied
to a string—up and down he would manipulate the potato with his throat
muscles, until they were strong enough to move it without the string. The
organizers of the London handcuff challenge had searched Houdini’s body
thoroughly beforehand, but no one could check the inside of his throat,
where he could have concealed small tools to help him escape. Even so,
Kleppini was fundamentally wrong: It was not Houdini’s tools but his prac-
tice, work, and research that made his escapes possible.
Kleppini, in fact, was completely outwitted by Houdini, who set the
whole thing up. He let his opponent learn the code to the French cuffs,
Keep the exrent nfyour
abilities unknown. The
wise man does not
allow hIS knowledge
and abilities to be
rounded to the bottom,
ifhe desires to be
honored by all. He
allows you to know
them but 710! to
comprehend them. No
one must know the
extent of/zit abilities
lest he be disappointed.
No one ever has an
opportunity offazhmw
ing him entirely. Fur
guesses and doubts
about the extem ofhis
taletus arouse more
veneration than accu—
rule knowledge of
them, be they ever so
great.
BALTASAR GRACIAN,
1601-1658
LAW 30
249
250
.
LAW 30
then baited him into choosing those cuffs onstage. Then, during the two
men’s tussle, the dexterous Houdini was able to change the code to “ER-
AvU-D.” He had spent weeks practicing this trick, but the audience saw
none of the sweat and toil behind the scenes. Nor was Houdini ever ner-
vous; he induced nervousness in others. (He deliberately dragged out the
time it would take to escape, as a way of heightening the drama, and mak-
ing the audience squirm.) His escapes from death, always graceful and
easy, made him look like a superman.
As a person of power, you must research and practice endlessly before
appearing in public, onstage or anywhere else. Never expose the sweat and
labor behind your poise. Some think such exposure will demonstrate their
diligence and honesty, but it actually just makes them look weaker-—as if
anyone who practiced and worked at it could do what they had done, or as
if they weren’t really up to the job. Keep your effort and your tricks to
yourself and you seem to have the grace and ease of a. god. One never sees
the source of a god’s power revealed; one only sees its effects.
A line [ofpoetry] will take us hours maybe;
Yet if it does not seem a mmnentis thought,
Our stitching and unstitciting has been naught.
Adam ‘s Curse, William Butler them, I 865~~l' 939
KEYS TO POWER
Humanity‘s first notions of power came from primitive encounters with na-
ture-—the flash of lightning in the sky, a sudden flood, the speed and feroc
ity of a wild animal. These forces required no thinking, no planning—they
awed us by their sudden appearance, their gracefulness, and their power
over life and death. And this remains the kind of power we have always
wanted to imitate. Through science and technology we have recreated the
speed and sublime power of nature, but something is missing: Our ma~
chines are noisy and jerky, they reveal their effort. Even the very best cre-
ations of technology cannot root out our admiration for things that move
easily and effortlessly. The power of children to bend us to their will comes
from a kind of seductive charm that we feel in the presence‘ of a creature
less reflective and more graceful than we are. We cannot retum to such a
state, but if we can create the appearance of this kind of ease, we elicit in
others the kind of primitive awe that nature has always evoked in hu-
mankind.
One of the first European writers to expound on this principle came
from that most unnatural of environments, the Renaissance court. In 771:
Book ofthe Courtier, published in 1528, Baldassare Castiglione describes the
highly elaborate and codified manners of the perfect court citizen. And yet,
Castiglione explains, the courtier must execute these gestures with what he
calls .r[mzz,zatu1a, the capacity to make the difficult seem easy. He urges the
courtier to “practice in all things a certain nonchalance which conceals all
artistry and makes whatever one says or does seem uncontrived and effort-
less.” We all admire the achievement of some unusual feat, but if it is ac-
complished naturally and gracefully, our admiration increases tenfold-—
“whereas
.
.
. to labor at what one is doing and
.
.
. to make bones over it,
shows an extreme lack of grace and causes everything, whatever its worth,
to be discounted.”
Much of the idea of sprezzalura came from the world of art. All the
great Renaissance artists carefully kept their works under wraps. Only the
finished masterpiece could be shown to the public. Michelangelo forbade
even popes to view his work in process. A Renaissance artist was always
careful to keep his studios shut to patrons and public alike, not out of fear
of imitation, but because to see the making of the works would mar the
magic of their effect, and their studied atmosphere of ease and natural
beauty.
The Renaissance painter Vasari, also the first great art critic, ridiculed
the work of Paolo Uccello, who was obsessed with the laws of perspective.
The elfort Uccello spent on improving the appearance of perspective was
too obvious in his work——it made his paintings ugly and labored, over-
whelmed by the elicit of their effects. We have the same response when we
watch performers who put too much effort into their act: Seeing them try-
ing so hard breaks the illusion. It also makes us uncomfortable. Calm,
graceful performers, on the other hand, set us at ease, creating the illusion
that they are not acting but being natural and themselves, even when
everything they are doing involves labor and practice.
The idea of sprewztum is relevant to all forms of power, for power
depends vitally on appearances and the illusions you create. Your public
actions are like artworks: They must have visual appeal, must create antici»
pation, even entertain. When you reveal the inner workings of your cre—
ation,
you
become just
one
more
mortal
among
others.
What
is
understandable is not awe-inspiring-—we tell ourselves we could do as well
if we had the money and time. Avoid the temptation of showing how
clever you are-—it is far more clever to conceal the mechanisms of your
cleverness.
Talleyrand’s application of this concept to his daily life greatly en»
hanced the aura of power that surrounded him. He never liked to work too
hard, so he made others do the work for hirn—-the spying, the research, the
detailed analyses. With all this labor at his disposal, he himself never
seemed to strain. VVhen his spies revealed that a certain event was about to
take place, he would talk in social conversation as if he sensed its immi-
nence. The result was that people thought he was clairvoyant. His short
pithy statements and witticisms always seemed to summarize a situation
perfectly, but they were based on much research and thought. '13:: those in
government, including Napoleon himself, Talleyrand gave the impression
of immense power—an effect entirely dependent on the apparent ease
with which he accomplished his feats.
There is another reason for concealing your shortcuts and tricks:
LAW 30
251
When you let this information out, you give people ideas they can use
against you. You lose the advantages of keeping silent. We tend to want the
world to know what we have done--we want our vanity gratified by hay»
ing our hard work and cleverness applauded, and we may even want sym—
pathy for the hours it has taken to reach our point of artistry. Learn to
control this propensity to blab, for its effect is often the opposite of what
you expected. Remember: The more mystery surrounds your actions, the
more awesome your power seems, You appear to be the only one who can
do what you do--and the appearance of having an exclusive
is im-
mensely powerful. Finally, because you achieve your accomplishments
with grace and ease, people believe that you could always do more if you
tried harder. This elicits not only admiration but a touch of fear. Your pow-
ers are untapped-——no one can fathom their limits.
Image: The Racehorse. From up close we would see the
strain, the effort to control the horse, the labored, painful
breathing. But from the distance where we sit and watch, it
is all gracefulness, flying through the air. Keep others at a
distance and they will only see the ease with which you move.
Authority: For whatever action [nonchalance] accompanies, no
matter how trivial it is, it not only reveals the skill of the person
doing it but also very often causes it to be considered far greater
than it really is. This is because it makes the onlookers believe that
a man who performs well with so much faxsility must possess even
greater skill than he does. (Baldassare Castiglione, 14784529)
REVE RSAL
The secrecy with which you surround your azztions must seem lighthearted
in spirit. A zeal to conceal your work creates an unpleasant, almost para-
noiar: impression: you are taking the game too seriously. Houdini was care»
ful to make the concealment of his tricks seem a game, all part of the show.
Never show your work until it is finished, but if you put too much effort
into keeping it under wraps you will be like the painter Pontormo, who
spent the last years of his life hiding his frescoes from the public eye and
only succeeded in driving himself mad. Always keep your sense of humor
about yourself.
There are also times when revealing the inner workings of your pm
jects can prove worthwhile. It all depends on your andience’s taste, and on
252
—
LAW 30
the times in which you operate. P. T. Barnum recognized that his public
wanted to feel involved in his shows, and that understanding his tricks de-
lighted them, partly, perhaps, because implicitly debunking people who
kept their sources of power hidden from the masses appealed to Ametica’s
democratic spirit. The public also appreciated the showman’s humor and
honesty. Barnum took this to the extreme of publicizing his own humbug—
gery in his popular autobiogzaphy, written when his career was at its
height.
As long as the partial disclosure of tricks and techniques is carefully
planned, rather than the result of an uncontrollable need to blab, it is the
ultimate in cleverness. It gives the audience the illusion of being superior
and involved, even while much of what you do remains concealed from
them.
LAW 30
1
253
31
CONTROLTHEOFUON&
(3ET(3TT{EIHSTC)PIJVYVVYFH
TEH£CDkRJ)S‘YCHJI)EHXL
JUDGMENT
The best deeeptirms are the ones that seem to give the
other person a choice: Your victims feel they are in con-
trol, but are actually your puppets. Give people options
that come out in yourfavor whichever one they choose.
Force them to make choices between the lesser of two evils,
both of which serve yourpurpose. Put them an the horns
ofa dilemma: They me gmed wherever they turn.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I
From early in his reign, Ivan IV, later known as Ivan the Terrible, had to
confront an unpleasant reality: The country desperately needed reform,
but he lacked the power to push it through. The greatest limit to his author-
ity Came from the boyars, the Russian princely class that dominated the
country and terrorized the peasantry.
In 1553, at the age of twenty-three, Ivan fell ill. Lying in bed, nearing
death, he asked the boyars to swear allegiance to his son as the new czar.
Some hesitated, some even refused. Then and there Ivan saw he had no
power over the boyars. He recovered from his illness, but he never forgot
the lesson: The boyars were out to destroy him. And indeed in the years to
come, many of the most powerful of them defected to Russia’s main ene-
mies, Poland and Lithuania, where they plotted their return and the over-
throw of the
czar.
Even
one of Ivan’s closest friends, Prince Andrey
Kurbski, suddenly turned against him, defecting to Lithuania in 1564, and
becoming the strongest of Iva.n’s enemies.
When Kurbski began raising troops for an invasion, the royal dynasty
seemed suddenly more precarious than ever. With émigré nobles foment-
ing invasion from the west, Tartars bearing down from the east, and the bcr
yars stirring up trouble within the country, Russia’s vast size made it a
nightmare to defend. In whatever direction Ivan struck, he would leave
himself vulnerable on the other side. Only if he had absolute power could
he deal with this many-headed Hydra. And he had no such power.
Ivan brooded until the morning of December 3, 1564, when the citi-
zens of Moscow awoke to a strange sight. Hundreds of sleds filled the
square before the Kremlin, loaded with the cza.r’s treasures and with provi-
sions for the entire court. They watched in disbelief as the czar and his
court boarded the sleds and left town. Without explaining why, he estab-
lished himself in a village south of Moscow. For an entire month a kind of
terror gripped the capital, for the Muscovites feared that Ivan had aban-
doned them to the bloodthirsty boyars. Shops closed up and riotous mobs
gathered daily. Finally, on January 3 of 1565, a. letter arrived from the czar,
explaining that he could no longer bear the boyars’ betrayals and had do
cided to abdicate once and for all.
Read aloud in public, the letter had a startling effect: Merchants and
commoners blamed the boyars for Ivan’s decision, and took to the streets,
terrifying the nobility with their fury. Soon a group of delegates represent-
ing the church, the princes, and the people made the journey to Ivan’s vil-
lage, and begged the czar, in the name of the holy land of Russia, to return
to the throne. Ivan listened but would not change his mind. After days of
hearing their pleas, however, he offered his subjects a choice: Either they
grant him absolute powers to govern as he pleased, with no interference
from the boyars, or they find a new leader.
Faced with a choice between civil war and the acceptance of despotic
power, almost every sector of Russian society “opted” for a strong czar,
calling for Ivan’s return to Moscow and the restoration of law and order. In
The German Cl’UlN(.'£’l'
lur Bl.!VilClI‘(7l(, ermzged
at the romlmtr criti-
(,‘l.\‘fl1S’/lftllll Rudolf
Virclww (the Ger/mm
puth(7l0gi.rl tlllll llbrrul
politirmn),I1ad his
.swoml.s' call upon the
.\’Cl£’IlIiSl I0 L"1(llll’7lg(’
/rim to a duel. “As the
CIlIllll“.Vlg(’(l party. Ilmvv
the clmiw of weapons,
"
will Vimlzow. "and I
choose lhvre."Hehcl1l
ulaft (W0 large’ and
appammly irlrnrlcal
xauxu,-.;c.r. “One of
tlte.w,” he went on, “ix
!IIfI,'Ct¢’,(l Will‘! (ll-‘arlly
gcrrns: the other is
per;/early sound. Le!
Ilix E.\‘(‘ellenL'y zlericle
w/rich, om‘ he wi.s'l1e.v to
wt. and I Will real the
other.
“ /l lmmt immedi-
ately I/zc ll|L'J.Yll;,’L’ czmm
back (ha! the chancel-
lor had (l[‘('l(l£‘d to
rzmcrl the duel.
rue 1.111 LE, BROWN
BOOK OF .r\,Ni-(‘Dori-.s,
CLIFION F/\l)lM/\N, E13,.
1985
LAW 3!
255
'|‘lIli LIAN
Once upon 41 time there
was a king of/lrnvertia,
who. being oft: lruriuus
mm nfmind and in
need a,f's(>nw new
aliversion, sent his
heralllx tk9’()l.lg}‘IA’)llI the
land to make
the following
/zm::lamnii'mz:
“Hear this! Whatever
man anmng you ('10!
prove himselfthe most
outrageous liar in
Armenia shall rei-eivr
an apple‘ made ofpurc
gold from the hands of
His .Ma;'€s!y the King!”
People began to swarrn
70 file palace from
every town and hamlrt
in the country, people
o/‘all ranks and
conditions, princux,
merclilinis, farmers‘.
priests, rich and poor,
(all and short, fat and
thin. There was no lack
of liars in the land, and
each one mid his Iale to
the king. /1 ruler,
however, has heard
practically every sort of
lie, and none ofthoxe
now mid him
convinced the king that
he had Iisrerxed to the
hm of them.
The king was begirr
ning to grow tired of
his new sport and was
thinking ofmlling the
whole contest off with
out declaring a winner,
when there appeamd
before him :2 poor,
ragged man, carrying :1
large earthenware
pitcher under his arm.
“Who! can I do for
vim?" asked llis
Majesty.
“Sire;”'s~a§d the poor
man, slightly bewil-
256
LAW 31
February, with much celebration, Ivan returned to Moscow. The Russians
could no longer complain if he behaved dictatorially-—-they had given him
this power themselves.
Interpretation
Ivan the Tenible faced a terrible dilemma: To give in to the boyars would
lead to certain destruction, but civil war would bring a different kind of
ruin. Even if Ivan came out of such a. war on top, the counhy would be dev-
astated and its divisions would be stronger than ever. His weapon of choice
in the past had been to make a bold, offensive move. Now, however, that
kind of move would turn against him—the more boldly be confronted his
enemies, the worse the reactions he would spark.
The main weakness of a show of force is that it stirs up resentment and
eventually leads to a response that eats at your authofity. Ivan, immensely
creative in the use of power, saw clearly that the only path to the kind of
victory he wanted was a false withdrawal. He would not force the country
over to his position, he would give it “options”: either his abdication, and
certain anarchy, or his accession to absolute power. To back up his move,
he made it clear that he preferred to abdicate: “Call my bluffi” he said,
“and watch what happens.” No one called his bluff. By withdrawing forjust
a month, he showed the country a glimpse of the nightmares that would
follow his abdication-—Taxtar invasions, civil war, ruin. (All of these did
eventually come to pass after Ivan’s death, in the infamous “Time of the
Troubles”)
Withdrawal and disappearance are classic ways of controlling the op»
tions. You give people a sense of how things will fall apart without you, and
you offer them a “choice”: I stay away and you suffer the consequences, or
I retum under circumstances that I dictate. In this method of controlling
people’s options, they choose the option that gives you power because the
alternative is just too unpleasant. You force their hand, but indirectly: They
seem to have a choice. Whenever people feel they have a choice, they walk
into your trap that much more easily.
OBSELRVANCE OF THE LAW II
As a seventeenth-century French courtesan, Ninon de Lenclos found that
her life had certain pleasures. Her lovers came from royalty and aristoc-
racy, and they paid her well, entertained her with their wit and intellect,
satisfied her rather demanding sensual needs, and treated her almost as an
equal. Such a life was infinitely preferable to marriage. In 1643, however,
Ninon’s mother died suddenly, leaving her, at the age of twenty-three, to
tally alone in the world-«no family, no dowry, nothing to fallback upon. A
kind ofpanic overtook her and she entered a convent, tuming her back on
her illustrious lovers. A year later she left the convent and moved to Lyons.
When she finally reappeared in Paris, in 1648, lovers and suitors flocked to
her door in greater numbers than ever before, for she was the wittiest and
most spirited courtesan of the time and her presence had been greatly
missed.
Ninon’s followers quickly discovered, however, that she had changed
her old way of doing things, and had set up a new system of options. The
dukes, seigneurs, and princes who wanted to pay for her services could
continue to do so, but they were no longer in control-—she would sleep
with them when she wanted, according to her whim. All their money
bought them was a possibility. If it was her pleasure to sleep with them only
once a month, so be it.
Those who did not want to be what Ninon called a payeur could join
the large and growing group of men she called her martyrs--men who vis—
ited her apartment principally for her friendship, her biting wit, her lute-
playing, and the company of the most vibrant minds of the period,
including Moliere, La Rochefoucauld, and Saint~Evremond. The martyrs,
too, however, entertained a possibility: She would regularly select from
them a fiwori, a man who would become her lover without having to pay,
and to whom she would abandon herself completely for as long as she so
desired-—«a week, a few months, rarely longer. A payeur could not become a
favori, but a martyr had no guarantee of becoming one, and indeed could
remain disappointed for an entire lifetime. The poet Charleval, for examv
pie, never enjoyed Ninon’s favors, but never stopped coming to visit--he
did not want to do without her company.
As word of this system reached polite French society, Ninon became
the object of intense hostility. Her reversal of the position of the courtesan
scandalized the queen mother and her court. Much to their horror, how-
ever, it did not discourage her male suitors—indeed it only increased their
numbers and intensified their desire, It became an honor to be a payeur,
helping Ninon to maintain her lifestyle and her glittering salon, accompa-
nying her sometimes to the theater, and sleeping with her when she chose.
Even more distinguished were the martyrs, enjoying her company without
paying for it and maintaining the hope, however remote, of some day be-
coming her fizvorz‘. That possibility spurred on many a young nobleman, as
word spread that none among the courtesans could surpass Ninon in the
art of love. And so the married and the single, the old and the young, en-
tered her web and chose one of the two options presented to them, both of
which amply satisfied her.
Interpretation
The life of the courtesan entailed the possibility of a power that was denied
a married woman, but it also had obvious perils. The man who paid for the
courtesaxfs services in essence owned her, determining when he could pos-
sess her and when, later on, he would abandon her. As she grew older, her
options narrowed, as fewer men chose her. To avoid a life of poverty she
had to amass her fortune while she was young. The courtesan’s legendary
greed, then, reflected a practical necessity, yet also lessened her allure,
since the illusion ofbeing desired is important to men, who are often alien-
dcrcd. "Surely you
reiziember? You owe
me :1 pm o}"gr>Id. and I
have come In
collect it.
"
“You are a perferr liar,
sir/" exclaimed the
king. “I owe you no
money!
"
“A perfect liar, um I?
”
said the poor man.
“Than give me the
golden appl::.’"
The king. realizing that
the man was trying to
Nick him. started to
hedge
“No, no.’ Yz>u are no! bi
Har!”
“Then gwc me the pot
ofgmld you owe me,
sire "said the man.
The king .\'(lW the
dilemma. He handed
over the golden apple.
Amtesznxn FOLK-TALES
AND i~ABi.es,
Rrvrou) BY
CH/\Rl,ES Dowmszo.
1993
LAW 3}
$15
.l. R Morgan St». once
((1111ajcwzzlmuflhis
an/uairzm:m> that he
was imererrerl Ill
buying a pearl .\'( ml’-
pin. Just a few wt?€k.s
1zlIt'r'. the ;eweIer
happened upon a
rmzgrtzficerzt pearl’. [[9
had i! mmmfed in an
uppmprmte sertizzg and
SM! is’ 10 Morgan.
mgrtlser with (2 bill for
$5,001). ‘lhefollriwing
day the parka/gr: wax
rem mud. Morgan ix‘
acrcmrtpzt/tying note
read: “I like the pm.
but I (hm ’t like 1111»
prire. [fyma will uccepi
the enclasezl ciwrzk for
$¢\()()0. pleaxv send
back the box with the
sear.’ smbmkcn.
" The
mrrzgerl jcwelrer refzmui
the dizrrk and diy»
rriissezl the i?i€.\‘S€Ilg€I'
in 1li.Ygll5‘l. Ht! nprsmui
up the box to reclaim
the mmwxml pm, only
to /iml that u hm! L-cm
rrmzovorli In in plum’
mm a (1u'(,'kfor .h”5,(}(l().
'1 H]; H rruz, uiwwr»
li()<)l\‘ or AN!,('DO’H 54
L'i,u"mr~ I-‘m>|M.»\i~:, I-n..
l985
258
LAW 31
ated if their partner is too interested in their money. As the courtesan aged,
then, she faced a most difficult fate.
Ninon de Lenclos had a horror of any kind of dependence. She early
on tasted a kind of equality with her lovers, and she would not settle into a
system that left her such distasteful options. Strangely enough, the system
she devised in its place seemed to satisfy her suitors as much as it did her.
The payeur: may have had to pay, but the fact that Ninon would only sleep
with them when she wanted to gave them a thrill unavailable with every
other courtesan: She was yielding out of her own desire. The martyrs’
avoidance of the taint of having to pay gave them a sense of superiority; as
members of Ninon’s fraternity of admirers, they also might some day expe
rience the ultimate pleasure of being her favari. Finally, Ninon did not
force her suitors into either category. They could “choose” which side they
prefer:-ed—a freedom flint left them a vestige of masculine pride.
Such is the power of giving people a choice, or rather the illusion of
one, for they are playing with cards you have dealt them. Where the alter-
natives set up by Ivan the Terrible involved
a certain risk—-one option
would have led to his losing his power——Ninon created a. situation in which
every option redounded to her favor. From the payeurs she received the
money she needed to run her salon. And from the martyrs she gained the
ultimate in power: She could surround herself with a. bevy of admirers, a
harem from which to choose her lovers.
The system, though, depended on one critical factor: the possibility,
however remote, that a martyr could become a fawn". The illusion that
riches, glory, or sensual satisfaction may someday fall into your victim's lap
is an irresistible carrot to include in your list of choices. That hope, how-
ever slim, will make men accept the most ridiculous situations, because it
leaves them the allimportant option of a dream. The illusion of choice,
married to the possibility of future good fortune, will lure the most stub
born sucker into your glittering web.
KEYS TO POWER
Words like “freedom,” “options,” and “choice” evoke a power of possibility
far beyond the reality of the benefits they entail. When examined closely,
the choices we have——in the marketplace, in elections, in ourjobs»-tend to
have noticeable limitations: They are often a matter of a choice simply be-
tween A and B, with the rest of the alphabet out of the picture. Yet as long
as the faintest mirage of choice flickers on, we rarely focus on the missing
options. We “choose” to believe that the game is fair, and that we have our
freedom. We prefer not to think too much about the depth of our liberty to
choose.
This unwillingness to probe the smallness of our choices stems from
the fact that too much freedom creates a kind of amdety. The phrase “un-
limited options” sounds infinitely promising, but unlimited options would
actually paralyze us and cloud our ability to choose. Our limited range of
choices comforts us.
This supplies the clever and cunning with enormous opportunities for
deception. For people who are choosing between alternatives find it hard
to believe they are being manipulated or deceived; they cannot see that
you are allowing them a small amount of free will in exchange for a much
more powerful imposition of your own will. Setting up a narrow range of
choices, then, should always be a part of your deceptions. There is a say-
ing: If you can get the bird to walk into the cage on its own, it will sing that
much more prettily.
The following are among the most common forms of “controlling the
options”:
Color the Choices. This was a favored technique of Henry Kissinger. As
President Richard Nixon’s secretary of state, Kissinger considered himself
better informed than his boss, and believed that in most situations he could
make the best decision on his own. But if he tried to determine policy, he
would offend or perhaps enrage a notoriously insecure man. So Kissinger
would propose three or four choices of action for each situation, and would
present them in such a way that the one he preferred always seemed the
best solution compared to the others. Time afler time, Nixon fell for the
bait, never suspecting that he was moving where Kissinger pushed him.
This is an excellent device to use on the insecure master.
Force the Resistor. One of the main problems faced by Dr. Milton H. Er-
ickson, a pioneer of hypnosis therapy in the 1950s, was the relapse. His pa»
tients might seem to be recovering rapidly, but their apparent susceptibility
to the therapy masked a deep resistance: They would soon relapse into old
habits, blame the doctor, and stop coming to see him. To avoid this, Ericlo
son began ordering some patients to have a relapse, to make themselves feel
as bad as when they first came in—-——to go back to square one. Faced with
this option, the patients would usually “choose” to avoid the relapse-
which, of course, was what Erickson really wanted.
This is a good technique to use on children and other willful people
who enjoy doing the opposite of what you ask them to: Push them to
“choose” what you want them to do by appearing to advocate the opposite.
Alter the Playing Field. In the 1860s,john D. Rockefeller set out to cre-
ate an oil monopoly. If he tried to buy up the smaller oil companies they
would figure out what he was doing and fight back. Instead, he began se-
cretly buying up the railway companies that transported the oil. When he
then attempted to take over a particular company, and met with resistance,
he reminded them of their dependence on the rails. Refusing them ship-
ping, or simply raising their fees, could ruin their business. Rockefeller a.l~
tered the playing field so that the only options the small oil producers had
were the ones he gave them.
In this tactic your opponents know their hand is being forced, but it
doesn’t matter. The technique is effective against those who resist at all
costs.
LAW 31
259
2&0
LAW’ 31
The Shrinking Options. The latemineteenth-century
art dealer Am-
broise Vollard perfected this technique.
Customers would come to Volla.rd’s shop to see some Cézannes. He
would show three paintings, neglect to mention a price, and pretend to
doze off. The visitors would have to leave without deciding. They would
usually come back the next day to see the paintings again, but this time
Vollard would pull out less interesting works, pretending he thought they
were the same ones. The baffled customers would look at the new offer-
ings, leave to think them over, and return yet again. Once again the same
thing would happen: Vollard would show paintings of lesser quality still. Fi-
nally the buyers would realize they had better grab what he was showing
them, because tomorrow they would have to settle for something worse,
perhaps at even higher prices.
A variation on this technique is to raise the price every time the buyer
hesitates and another day goes by. This is an excellent negotiating ploy to
use on the chronically indecisive, who will fall for the idea that they are get-
ting a better deal today than if they wait till tomorrow.
The Weak Man on the Precipice. The weak are the easiest to maneuver
by controlling their options. Cardinal do Retz, the great seventeenth~cen-
tury provocateur, served as an unofficial assistant to the Duke of Orléans,
who was notoriously indecisive. It was a constant struggle to convince the
duke to take action»-—-he would hem and haw, weigh the options, and wait
till the last moment, giving everyone around him an ulcer. But Retz discov~
ered a way to handle him: He would describe all sorts of dangers, exaggep
ating them as much as possible, until the duke saw a yawning abyss in
every direction except one: the one Retz was pushing him to take.
This tactic is similar to “Color the Choices,” but with the weak you
have to be more aggressive. Work on their emotions—use fear and terror
to propel them into action. Tn: reason and they will always find a way to
procrastinate.
Brothers in Crime. This is a classic convartist technique: You attract your
victims to some criminal scheme, creating a bond of blood and guilt be-
tween you. They participate in your deception, commit a crime (or think
they do-—-see the story of Sam Geezil in Law 3), and are easily manipu-
lated. Serge Stavisky, the great French con artist of the 1920s, so entangled
the government in his scams and swindles that the state did not dare to
prosecute him, and “chose” to leave him alone. It is often wise to implicate
in your deceptions the very person who can do you the most harm if you
fail. Their involvement can be subtle—-even a hint of their involvement
will narrow their options and buy their silence.
The Horns of a Dilemma. This idea was demonstrated by General
William Sherma.n’s infamous march through Georgia during the American
Civil War. Although the Confederates knew what direction Sherman was
heading in, they never knew if he would attack from the left or the right, for
he divided his army into two wings--and if the rebels retreated from one
wing they found themselves facing the other. This is a classic trial lawyer’s
technique: The lawyer leads the witnesses to decide between two possible
explanations of an event, both of which poke a hole in their story. They
have to answer the lawyer’s questions, but whatever they say they hurt
themselves. The key to this move is to strike quickly: Deny the victim the
time to think of an escape. As they wriggle between the horns of the
dilemma, they dig their own grave.
Understand: In your struggles with your rivals, it will often be necessary
for you to hurt them. And if you are clearly the agent of their punishment,
expect a counterat1ack——expect revenge. If, however, they seem to them-
selaes to be the agents of their own misfortune, they will submit quietly.
When Ivan left Moscow for his rural village, the citizens asking him to re-
turn agreed to his demand for absolute power. Over the years to come,
they resented him less for the terror he unleashed on the country, because,
alter all, they had granted him his power themselves. This is why it is al
ways good to allow your victims their choice of poison, and to cloak your
involvement in providing it to them as far as possible.
Image: The
Horns
of
the Bull.
The
bull
backs you
into the cor»
ner with its
homs—~not
a single horn,
which
you
might be
able to es-
cape, but a
pair of horns
that trap you
within their
hold. Run
right or run
lefl—either
w a y
y o u
move into their piercing
ends
and
are
gored.
Authority: For the wounds and every other evil that men inllict upon them-
selves spontaneously, and of their own choice, are in the long run less
painful than those inflicted by others. (Niccolo Machiavelli, 140'9—~1527)
LAW 3]
261
5'62
LAW 31
REVERSAI.
Controlling the options has one main purpose: to disguise yourself as the
agent of power and punishment. The tactic works best, then, for those
whose power is fragile, and who cannot operate too openly without incur-
ring suspicion, resentment, and anger. Even as a general rule, however, it is
rarely wise to be seen as exerting power directly and forcefully, no matter
how secure or strong you are. It is usually more elegant and more effective
to give people the illusion of choice.
On the other hand, by limiting other people’s options you sometimes
limit your own. There are situations in which it is to your advantage to
allow your rivals a large degree of freedom: As you watch them operate,
you give yourself rich opportunities to spy, gather information, and plan
your deceptions. The nineteenth~century banker James Rothschild liked
this method: He felt that if he tried to control his opponents’ movements,
he lost the chance to observe their strategy and plan a more effective
course. The more freedom he allowed them in the short term, the more
forcefully he could act against them in the long run.
32
PLAY TO PEOPLES
FANTASIES
‘JUDGMENT
The truth ix often avoided because it is ugly and un-
pleasant. Never appeal to truth and reality unless you
are prepared for the anger that comex from disen-
chantment. Life is so harsh and distressing lhal people
who can manufacture mmemce oreonjme upfmitasy are
like oases in the desert: E1/eryoiwfloeks to them. There is
great pawer in tapping into thefantasies oftlze masses.
Tllli H Vi.“-\I. (ll-'
llllu l_lll'\|',*~‘1~'-
The lion having
smlelenly lost his
qU€t'.Vl. CVFVV (771?
Imstmred In Show alle-
girmcc to the monarch,
by offering con.voIa-
tion. These t:nmpli-
mems, alas, served but
10 im‘re:a.s'c ihrt
widowraflx u}‘]iiL'Iion.
Due nrrlice was given
Ihmughour the lung-
rlom that ffze:fm:<:ru1‘
would be performed at
.2 certain time and
place; the lion 1: oflimrs
were ordered to be in
(1t!('Ild1ZI1(.‘(‘, to regulate
the ceremony, and
place the company
according to ll'l(’lV
res[7e(‘1lv(' rank.
One may well judge no
one abxenlerl himself."
The rmmarch go ve way
to his grief and the
wholv mvza lions haw
mg no mixer II3I31;')lt'.£’,
res'am1<led with Iris
cries: Afler his example,
all (he caurrins rrmrad
in their different zones.
A court is the son of
place where everyone is
either mrrowfal, gav,
vr mdi_fferem 10 every-
thing. jun as the reign-
ing prince may think
fir; or ifuny one is no!
ucmally, he at least trips
to appcarso: each
enlleavmx to rnimic the
muster. It 15 truly said
that one mmd mzimares
a lhoustmri bodies.
<Zlen'Il'l)J showing mm
human: beings
are mere marimrex
But for us rerun: to om
subject. The slag alone
shall no mars. How
could he, fursnuth? The
dmth of Ills‘ queen
avenged him, she had
264
LAW 32
OBSERVANCI:‘. OF THE LAW
The cityvstate of Venice was prosperous for so long that its citizens felt their
small republic had destiny on its side. In the Middle Ages and High Re
naissance, its virtual monopoly on trade to the east made it the wealthiest
city in Europe. Under a beneficent republican government, Venelians en-
joyed liberties that few other Italians had ever known. Yet in the sixteenth
century their fortunes suddenly changed, The opening of the New World
transferred power to the Atlantic side of Europewto the Spanish and For-
tuguese, and later the Dutch and English. Venice could not compete eco
nomically and its empire gradually dwindled. The final blow
was the
devastating loss of
a prized Mediterranean possession,
the island of
Cyprus, captured from Venice by the Turks in 1570.
Now noble families went broke in Venice, and banks began to fold. A
kind of gloom and depression settled over the citizens. They had known a
glittering past~—-had either lived through it or heard stories about it from
their elders. The closeness of the glory years was humiliating. The Vene—
clans half believed that the goddess Fortune was only playing a joke on
them, and that the old days would soon return. For the time being, though,
what could they do?
In 1589 rumors began to swirl around Venice of the a.m‘val not far
away of a mysterious man called “ll Bragadino," a master of alchemy, a
man who had won incredible wealth through his ability, it was said, to mul-
tiply gold through the use of a secret substance. The rumor spread quickly
because a few years earlier, a Venetian nobleman passing through Poland
had heard a learned man prophesy that Venice would recover her past
glory and power if she could find a man who understood the alchemic art
of manufacturing gold. And so, as word reached Venice of the gold this
Bragadino possessed——he clinked gold coins continuously in his hands,
and golden objects filled his palace-some began to dream: Through him,
their city would prosper again.
Members of Venice’s most important noble families accordingly went
together to Brescia, where Bragadino lived. They toured his palace and
watched in
awe
as he demonstrated his gold-making abilities, taking a
pinch of seemingly worthless minerals and transforming it into several
ounces of gold dust. The Venetian senate prepared to debate the idea of ex
tending an ofllcial invitation to Bragadino to stay in Venice at the city’s ex-
pense, when word suddenly reached them that they were competing with
the Duke of Mantua for his services. They heard of a magnificent party in
Bragadinds palace for the duke, featuring garments with golden buttons,
gold watches, gold plates, and on and on. Worried they might lose Bra-
gaclino (0 Martina, the senate voted almost unanimously to invite him to
Venice, promising him the mountain of money he would need to continue
living in his luxurious style-~but only if he came right away.
Late that year the mysterious Bragaclino arrived in Venice. With his
piercing dark eyes under thick brows, and the two enormous black mastiffs
that accompanied him everywhere, he was forbidding and impressive. He
took up residence in a sumptuous palace on the island of the Giudecca,
with the republic funding his banquets, his expensive clothes, and all his
other whims. A kind of alchemy fever spread through Venice. On street
corners, hawkers would sell coal, distilling apparatus, bellows, how—to
books on the subject. Everyone began to practice alchemyw-everyone ex—
cept Bragadino.
The alchemist seemed to be in no hurry to begin manufacturing the
gold that would save Venice from ruin. Strangely enough this only in-
creased his popularity and following; people thronged from all over Eu-
rope, even Asia, to meet this remarkable man. Months went by, with gifts
pouring in to Bragadino from all sides. Still he gave no sign of the miracle
that the Venetians confidently expected him to produce. Eventually the cit-
izens began to grow impatient, wondering if he would wait forever. At first
the senators warned them not to hurry him-—-he was a capricious devil,
who needed to be cajoled. Finally, though, the nobility began to wonder
too, and the senate came under pressure to show a return on the city’s ba.l~
looning investment.
Bragadino had only scorn for the doubters, but he responded to them.
He had, he said, already deposited in the city’s mint the mysterious sub-
stance with which he multiplied gold. He could use this substance up all at
once, and produce double the gold, but the more slowly the process took
place, the more it would yield. If left alone for seven years, sealed in a cas
ket, the substance would multiply the gold in the mint thirty times over.
Most of the senators agreed to wait to reap the gold mine Bragadino
promised. Others, however, were angry: seven more years of this man liv-
ing royally at the public trough! And many of the common citizens of
Venice echoed these sentiments. Finally the alchemist‘s enemies demanded
he produce a proof of his skills: a substantial amount of gold, and soon.
Lofty, apparently devoted to his art, Bragadino responded that Venice,
in its impatience, had betrayed him, and would therefore lose his services.
He left town, going first to nearby Padua, then, in 1590, to Munich, at the
invitation of the Duke of Bavaria, who, like the entire city of Venice, had
known great wealth but had fallen into bankruptcy through his own profli-
gacy, and hoped to regain his fortune through the famous alchemist’s ser-
vices. And so Bragadino resumed the comfortable arrangement he had
known in Venice, and the same pattern repeated itself.
Interpretation
The young Cypriot Mamugna had lived in Venice for several years before
reincamating himself as the alchemist Bragadino. He saw how gloom had
settled on the city, how everyone was hoping for a redemption from some
indefinite source. While other charlatans mastered everyday cons based on
sleight of hand, Mamugna mastered human nature. With Venice as his tar-
get from the start, he traveled abroad, made some money through his
alchemy scams, and then returned to Italy, setting up shop in Brescia.
There he created a reputation that he knew would spread to Venice. From
a distance, in fact, his aura of power would be all the more impressive.
At first Mamugna did not use vulgar demonstrations to convince peo-
formerly strangled his
wife and son. A courtier
lhouglztfit In inform the
bereaved mormrch, and
even aflirnieri that he
had seen the stag laugh.
The rage oft: king, says
Solomon, is rerrible,
and especially that of
a liomking. “I’itiful
fnr!',.rler.v"' he exclaimed,
"dares! thou laugh
when all around are
dissolved in (ears? We
will no! soil our royal
(laws will! Ihy profane
hlood.’ Do thou, brave
wulji avenge our queen,
by lmmola!ing1lii.s'
traitor [0 her august
mzmes.
"
Hercaupon the stag
rcpllred: "Sire. the mm»
for weeping is passed;
grief is here superflu-
(ms. Your revered
spouse appeared to me
but now. reparing on a
bed of roses; I inslanzly
rzacognizcd her. ‘I-'n'erzd.‘
said she to me. ‘have
done with !lm‘funereal
pomp, cease these
useless‘ tears. I have
tasted rt Ihousaml
delights‘ in the E[V.VitIIl
fields, conwsm
5 with
rh(_:.s'e‘ who are suims like
myself 1,431 the kings
despair remain for
some time irrzcheckezl, iz
gratijlar me.
‘ "
Sr‘ar(‘e*ly
had he spoken, when
every one shouted: “A
miracle! a rmracle!"
The wing, instead of
being pimishea‘, re-
ceived a lmnrlrome
D0 but entertain a king
with dre1m1s,flal1er
him. and tell him a few
pleasant fantastic lies:
wlmrewr Ills imIigna-
tiun against you may
be. he will swallow the
bail, and make you his‘
dearesr friend.
l-}\lll.l‘S,
h=..et.\: on 1,». FONTAINE.
l62l»l(w‘)5
LAW 82
265
Ifymt want to tell lies
that will be helilaved,
dun’! tell the truth
that wont
EMPLROR TUKU19/\wA
lF\i;\Sl; or J/‘P/\Y\u
S1-‘.\'l-‘N TF1 N'I’ll (‘EN FURY
266
LAW 32
pic of his alchemic skill. His sumptuous palace, his opulent garments, the
clink of gold in his hands, all these provided a superior argument to any-
thing rational. And these established the cycle that kept him going: His ob~
vious wealth confirmed his reputation as an alchemist, so that patrons like
the Duke of Mantua gave him money, which allowed him to live in wealth,
which reinforced his reputation as an alchemist, and so on. Only once this
reputation was established, and dukes and senators were fighting over him,
did he resort to the trifling necessity of a demonstration. By then, however,
people were easy to deceive: They wanted to believe. The Venetian sena-
tors who watched him multiply gold wanted to believe so badly that they
failed to notice the glass pipe up his sleeve, from which he slipped gold
dust into his pinches of minerals. Brilliant and capricious, he was the al
chemist of their fantasies—-and once he had created an aura like this, no
one noticed his simple deceptions.
Such is the power of the fantasies that take root in us, especially in
times of scarcity and decline. People rarely believe that their problems
arise from their own misdeeds and stupidity. Someone or something out
there is to blame—-the other, the world, the gods—and so salvation comes
from the outside as well. Had Bragadino arrived in Venice armed with a
detailed analysis of the reasons behind the city’s economic decline, and of
the hardcnosed steps that it could take to turn things around, he would
have been scorned. The reality was too ugly and the solution too painful-—
mostly the kind of hard work that the citizens‘ ancestors had mustered to
create an empire. Fantasy, on the other hand——in this case the romance of
alchemy--was easy to understand and infinitely more palatable.
To gain power, you must be
a source of pleasure for those around
you--and pleasure
comes from playing
to people’s
fantasies.
Never
promise a gradual improvement through hard work; rather, promise the
moon, the great and sudden transformation, the pot of gold.
No man need despair ofgainiug converts to the most extravagant
hypothesis who has an enough to represent it £1;favomable colors.
David Hium’, I 71.1-J 776
KEYS TO POWER
Fantasy can never operate alone. It requires the backdrop of the huxndrum
and the mundane. It is the oppressiveness of reality that allows fantasy to
take root and bloom. In sixteenth-century Venice, the reality was one of de
clirre and loss of prestige. The corresponding fantasy described a sudden
recovery of past glories through the miracle of alchemy. While the reality
only got worse, the Venetians inhabited a happy dream world in which
their city restored its fabulous wealth and power overnight, turning dust
into gold.
The person who can spin a fantasy out of an oppressive reality has ac-
cess to untold power. As you search for the fantasy that will take hold of the
masses, then, keep your eye on the banal truths that weigh heavily on us
all. Never be distracted by peop1e’s glamorous portraits of themselves and
their lives; search and dig for what really imprisons them. Once you find
that, you have the magical key that will put great power in your hands.
Although times and people change, let us examine a few of the oppres~
sive realities that endure, and the opportunities for power they provide:
The Reality: Change isslow andgradual. It requires ham’ work, a bit ofluck, afair
amount ofrel —sacrg'fice, and a lot pfpatience.
The Fantasy: A sudden tmmfarmation will bring a total change in aneivfiirtunes,
bypassing work, luck, self-sacrifice, and time in onefantastic make.
This is of course the fantasy par excellence of the charlatans who
prowl among us to this day, and was the key to B1'agadin0’s
success.
Promise a great and total change-—~from poor to rich, sickness to health,
misery to ecstasy—and you will have followers.
How
did
the
great
sixteenth-century
German
quack
Leonhard
Thumeisser become the court physician for the Elector of Brandenburg
without ever studying medicine? Instead of offering amputations, leeches,
and foul~tasting purgatives (the medicaments of the time), Thurneisser ofv
fared sweevtasting elixirs and promised instant recovery. Fashionable
courtiers especially wanted his solution of “drinkable gold,” which cost a
fortune. If some inexplicable illness assailed you, Thur-neisser would con-
sult
a horoscope and prescribe
a talisman. Who could resist such
a
fantasy-—-health and well-being without sacrifice and pain!
The Reality: The social realm has lzard~set codes and boundaries. We understand
time limits and know that we have to move within the samefamiliar circles, ziay in
and ritzy out.
Tim Fantagv.“
WE’ can enter :1 totally new world with a':fi"m'ent codes and ihepmmzke
ofadventure.
In the early 1700s, all London was abuzz with talk of a mysterious
stranger, a young man named George Psalmanazar. He had arrived from
what was to most Englishmen a fantastical land: the island of Formosa
(now Taiwan),
off
the
coast
of China.
Oxford University engaged
Psalmauazar to teach the island’s language; a few years later he translated
the Bible into Formosan, then wrote a bool<—ar: immediate bestseller--on
Formosa’s history and geography. English royalty wined and dined the
young man, and everywhere he went he entertained his hosts with won-
drous stories of his homeland, and its bizarre customs.
After Psalmanazar died, however, his will revealed that he was in fact
merely a Frenchman with a rich imagination. Everything he had said about
Formosa——-its alphabet, its language, its literature, its entire culture-—he had
invented. He had built on the English puhlic’s ignorance of the place to
concoct an elaborate story that fulfilled their desire for the exotic and
LAW 32
‘.767
268
LAW 32
strange. British cultu.re’s rigid control of people’s dangerous dreams gave
him the perfect opportunity to exploit their fantasy.
I
The fantasy of the exotic, of course, can also skirt the sexual. It must
not come too close, though, for tl1e physical hinders the power of fantasy; it
can be seen, grasped, and then tired of-—the fate of most courtesans. The
bodily charms of the mistress only whet the master’s appetite for more and
different pleasures, a new beauty to adore. To bring power, fantasy must re»
main to some degree unrealized, literally unreal. The dancer Mata Hari,
for instance, who rose to public prominence in Paris before World War I,
had quite ordinary looks. Her power came from the fantasy she created of
being strange ‘and exotic, unknowable and indecipherable. The taboo she
worked with was less sex itself than the breaking of social codes.
Another form of the fantasy of the exotic is simply the hope for relief
from boredom. Con artists love to play on the oppressiveness of the work-
ing world, its lack of adventure. Their cons might involve, say, the recov-
ery of lost Spanish treasure, with the possible participation of an alluring
Mexican sefiorita. and a connection to the president of a South American
country—a.nything oficering release from the humdrum.
The Reality: Society isfragmented andfull ofconflict.
The Fantasy: People can come together in a mystical union ofsouls.
In the 19205 the con man Oscar Hartzell made a quick fortune out of
the agevold Sir Francis Drake swindle—basically promising any sucker who
happened to be surnamed “Drake”
a substantial share of the long-lost
“Drake treasure,” to which Hartzell had access. Thousands across the Mid-
west fell for the scam, which Hartzell cleverly turned into a crusade against
the government and everyone else who was trying to keep the Drake for»
tune out of the rightful hands of its heirs. There developed a mystical union
of the oppressed Drakes, with emotional rallies and meetings. Promise such
a union and you can gain much power, but it is a dangerous power that can
easily turn against you. This is a fantasy for demagogues to play on.
The Reality: Death. The dead cannot be brought back, tlzepart cannot be changed.
The Fantasy.‘ A sudden reversal aftlzis intolerablefact.
This con has many variations, but requires great skill and subtlety.
The beauty and importance of the art of Vermeer have long been rec
ognized, but his paintings are small in number, and are extremely rare. In
the 1930s, though, Vermeers began to appear on the art market. Experts
were called on to verify them, and pronounced them real. Possession of
these new Vermeers would crown a collector’s career. It was like the resur-
rection of Lazarus: In a strange way, Vermeer had been brought back to
life. The past had been changed.
Only later did it come out that the new Vermeers were the work of a
middle-aged Dutch forget named Han van Meegeren. And he had chosen
Vermeer for his scam because he understood fantasy: The paintings would
seem real precisely because the public, and the experts as well, so desper-
ately wanted to believe they were.
Remember: The key to fantasy is distance. The distant has allure and
promise, seems simple and problem free. What you are offering, xhen,
should be ungraspable. Never let it become oppressively familiar; it is the
mirage in the distance, withdrawing as the sucker approaches. Never be
(no direct in describing the fantasywkeep it vague. As a forget of fantasies,
let your victim come close enough to see and be tempted, but keep him far
away enough that he stays dreaming and desiring.
Image: The
Moon. Unattainable,
always changing shape,
disappezuing and reappear-
ing. We look at it, imagine,
wonder, and pine——neVer fa.-
miliar, continuous provoker
of dreams. Do not offer
the obvious. Promise
the
moon.
Authority: A lie is an alluremeut, a fabrication, that can be embell-
ished into a fantasy. It can be clothed in the raiments of a mystic
conception‘ Truth is cold, sober fact, not so comfortable to absorb.
A lie is more palatable. The most dctested person in the world is
the one who always tells the truth, who never romances.
.
.
.
I found it far more interesting and profitable to romance than to
tell the truth. {Joseph Weil, a.l:.a. “The Yellow Kid,” l875wl976)
LAW 32
269
270
LAW 32
REVERSAL
If there is power in tapping into the fantasies of the masses, there is also
danger, Fantasy usually contains an element of play-the public half real-
izes it is being duped, but it keeps the dream alive anyway, relishing the en»
tertainment and the temporary diversion from the everyday that you are
providing. So keep it 1ight~—never come too close to the place where you
are actually expected to produce results. That place may prove extremely
hazardous.
After Bragadino established himself in Munich, he found that the
sober-minded Bavarians had far less faith in alchemy than the tempera-
mental Venelians. Only the duke really believed in it, for he needed it des—
perately to rescue him from the hopeless mess he was in. As Bragadino
played his familiar waiting game, accepting gifts and expecting patience,
the public grew angry. Money was being spent and was yielding no results.
In 1592 the Bavarians demanded justice, and eventually Bragadino found
himself swinging from the gallows. As before, he had promised and had
not delivered, but this time he had misjudged the forbearance of his hosts,
and his inability to fulfill their fantasy proved fatal.
One last thing: Never make the mistake of imagining that fantasy is al»
ways fantastical. It certainly contrasts with reality, but reality itself is some
times so theatrical and stylized that fantasy becomes a desire for simple
things. The image Abraham Lincoln created of himself, for example, as a
homespun country lawyer with a beard, made him the common man’s
president.
P. T. Barnum created a successful act with Tom Thumb, a dwarf who
dressed up
as famous leaders of the past, such
as Napoleon, and iam-
pooned them wickedly. The show delighted everyone, right up to Queen
Victoria, by appealing to the fantasy of the time: Enough of the vain-
glorious rulers of history, the common man knows best Tom Thumb re-
versed the familiar pattern of fantasy in which the strange and unknown
becomes the ideal. But the act still obeyed the Law, for underlying it
was the fantasy that the simple man is without problems, and is happier
than the powerful and the rich.
Both Lincoln and Tom Thumb played the commoner but carefully
maintained their distance. Should you play with such a fantasy, you too
must carefully cultivate distance and not allow your “common” persona to
become too familiar or it will not project as fantasy.
LAW
33
DISCOVER EACH
MAN’S THUMBSCREW
jUDGMENT
Everyone has a weakness, a gap in the castle wall. That
weakness is usually
an insecurity,
an uncontrollable
emotion or need; it can also be a small seem! pleasure.
Either way, oncefound, it is a thumbscrew you can mm
to your advantage.
‘
271
VI llli l.lt)'\,
|'lll*',
(‘ll\.\1l)l> .\\l)
IVIII. l-OX
A lion was (‘lmsing a
Chamois along a valley.
lle had all but caught
it, and with lzmgirzg
(£)'€.\‘ was umicipuiirig 1:
certain and a .w:i'.v_fying
repuss. I! serrnnl as if :1
won: ulrerly r’mp:;ssibl('
for me vmém to escape;
for at llwp ravine
uppnawd to bar the
wayfor bath the hunter
and flu’ hunted. Bur the
nimble Chamois: galli-
ormg rzzgwher all its
smrngth, slml like an
arrow from a bow
across Ike Irh/um, and
xtnml still on Ilm rocky
c:'if]'tm the other side.
()u(1£rm pulled up
short. Hm at that!
moment 11 [riez-:1! ofhit
luappened to be near at
hand. Thu: frieml wus
the fox.
“WhaI."'suidl1e. “with
your stmngtlt and
agility,
1
‘X possible
that you will yield to a
feeble L'lwmc-is? You
have only to Will. and
you will be ahle 10
work wm2zl:.'r.«:. Tlinuglx
the ab}-xss be deep, yet. if
you are tmly in earnest,
I um certain you will
clear it. Surely you can
C:7uf?dP in my disinter-
eslczl friendship. I
would not expose _Vour
life In danger lfl wen’
not .\'(I well awure of
ynur strength and
dexmrity.
"
The lions blood waxed
hot, and begun, in boil
in his veins. Hr flung
izt'rm‘r?if with all his
might irzm .€[7x2C!.’. But
he could not clear Illfi
cl1(mn.'io down he
lunLlJlczl headlong, and
was killed by the full.
272
LAW 33
FINDING THE THUMBSCREW: A Strategic Plan of Action
We all have resistances. We live with a perpetual armor around ourselves
to defend against change and the intrusive actions of friends and rivals. We
would like nothing more than to be lefi to do things our own way. Con-
stantly butting up against these resistances will cost you a lot of energy.
One of the most important things to realize about people, though, is that
they all have a weakness, some part. of their psychological armor that will
not resist, that will bend to your will if you find it and push on it. Some pee»
ple wear their weaknesses openly, others disguise them. Those who dis
guise them are often the ones most effectively undone through that one
chink in their armor.
In planning your assault, keep these principles in mind:
Pay Attention to Gestures and Unconscious Signals. As Sigmund
Freud remarked, “No mortal can keep at secret. If his lips are silent, he chat-
ters with his fingertips; betrayal oozes out of him at every pore.” This is a
critical concept in the search for a person’s weakness-—it is revealed by
seemingly unimportant gestures and passing words.
The key is not only what you look for but where and how you look.
Everyday conversaiion supplies the richest mine of weaknesses, so train
yourself to listen. Start by always seeming interested——~the appearance of a
sympathetic ear will spur anyone to talk. A clever trick, often used by the
nineteenth-century French statesman Talleyrand, is to appear to open up to
the other person, to share a secret with them. It can be completely made
up, or it can be real but of no great importance to you——-the important
thing is that it should seem to come from the heart. This will usually elicit at
response that is not only as frank as yours but more genuine»-a response
that reveals a weakness.
If you suspect that someone has a. particular soft spot, probe for it indi»
rectly. If, for instance, you sense that a man has a need to be loved, openly
flatter him. If he laps up your compliments, no matter how obvious, you
are on the right track. Train your eye for details——how someone tips a
waiter, what delights a person, the hidden messages in clothes. Find peo-
ple-.’s idols, the things they worship and will do anything to get“-perhaps
you can be the supplier of their fantasies. Remember: Since we all my to
hide our weaknesses, there is little to be leamed from our conscious behav-
ior. What oozes out in the little things outside our conscious control is what
you want to know.
Find the Helpless Child. Most weaknesses begin in childhood, before
the self builds up compensatory defenses. Perhaps the child was pampered
or indulged in a particular area, or perhaps a certain emotional need went
unfulfilled; as he or she grows older, the indulgence or the deficiency may
be buried but never disappears. Knowing about a childhood need gives
you a powerful key to a person’s weakness.
One sign of this weakness is that when you touch on it the person will
often act like a child. Be on the lookout, then, for any behavior that should
have been outgrown. If your victims or rivals went without something im-
portant, such as parental support, when they were children, supply it, or its
facsimile. If they reveal a secret taste, a hidden indulgence, indulge it. In ei-
ther case they will be unable to resist you.
Look for Contrasts. An overt trait often conceals its opposite. People
who thump their chests are often big cowards; a prudish exterior may hide
a lascivious soul; the uptight are often screaming for adventure; the shy are
dying for attention. By probing beyond appearances, you will often find
people’s weaknesses in the opposite of the qualities they reveal to you.
Find the Weak Link. Sometimes in your search for weaknesses it is not
what but who that matters. In today’s versions of the court, there is often
someone behind the scenes who has a great deal of power, a tremendous
influence over the person superficially on top. These behind-tliescenes
powerbrokers are the group’s weak link: Win their favor and you indirectly
influence the king. Alternatively, even in a group of people acting with the
appearance of one will—as when a group under attack closes ranks to resist
an outsi-:ler———there is always a weak link in the chain. Find the one person
who will bend under pressure.
Fill the Void. The two main emotional voids to Kill are insecurity and um
happiness. The insecure are suckers for any kind of social validation; as for
the chronically unhappy, look for the roots of their unhappiness. The inse
cure and the unhappy are the people least able to disguise their weak-
nesses. The ability to fill their emotional voids is a great source of power,
and an indefinitely prolongable one.
Feed on Uncontrollable Emotions. The uncontrollable emotion can be
a paranoid fear-wa fear disproportionate to the situaIion~—-or any base mo-
tive such as lust, greed, vanity, or hatred. People in the grip of these emo-
tions often cannot control themselves, and you can do the controlling for
them.
OBSERVANCES OF THE LAW
Observance I
In 1615 the thirty—yeaH3ld bishop of Lugzon, later known as Cardinal Riche
lieu, gave a speech before representatives of the three estates of France-
clergy, nobility, and commoners. Richelieu had been chosen to serve as
the mouthpiece for the clergy—an immense responsibility for a man still
young and not particularly well known. On all of the important issues of
the day, the speech followed the Church line. But near the end of it Riche«
lieu did something that had nothing to do with the Church and everything
to do with his career. He turned to the throne of the fifteen-year—old King
Louis XIII, and to the Queen Mother Marie de’ Médicis, who sat beside
Then what did /uk dear
friend do? He
czzutiously made his
way down In rim
boumn nfrhe ravine.
and there, out in the
open space and the free
air. seeing that the lion
wan ted neitherflaliery
nor obedience now, he
set to work to pay the
[mt sad rim‘ to his
dead friend, and in ll
momh picked his bones
c/0.-m.
NABLES,
IVAN Ktumi-1:
l 768--I844
IR\'ll\1,' |..~\'/All
[Hollywood super-
zzgent] Irving Paul
Lazar was once
anxious to sell /studio
mogul] Jack L. Warner
a play. "I /mil a long
rmzeting Wiih him
today,” Lazar
explained [10 scram-
writer Garszm Kanin],
“hm Idir1n’I memion
it, I didn't even bring
it up.”
“Why noI?"Iasked.
“Because I ‘m going to
wait unit’! 1119 weekend
afier next, when I go to
Palm Springs."
“I don ’£ wzdcrslzmri.
”
“You dorfr? I go to
Palm Springy every
wee/«end. but Warner
rim '1 going thi.S' week
end. Heb gal a preview
or sometlxing. S0 heir
pm! mm/Ing dawn till
rim Hex! weekeml, so
that‘: when I’m going
to bring it up.“
“Iwing, I ‘In more and
LAW 33
273
more crm/"med.
”
"Look
" mid Irving
irtzpatieritly. "I know
what I'm doing. I know
how or will Warner.
’l"Iu'.s: is a type of mim-
nut that he Iv mu'a.\‘}'
with, so I have to hit
him with it hard and
surldenly to
gr»! an okay."
“lint why Palm
Springs?
"
“lirL'uuse in Palm
.‘v'pI’ing.s‘, (-very day he
goes to flu’ baths‘ Ill The
Spa. Am] thmiv where
I'm going to be when
hm‘ titcw. Now th:*ry’.\*
It thing ulmul .Im'k.- H23
cciglzty am! he’.v
_,
vain, and In» doesn ‘I
like pwpr'c' to sec him
naked. 50 when I walk
up so [um N11/<<.'<l at The
S[)a—~ I utezm he‘s
1mk:,'(l———xw!I, I'm
t1l.lkL?(I mo, but I dun’:
an
3 who .\‘¢‘m' me, He
does; And I walk up [0
him nuktczf, and Lawn
to talk to him about
this thing. hrflt be very
:‘rnl1¢xI‘ru.v.s‘c11./lrad
he'll want to get away
from rue, and the L-'u.\‘I-
est way is to my ‘Ye.x.‘
bc-mme he [wows tflw
mys ‘Nay (hm I'm
5,-m'ng tn xtirk with him,
and stay righl on in and
not give up. Sn to get
mt ufme. l1e‘Il proba-
My say, ‘Y:/51"’
Two 1116:)/CS Iuzcr, t read
of Ike m:qu{sizr’mz of
this parucular propvrry
by Warner BroIIzer.~r. 1
p/:ou<’d Lazar and
a.\‘A'(,’(l lww fl had been
accom,'IIi.s'l1crt'. “llmv
do you think,"'lw
aximl. “In the buff,
tlmtfv how
.
. just the
way ltotd you it was
going to work."
um l.\’W0()D,
G!\R50?~J Kmum,
1974
274
LAW 33
Louis, as the regent ruling France until her son reached his majority. Every-
one expected Richelieu to say the usual kind words to the young king. In
stead, however, he looked directly at and only at the queen mofher. indeed
his speech ended in long and fulsome praise ofher, praise so glowing that it
actually offended some in the Church. But the smile on the queen’s face as
she lapped up Richelielfs compliments was unforgettable.
A year later the queen mother appointed Richelieu secretary of state
for foreign affairs, an incredible coup for the young bishop. He had now
entered the inner circle of power, and he studied the workings of the court
as if it were the machinery of a watch. An Italian, Concino Concini, was
the queen mother’s favorite, or rather her lover, a role that made him per-
haps the most powerful man in France. Concini was vain and foppish, and
Richelieu played him perfectly—-attending to him as if he were the king.
Within months Richelieu had become
one of Concim"s favorites. But
something happened in
1617 that turned everything upside down: the
young king, who up until then had shown every sign of being an idiot, had
Concini murdered and his most important associates imprisoned. In so
doing Louis took command of the country with one blow, sweeping the
queen mother aside.
Had Richelieu played it wrong? He had been close to both Concini
and Marie de Médicis whose advisers and ministers were now all out of
favor, some even arrested. The queen mother herself was shut up in the
Louvre, a virtual prisoner. Richelieu wasted no time. If everyone was de-
serfing Marie de Médicis, he would stand by her. He knew Louis could not
get rid of her, for the king was still very young, and had in any case always
been inordinately attached to her. As Man'e’s only remaining powerful
friend, Richelieu filled the valuable function of liaison between the king
and his mother. In return he received her protection, and was able to sur—
vive the palace coup, even to thrive. Over the next few years the queen
mother grew still more dependent on him, and in 1622 she repaid him for
his loyalty: Through the intercession of her allies in Rome, Richelieu was
elevated to the powerful rank of cardinal.
By 1623 King Louis was in trouble. He had no one he could trust to
advise him, and although he was now a young man instead of a boy, he re
mained childish in spirit, and affairs of state came hard to him. Now that he
had taken the throne, Marie was no longer the regent and theoretically had
no power, but she still had her son’s ear. and she kept telling him that
Richelieu was his only possible savior. At first Louis would have none of
it——-he hated the cardinal with a passion, only tolerating him out of love for
Marie. In the end, however, isolated in the court and crippled by his own
iudecisiveness, he yielded to his mother and made Richelieu fixst his chief
Councilor and later prime minister.
Now Richelieu no longer needed Marie de Médicis. He stopped visit-
ing and courting her, stopped listening to her opinions, even argued with
her and opposed her wishes. Instead be concentrated on the king, making
himself indispensable to his new master. All the previous premiers, under
standing the king’s childishness, had tried to keep him out of trouble; the
shrewd Richelieu played him differently, deliberately pushing him into
one
ambitious project
after another,
such
as
a
crusade against the
Huguenots and finally an extended war with Spain. The immensity of
these projects only made the king more dependent on his powerful pre-
mier, the only man able to keep order in the realm. And so, for the next
eighteen years, Richelieu, exploiting the king’s weaknesses, governed and
molded France according to his own vision, unifying the country and mak-
ing it a strong European power for centuries to come.
lntcipretation
Richelieu saw everything as a military campaign, and no strategic move
was more important to him than discovering his enemy’s weaknesses and
applying pressure to them. As early as his speeoh in 1615, he was looking
for the weak link in the chain of power, and he saw that it was the queen
mother, Not that Marie was obviously weakmslie governed both France
and her son; but Richelieu saw that she was really an insecure woman who
needed constant masculine attention. He showered her with afiection and
respect, even toadying up to her favorite, Concini. He knew the day would
come when the king would take over, but he also recognized that Louis
loved his mother dearly and would always remain a child in relation to her.
The way to control Louis, then, was not by gaining his favor, which could
change overnight, but by gaining sway over his mother, for whom his afv
fection would never change.
Once Richelieu had the position he desiredm-prime minister———he dis-
carded the queen mother, moving on to the next weak link in the chain:
the king‘s own character. There was a part of him that would always be a.
helpless child in need of higher authority. It was on the foundation of the
king’s weakness that Richelieu established his own power and fame.
Remember: When entering the court, find the weak link. The person
in control is often not the king or queen; it is someone behind the scenes-«
the favorite, the husband or wife, even the court fool. This person may
have more weaknesses than the king himself, because his power depends
on all kinds of capricious factors outside his control.
Finally, when dealing with helpless children who cannot make deci-
sions, play on their weakness and push them into bold ventures, They will
have to depend on you even more, for you will become the adult figure
whom they rely on to get them out of scrapes and to safety.
Observance H
In December of 1925, guests at the swankiest hotel in Palm Beach, Florida,
watched with interest as a mysterious man arrived in a RoI1s—Royce dn'ven
by ajapanese chauffeur. Over the next few days they studied this hand~
some man, who walked with an elegant cane, received telegrams at all
hours, and only engaged in the briefest of conversations. He was a count,
they heard, Count Victor Lustig, and he came from one of the wealthiest
families in Europe—~but this was all they could find out.
Imagine their amazement, then, when Lustig one day walked up to
one of the least distinguished guests in the hotel, a Mr. Herman Loller,
Tlll" l,H"|’|,l£ '|'|||'\(IS
(,(ll‘\'ll
As time went on I wine
to look for the Iitllrt
weaknesses.
.
.
. It’: the
liitfe tlrings that cmml.
OI; nice‘ nrazximz. I
worked on the pre5x'—
den! afa large bank in
Omulm. The [phony]
deal invnlwed the
purtlmye of (he ytrvcl
railway x_v.m=nz of
Omaha, includirlg a
bridge acros.\' IIII4
MISSI.YSip[)I RIVHL My
pr:'ncz'pal.r were sup/,»os-
ally t'}t*mzarz am! I had
(0 rlegotitlle with
Iiurlirz. While awaiting
word from them. I
inrmrlz/(‘ed my fake
mining-stock proposre
/ion. Since this man
was rich, I decided to
play for high nuke.
.
.
Mearnvlzilzt Iplayed
golf with the Iyrmkrr.
visited his Imme, and
men: In rhc theater wizlz
him and his wife.
Ttmugh he showed
wine inter am? in my
xmck deal, he still
warn ‘I con virzced, I had
built it up In the point
that an in vestruem of
3I ,25(I.()0{) war
requirmi. Oflhis I was
(0 put up $9()().l)(l(), tho
Imrzker $35t),(IO0. But
still in» }zesr'€ti!m€.
One eve-mug when I
was at ilulf homflfor
(Iilmcr I wore xumo
perfume-—Coty '5 "April
Vi0le1.x" I! wax rm: {hm
considered effemimzle
for a man Ir) use u zlrlsh
z)_/‘pnrfurrze. The
(maker '3 wife though! ("I
very IIM'('I_V.
" W11 ere did
you get if?‘
"
“II is :1 rare blend,
"
I told her, “especially
madefur me by u
LAW 33
I/rench per/}xrrie'r. Do
you lift? it?”
“I love it, ”3!to replied.
The following day I
went through my
cffctrts and found two
empty bonlrns. Bath hat]
come from France, but
went empty. I want It) (1
downtown department
rlure and ])llfC’llLl£’(l
ten ounces ofCot_v'.r
"April Vmlz.
.
poured this into [its
two !"ren<:h bottles,
mrvfuliy xeulml «mm.
wrzzppwi them in
fissile paper.
That £.’Vl’HiIlg I dmppea’
by tlzr bankers‘ home-
and presenled the two
btJttle.s' to his wife.
"They were especially
put up for me m
CoI()gne,"ltt;I(1/wr.
The next day the
bunker called at my
hotcl. Hi.\' wife was
mmprurerl by my
perfume, She t'zm§id-
cred it the most
W(>TI(l(‘?‘flil, (he mm!
l’.l‘OIi(“ frugraizctt she
hm! ever «med. 1 did no!
tell me banker he could
get ail In» warrtczi righ!
in Omtrhat.
“Site mid.
" the [tanker
adriatl, "that I was
formnule [0 be’ u.\:mt'i-
ztttrtl with a man like
mat." Frmn than on his
uttilttde wax t‘/zarzged,
for he had (‘amp/ale
faith in his wt'fc3'jut1g-
merit.
.
.
, Ha partrrl
with $35(),0l)U. This,
incivieumlly was my
big,-;z¢'.rt [con] sums.
"YELLOW 1<u:“wr:t1,.
lX75—l‘J76
276
LAW 33
head of an engineering company, and entered into conversation with him.
Loller had made his fortune only recently, and forging social connections
was very important to him. He felt honored and somewhat intimidated by
this sophisticated man, who spoke perfect English with a hint of a foreign
accent Over the days to come, the two became friends.
Loller of course did most of the talking, and one night he confessed
that his business was doing poorly, with more troubles ahead. In return,
Lustig
confided
in his
new
friend
that he
too
had
serious
money
prob1ems——Communisls had seized his family estate and all its assets. He
was too old to learn a trade and go to work. Luckily he had found an an
swer——“a money—making machine." “You counterfeit?” Loller whispered in
half—shock. No, Lusiig replied, explaining that through a secret chemical
process. his machine could duplicate any paper currency with complete ac»
curacy. Put in a dollar bill and six hours laxer you had two, both perfect. He
proceeded to explain how the machine had been smuggled out of Europe,
how the Germans had developed it to undermine the British, how it had
supported the count for several years, and on and on. When Loller insisted
on a demonstration, the two men went to Lustig's room, where the count
produced a magnificent mahogany box fitted with slots, cranks, and dials.
Loller watched as Lustig inserted
a. dollar bill in the box. Sure enough,
early the following morning Lustig pulled out two bills, still wet from the
chemicals.
Lustig gave the notes to Loller, who immediately took the bills to a
local bank—-——which accepted them as genuine. Now the businessman fever-
ishly begged Lusug to sell him a machine. The count explained that there
was only one in existence, so Loller made him a high offer: $25,000, then a
considerable amount (more than $400,000 in today’s terms). Even so,
Lustig seemed reluctant: He did not feel right about making his friend pay
so much. Yet finally he agreed to the sale. After all, he said, “I suppose it
matters little what you pay me. You are, after all, going to recover the
amount within a few days by duplicating your own bills.” Making Loller
swear never to reveal the machine’s existence to other people, Lustig ac»
cepted the money. Later the same day he checked out of the hotel. A year
later, after many futile attempts at duplicating bills, Loller finally went to
the police with the story of how Count Lustig had conned him with a pair
of dollar bills, some chemicals, and a. worthless mahogany box.
Interpretation
Count Lustlg had an eagle eye for other people’s weaknesses. He saw them
in the smallest gesture. Loller, for instance, overtipped waiters, seemed
nervous in conversation with the concierge, talked loudly about his busi»
ness. His weakness, Lustig knew, was his need for social validation and for
the respect that he thought his wealth had earned him. He was also chroni-
cally insecure. Luslig had come to the hotel to hunt for prey. In Loller he
horned in on the perfect sucker»-—a man hungering for someone to fill his
psychic voids.
In offering Loller his friendship, then, Lustig knew he was offering him
the immediate respect of the other guests. As a count, Lustig was also offer-
ing the newly rich businessman access to the glittering world of old wealth.
And for the coup de grace, he apparently owned a machine that would res-
cue Loller from his worries. It would even put him on a par with Lustig
himself, who had also used the machine to maintain his status. No wonder
Loller took the bait.
Remember: When searching for suckers, always look for the dissatis-
fled, the unhappy, the insecure. Such people are riddled with weaknesses
and have needs that you can fill. Their neediness is the groove in which
you place your thumbnail and turn them at will.
Observance III
In the year 1559, the French king Henri ll died in ajousting exhibition. His
son assumed the throne, becoming Francis 11, but in the background stood
Henri’s wife and queen, Catherine de’ Médjcis, a woman who had long
ago proven her skill in affairs of state. When Francis died the next year,
Catlierine took control of the country as regent to her next son in line of
succession, the future Charles IX, a mere ten years old at the time.
The main threats to the queens power were Antoine de Bourbon, king
of Navarre, and his brother, Louis, the powerful prince of Condé, both of
whom could claim the right to serve as regent instead of Catherine, who,
after all, was Italian——-a foreigner. Catherine quickly appointed Antoine
lieutenant general of the kingdom, a title that seemed to satisfy his ambi-
tion. It also meant that he had to remain in court, where Catherine could
keep an eye on him. Her next move proved smarter still: Antoine had a
notorious weakness for young women, so she assigned one of her most at-
tractive maids of honor, Louise de Rouet, to seduce him. Now Antoine’s
intimate, Louise reported all of his actions to Catherine. The move worked
so brilliantly that Catherine assigned another of her maids to Prince
Condé, and thus was formed her atcadron 2mla1Lt——“lly1'ng squadron”-—of
young grls whom she used to keep the unsuspecting males in the court
under her control.
In 1572 Catherine married 05 her daughter, Marguerite de Valois, to
Henri, the son of Antoine and the new king of Navarre. To put a family that
had always struggled against her so close to power was a dangerous move,
so to make sure of Henri’s loyalty she unleashed on him the loveliest mem-
ber of her “flying squadron,” Charlotte de Beaune Semblancay, baroness
of Sauves. Catherine did this even though Henri was married to her daugh-
ter. Within weeks, Marguerite de Valois wrote in her memoirs, “Mme. de
Sauves so completely ensnared my husband that we no longer slept to-
gether, nor even conversed.”
The baroness was an excellent spy and helped to keep Henri under
Cathei-ine’s thumb. W’hen the queen’s youngest son, the Duke of Alencon,
grew so close to Henri that she feared the two might plot against her, she
assigned the baroness to him as well. This most infamous member of the
flying squadron quickly seduced Alengon, and soon the two young men
fought over her and their friendship quickly ended, along with any danger
of a conspiracy.
And while I am on the
subject, them is artwher
fact that d¢'.vvrw’s
mmrimi. It is this. A
man sltows his churat:«
{er just in the way in
which he deals‘ with
tr1fz‘es—~for than he IS
ojfliis guard. This will
ofzeri zzfford tl good
opparmni/y ofalzserw
ing the boundless
egnism of a mun ‘.5’
nature, and his f0!Il/
luck oirunsidemlitm
for orlzyrs; and if fht'.Yl’
defects show (Izmi-
selvw in small I/tings,
or merely in his general
rlz-mmmmr. you will
find (Ital they ll/S/J
underlie his uctirm in
matters ofimportance,
although he may
dlS‘gt(i5‘t‘ the furl. Tlzis it
an opportunity w/Itch
should not be nzmml.
Ifin the little u_/jrmzv of
every day-«the tn,’/{er of
life
.
,
.—- a man is
inctzn.vizlcrute and stir!/x'.t
only what is advumw
gmus or mnvertizmt to
lzimsvlfi to tho preju-
drcv olotlicrrs’ riglm; if
he opprrrprialcs to
his-n.s-«If rim! which
bzdorzgs to all alilm, you
may be Aura there is no
jItsliCL' in ]ti.\‘ heart. and
that he would be a
xcnumlrsl rm a witch’-
sale scale, only that law
and cvnipulsion bind
Ixis hands".
A RT] urn
Srtic)Pt:NII/umk.
1788
1860
LAW 33
277
'l'l||I ll \ F'|‘|.lt r’\'l‘
Pll;\R>i,\l.l.\
When the (W1) armies
/Julius Cazamriv tmrl
Pampry’s] were came
intu Plturyzllitt, and
both mmmpterl Ilwre.
Pompreyis tlzrmghtx ran
the xurne way as they
had done before,
agtumtfiglztiug.
.
.
. But
those who were about
him were grmtly (,’(mfl-
zlrm o
nu‘cz'ss.
.
, us if
tlugv hml «I/ready
mru/uerod.
.
.
. The
rruvulrv t.'.i‘/7r'<tt'all_v were
obstinate farfigltrtrzg,
bflmg vplerzt/izlly armed
and bravely mnuntzvrl.
and valuirtg thmzsrelves
upon thcfine horses
they kept, and upon
their own handmrm"
persons.‘ as also upon
the atlvunmgc of their
numl1er\'. for they were
five Ihtmyaml against
one thousand of
(Trtcxtrrit. Nor were the
number: ofthe infamr_v
less t1i.\[Irt)pnrtitmult'.
there lwing forty-five
thousand of Pompey It
uguimt !WL’7t/‘V-(wt)
thottsunrl uflho enemy.
(The mut day] whilst
the infantry was thus
sharply engagml in the
main battle, on the
/tcmh POInp4:y'.s' horse
rode up am,/irlemly.
and npenerl [his
cavalry'.s'l ranks very
wide, that they might
surround the right wing
of Caesar. But before
they engaged, Caesar's
whorls l'll.\’h€(I out and
attacked them, and did
not dun their mveltus
at a tlistarm’. I1rN‘.S‘lrlh‘('
at the thighv and legs,
as they usually did in
rlose battle. but aimerl
at tlmir frurcx. For thus
275
LAW 33
Interpretation
Catherine had seen very early on the sway that a mistress has over a man
of power: Her own husband, Henri II, had kept one of the most infamous
mistresses of them all, Diane de Poitiers. What Catherine learned from the
experience was that a man like her husband wanted to feel he could win a
woman over without having to rely on his status, which he had inherited
rather than earned. And such a need contained a huge blind spot: As long
as the woman began the affair by acting as if she had been conquered, the
man would fail to notice that as dine passed the mistress had come to hold
power over him, as Diane de Poitiers did over Henri. It was Catherine’s
strategy to turn this weakness to her advantage, using it as a way to conquer
and control men. All she had to do was unleash the loveliest women in the
court, her “flying squadron,” on men whom she knew shared her hus«
ba.nd’s vulnerability.
Remember. Always look for passions and obsessions that cannot be
controlled. The stronger the passion, the more vulnerable the person. This
may seem surprising, for passionate people look strong. In fact, however,
they are simply filling the stage with their theatricality, distracting people
from how weak and helpless they really are. A man’s need to conquer
women actually reveals a tremendous helplessness that has made suckers
out of them for thousands of years. Look at the part of a person that is most
visible—their greed, their lust, their intense fear. These are the emotions
they cannot conceal, and over which they have the least control. And what
people cannot control, you can control for them.
Observance IV
Arabella Huntington, wife of the great late-nineteenth-century railroad
magnate Collis P. Huntington,
came from humble origins and always
struggled for social recognition among her wealthy peers. When she gave a
party in her San Francisco mansion, few of the social elite would show up;
most of them took her for a gold digger, not their kind. Because of her hus-
band’s fabulous wealth, art dealers courted her, but with such condescen-
sion they obviously saw her as an upstart. Only one man of consequence
treated her difl’erently: the dealer Joseph Duveen.
For the first few years of Duveen’s relationship with Arabella, he made
no eifort to sell expensive art to her. Instead he accompanied her to fine
stores, chatted endlessly about queens and princesses he knew, on and on.
At last, she thought, a man who treated her as an equal, even a superior, in
high society. Meanwhile, if Duveen did not try to sell art to her, he did sub-
tly educate her in his aesthetic ideas——n-amely, that the best at was the
most expensive art. And after Arabella had soaked up his way of seeing
things, Duveen would act as if she always had exquisite taste, even though
before she met him her aesthetics had been abysmal.
When Collis Huntington died, in 1900, Arabella came into a fortune.
She suddenly started to buy expensive paintings, by Rembrandt and
Velazquez, for exa.rnple—and only from Duveen. Years later Duveen sold
her Gainsb0rough’s Blue Boy for the highest price ever paid for a work of
art at the time, an astounding purchase for a. family that previously had
shown little interest in collecting.
Interpretation
joseph Duveen instantly understood Arabella Huntington and what made
her tick: She wanted to feel important, at home in society. lntensely inse-
cure about her lowerclass background, she needed confirmation of her
new social smtus. Duveen waited. lnstead of rushing into trying to per-
suade her to collect art, he subtly went to work on her weaknesses. He
made her feel that she deserved his attention not because she was the wife
of one of the wealthiest men in the world but because of her own special
character--and this completely melted her. Duveen never condescended
to Arabella; rather than lecturing to her, he instilled his ideas in her indi-
rectly. The result was one of his best and most devoted clients, and also the
sale of The Bhze Bay.
People’s need for validation and recognition, their need to feel impor~
tant, is the best kind of weakness to exploit. First, it is almost universal; sec-
ond, exploiting it is so very easy. All you have to do is find ways to make
people feel better about their taste, their social standing, their intelligence.
Once the fish
are hooked, you can reel them in again and again, for
yea.rs——you are filling a positive role, giving them what they cannot get on
their own. They may never suspect that you are turning them like a thumb«
screw, and if they do they may not care, because you are making them feel
better about themselves, and that is worth any price.
Observance V
In 1862 King William of Prussia named Otto Von Bismarck premier and
minister for foreign affairs. Bismarck was known for his boldness, his a.rnbi~
tion—~and his interest in strengthening the military. Since Wflliam was sur-
rounded by liberals in his ghvemment and cabinet, politicians who already
wanted to limit his powers, it was quite dangerous for him to put Bismarck
in this sensitive position. His wife, Queen Augusta, had tried to dissuade
him, but although she usually got her way with him, this time William
stuck to his guns.
Only a week after becoming prime minister, Bismarck made an im-
promptu speech to a few dozen ministers to convince them of the need to
enlarge the army. He ended by saying, “The great questions of the time
will be decided, not by speeches and resolutions of majorities, but by iron
and blood.” His speech was immediately disseminated throughout Ger-
many. The queen screamed at her husband that Bismarck was a barbaric
militar-ist who was out to usurp control of Prussia, and that William had to
fire him. The liberals in the government agreed with her. The outcry was
so vehement that Williarn began to be afraid he would end up on a scaf-
fold, like Louis XVI of France, if he kept Bismarck on as prime minister.
Bismarck knew he had to get to the king before it was too late. He also
knew he had blundered, and should have tempered his fiery words. Yet as
he contemplated his strategy, he decided not to apologize but to do the
exact opposite, Bismarck knew the king well.
(Yzciar had in; trloczirri
them, in ltoper rim:
young gentlemen, who
hurl not known much
c‘/flzutrlnr and wounds,
but came wearing their
hair long. in zhzvflower
nfrheir age and height
of thllll’ beauty, would
be more uppre/1t’r1.s'ive
afiuch blows, and not
am: for lmzurding hmh
a dangrlr II! pr:-smu cum’
1: bleniish far the
future,
And so itpmved, for
they were .m_/nrfrom
l.Vc'rzr‘11-xg the xtmke of
rlw javclins, that Iizey
could not Slund the
sight oft/rem. but
turned about, and
covered their 1224,-es to
xc-cure rhem. ()nm in
rlimrdm; pr:-xemly they
ruined ubom Ia /iy; and
so most shamcfully
ruilwd all. For (hm?
who hm] hm! then:
back at once
nmfimzkeri the infamry.
and falling on their
rear, cu! then: (0 pieces
Pompey, who
commanded the r)Ihr=r
wing of the army, whorl
hr Saw his raw:/ry rims
broken llfldflfiflg. was
no longer lzimself; nor
did he now I'eI11ember
that he was Pompey the
Gmzt, bur, likp one
whom some god /(ml
tlepriwd of/Iii‘ s'em'e.i',
rt/Iired In his mu with-
out speaking /1 word,
and there ml to (’,.\:]7(’(’I
the event. til! the whole
army was routed.
THE LIFE or l\)!.lUS
<‘A(=.SAl<.
P:
v
-\!<( H.
c
A.n.~1o—-12!)
LAW 33
279
280
LAW 33
When the two men met, William, predictably, had been worked into a
tizzy by the queen. He reiterated his fear of being guillotined. But Bismarck
only replied, “Yes, then we shall be dead! We must die sooner or later, and
could there be a more respectable way of dying? I should die lighting for
the cause of my king and master. Your Majesty would die sealing with your
own blood your royal rights granted by God’s graze. Whether upon the
scafiold or upon the battlefield makes no difference to the glorious staking
of body and life on behalf of rights granted by God’s grace!“ On he went,
appealing to William’s sense of honor and the majesty of his position as
head of the army. How could the king allow people to push him around?
Wasn’t the honor of Germany more important than quibbling over words?
Not only did the prime minister convince the king to stand up to both his
wife and his parliament, he persuaded him to build up the am1y—Bis-
matclwfs goal all along.
Interpretation
Bismarck knew the king felt bullied by those around him. He knew that
William had a military background and a deep sense of honor, and that he
felt ashamed at his cravenness before his wife and his government. Wdliam
secretly yearned to be a great and mighty king, but he dared not express
this ambition because he was afraid of ending up like Louis XVI. Where a
show of courage often conceals a man’s timidity, William’s timidity con-
cealed his need to show courage and thump his chest.
Bismarck sensed the longing for glory beneath William’s pacifist front,
so he played to the king’s insecurity about his manhood, finally pushing
him into three wars and the creation of a German empire. Timidity is a. po-
tent weakness to exploit. Timid souls often yearn to be their opposite——to
be Napoleons. Yet they lack the inner strength. You, in essence, can be-
come their Napoleon, pushing them into bold actions that serve your
needs while also making them dependent on you. Remember: Look to the
opposites and never take appearances at face value.
Image:
The
Thumbscrew.
Your
enemy
has secrets that
he guards, thinks
thoughts he will
not reveal. But
they come out in
ways he
cannot
help. It is there some
where,
a groove
of
weakness
on his head,
at his heart, over his
belly. Once you find the
groove, put your thumb in
it and turn him
at will.
Authority: Finzi out each man’s thumbscrew. "l‘is the art of setting their
wills in action. It needs more skill than resolution. You must know
where to get at anyone. Every volition has a special motive which varies
according to taste. All men are idolaters, some of fame, others of self-
interest, must of pleasure. Skill consists in knowing these idols in order
to bring them into play. Knowing any man’s rnainspring of motive
you have as it were the key to his will. (Baltasar Gracién, 1601-1658)
REVERSAL
Playing on people’s weakness has one significant danger: You may stir up
an action you cannot control.
In your games of power you always look several steps ahead and plan
accordingly. And you exploit the fact that other people are more emotional
and incapable of such foresight. But when you play on their vulnerabilities,
the areas over which they have least control, you can unleash emotions
that will upset your plans. Push timid people into bold action and they may
go too far; answer their need for attention or recognition and they may
need more than you want to give them. The helpless, childish element you
are playing on can turn against you.
The more emotional the weakness, the greater the potential danger.
Know the limits to this game, then, and never get carried away by your
control over your victims. You are after power, not the thrill of control.
LAW 33
281
34
BE ROYAL IN YOUR OWN
FASHION: ACT LIKE A
KING TO BE TREATED
LIKE ONE
JUDGMENT
The way you ccmy yourselfwill often determine how you
are treated: [71, the long mm, appearing vulgar or com-
mon will make people disrespect you. For a king respects
himself and zflspires the same xmtimmt in others. By
acting regzzlly and confident ofyaur powers, you make
yourself seem destined to wear 52 crown.
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
In July of 1830,
a revolution broke out in Paris that forced the king,
Charles X, to abdicate. A commission of the highest authorities in the land
gathered to choose
a successor, and the man they picked was Louis-
Philippe, the Duke of Orleans.
From the beginning it was clear that Louis~Philippe would be a differ
am kind of king, and not just because he came from a different branch of
the royal family, or because he had not inherited the crown but had been
given it, by a commission, putting his legitimacy in question. Rather it was
that he disliked ceremony and the trappings of royalty; he had more
friends among the bankers than among the nobility; and his style was not
to create a new kind ofroyal rule, as Napoleon had done, but to downplay
his status, the better to mix with the businessmen and middle-class folk
who had called him to lead. Thus the symbols that came to be associated
with Louis-Philippe were neither the scepter nor the crown, but the gray
hat and umbrella with which he would proudly walk the streets of Paris, as
if he were a bourgeois out for a stroll. VVhen Louis—Philippe invited James
Rothschild, the most important banker in France, to his palace, he treated
him as an equal. And unlike any king before him, not only did he talk busi-
ness with Monsieur Rothschild but that was literally all he talked, for he
loved money and had amassed a huge fortune.
As the reign of the “bourgeois king” plodded on, people came to de
spire him. The aristocracy could not endure the sight of an unkingly king,
and within a few years they turned on him. Meanwhile the growing class of
the poor, including the radicals who had chased out Charles X, found no
satisfaction in a ruler who neither acted as a king nor governed as a man of
the people. The bankers to whom Louis-Philippe was the most beholden
soon realized that it was they who controlled the country, not he, and they
treated him with growing contempt. One day, at the start of a train trip or-
ganized for the royal family, James Rothschild actually berated him-and
iri public-—for being late. Once the king had made news by treating the
banker as an equal; now the banker treated the king as an inferior.
Eventually the workers’ insurrections that had brought down Louis-
Phi1ippe’s predecessor began to ree.-merge, and the king put them down
with force. But what was he defending so brutally? Not the institution of the
monarchy, which he disdained, nor a democratic republic, which his rule
prevented. What he was really defending, it seemed, was his own fortune,
and the fortunes of the bankers—-not a way to inspire loyalty among the
citizenry.
In early 1848, Frenchmen of all classes began to demonstrate for elec-
toral reforms that would make the country truly democratic. By February
the demonstrations had turned violent. To assuage the populace, Louis-
Philippe fired his prime minister and appointed a liberal as a replacement.
But this created the opposite of the desired effect: The people sensed they
could push the king around. The demonstrations turned into a l'ull~fledged
revolution, with gunfire and barricades in the streets.
z'\/ever [are your
self-rre¢‘[)ect. nor be too
fimu/far with yourself
. when you are alone.
I11 yrmr imegri/{V ilxr,-If
be your own rraizdard
of rrclilude. and he
more indebted to (he
Arvrzrily oj'yuur awn
judgnmit ofyaum-elf
than to all external
prewpls. Desist from
mlsreemly rundurr.
rather our of respect
for your own virme
than for Ike .a‘n'i(l1rrr?5
cvfexlernal zzurlzoriry.
Come (0 hold yourself
in awe. and you will
have no need of
Smear’; zrrmginury
tutor.
BAIII.-NS/\R GRA(~m.\'.
1001
I058
LAW 34
293
284
LAW 34
On the night of February 23,
a crowd of Parisians surrounded the
palace. With
a suddenness that caught everyone by surprise,
Louis-
Philippe abdicated that very evening and fled to England. He left no sue»
cessor, nor even the suggestion of one-—his whole government folded up
and dissolved like a traveling circus leaving town.
Interpretation
Louis-Philippe consciously dissolved the aura that natu.rally pertains to
kings and leaders. Scoffing at the symbolism of grandeur, he believed a
new world was dawning, where rulers should act and be like ordinary citi
zens. He was right: A new world, without kings and queens, was certainly
on its way. He was profoundly wrong, however, in predicting a change in
the dynamics of power.
The bourgeois king’s hat and umbrella amused the French at first, but
soon grew irritating. People knew that Louis-Philippe was not really like
them at all—that the hat and umbrella were essentially a kind of trick to en-
courage them in the fantasy that the country had suddenly grown more
equal. Actually, though, the divisions of wealth had never been greater.
The French expected their ruler to be a bit of a showman, to have some
presence. Even a radical like Robespierre, who had briefly come to power
during the French Revolution fifty years earlier, had understood this, and
cenainly Napoleon, who had turned the revolutionary republic into an im
per-ial regime, had known it in his bones. Indeed as soon as Louis—Phi1ippe
fled the
stage,
the
French
revealed their
true
desire: They
elected
Napoleon’s grand-nephew president. He was a virtual unknown, but they
hoped he would recreate the great general’s powerful aura, erasing the
awkward memory of the “bourgeois king.”
Powerful people may be tempted to affect a common-man aura, trying
to create the illusion that they and their subjects or underlings are basically
the same. But the people whom this false gesture is intended to impress will
quickly see through it. They understand that they are not being given more
power——that it only appears as if they shared in the powerful person’s fate.
The only kind of common touch that works is the kind ailected by Franklin
Roosevelt, a style that said the president shared values and goals with the
common people even while he remained a patrician at heart. He never
pretended to erase his distance from the crowd.
Leaders who try to dissolve that distance through a false chumrniness
gradually lose the ability to inspire loyalty, fear, or love. Instead they elicit
contempt. Like Louis—Philippe, they are too uninspiring even to be worth
the guillotine-——the best they can do is simply vanish in the night, as if they
were never there.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
When Christopher Columbus was trying to find funding for his legendary
voyages, many around him believed he came from the Italian aristocracy.
This view was passed into history through a biography written after the ex-
plorer’s death by his son, which describes him as a descendant of a Count
Colombo of the Castle of Cuccaro in Montferrat. Colombo in turn was said
to be descended from the legendary Roman general Colonius, and two of
his first cousins were supposedly direct descendants of an emperor of Con
stantinople. An illustrious background indeed. But it was nothing more
than illustrious fantasy, for Columbus was actually the son of Domenico
Colombo, a humble weaver who had opened a wine shop when Christa»
pher was a young man, and who then made his living by selling cheese.
Columbus himself had created the myth of his noble background, be-
cause from early on he felt that destiny had singled him out for great
things, and that he had a kind ofroyalty in his blood. Accordingly he acted
as if he were indeed descended from noble stock. After an uneventful ca-
reer as a merchant on
3 commercial vessel, Columbus, Originally from
Genoa, settled in Lisbon. Using the fabricated story of his noble back
ground, he married into an established Lisbon family that had excellent
connections with Portuguese royalty.
Through his in—laws, Columbus finagled a meeting with the king of
Portugahjoao II, whom he petitioned to finance a westward voyage aimed
at discovering a shorter route to Asia. In return for announcing that any
discoveries he achieved would be made in the kings name, Columbus
Ihwanted a series of rights: the title Grand Admiral of the Oceanic Sea; the
office of Viceroy over any lands he found; and 10 percent of the future
commerce with such lands. All of these rights were to be hereditary and for
all time. Columbus made these demands even though he had previously
been a mere merchant, he knew almost nothing about navigation, he could
not work a quadrant, and he had never led a group of men. In short he had
absolutely no qualifications for the journey he proposed. Furthermore, his
petition included no details as to how he would accomplish his plans, just
vague promises.
“Then Columbus finished his pitch, joao II smiled: He politely de-
clined the offer, but left the door open for the future. Here Columbus must
have noticed something he would never forget: Even as the king turned
down the sailor’s demands, he treated them
as legitimate. He neither
laughed at Columbus nor questioned his background and credentials. In
fact the king was impressed by the boldness of Columbus’s requests, and
clearly felt comfortable in the company of a man who acted so confidently.
The meeting must have convinced Columbus that his instincts were cor‘
rect: By asking for the moon, he had instantly raised his own status, for the
king assumed that unless a man who set such a high price on himself were
mad, which Columbus did not appear to be, he must somehow be worth it.
A few years later Columbus moved to Spain. Using his Portuguese
connections, he moved in elevated circles at the Spanish court, receiving
subsidies from illustrious financiers and sharing tables with dukes and
princes. To all these men be repeated his request for financing for a voyage
to the we-st——and also for the rights he had demanded from joao II. Some,
such as the powerful duke of Medina, wanted to help, but could not, since
they lacked the power to grant him the titles and rights he wanted, But
Columbus would not back down. He soon realized that only one person
Illl'I*m:I,1~,Im..- AT
?4l(I\’().\
In rim mun gwwrminn
rhe /izmi/y lwecnrne
mm]: more ftlmom
/Ium before Ilzmugh I/zr?
distinctimr conferred
upnn u by Clam-rlrenm
[he nzusler of .\‘ic_wn.
(.'lt'ix1/runes
.
.
. had a
zlnugltmg Agarzstu,
whom he wished to
marry to lite‘ best man
in all (fruece. 30 during
1/2/z 0l'_wrpi4* gxlnmy, in
whirl: he had him.
.r’_,s"
mm the Chariot race, he
had a pm‘)lir; amumnczh
men! murlc, to the e/Ierl
that any Greek who
mcmghr himselfgood
enough to becunze
(,‘lr:i.v1hcnc.v' .s'rm—in-law
should presrnt Irirzzwlf
iw‘.rherI-becuu.\‘e he
:‘mm(lc‘d, willxiri the
ymr /ollowirzg the
ulrtirilh day, In hr,-Imlh
his (1(llIg}l(t’I‘ In Jzw
/inure husbrmd
Cl1*is!}rzvu'.v liar! had a
racetrack and .1
u'r(’xIIing~rir1K i‘p(!<'iullv
fllflt/(’ for Iris purpose,
and pmwntly the nu"!-
am‘ begun to nr/ive——
every num of (Irerrk
nationalily who had
mrrmtlairzg 11) be /mmd
nf rairlmr in /1 ix country
or in fiirmx»/fl
.
.
.
Cl('i.s'1h(.'n£‘.$' began I?)-
rzvkilig mclz [«.z_['rhc
/mnmmur .s'uimrs/ in
turn to nmnc his (mm-
rry um! parvn/:1ge;IIx(-n
he kepz r/rem in }Is'.\‘
Iinzme for a year. In get
to know man: well.
entering mm a2nversa—
mm with (hem S()IIl€A
timer singly. .s'()me‘Iime5
all mg:-Jlwr, and rmling
each. of them for lzir
LAW 34
285
manly quuliliztr «ml
te'm,n£'r. edumlirm and
manners.
.
. But my
mm! impnmml ms! of
all was t/m‘r lnalmvirmr
at the dinnurmlilo. All
this wmz on through-
out their wry in Sz't'y(:/1.
and all {he mm‘ he
enlerraimm‘ (hem fraud»
snmr'iy_
For Um’ !t‘G.)'t)fl or
(n.v,(:£’lu’I ix‘ was the lwo
Allsmiarzs who
lmpmrsed C/€{a'rI1en(‘.v
most /'mrnmm'7l_v. and
0/"Ike Iwn Ti,mrrdw".s'
sun lIl[)pr)t'lL‘l(lL'.\‘ mine
(0 be pre_/errretl.
.
.
.
At last l/H.’ duy curnt’
which had been /ixwi
for the belrrrrlmrl, and
Clni.n‘l1e1irz,r had to
declare his ('iznice. Ile"
nmrkczl the day by tin’
sczcrzfice rafa hurztirml
oxen. and Ilzen grew: ti
great banquet, In whirl:
not only the .rm'Im'.s‘ but
everyone ufrmte in
Sicyvn was invitrszl.
When dinner was over.
the .\'u[t0r5 lacgzm Ir)
cornpcle with (‘MC’)
allmr in mum‘ and in
talking in mmpmzy.
In both tirtasv at'mm~
[)ll.Y/llIIL’Ill.\‘ II was
f1ip;)o<‘l1'i'¢z’e.i' who
pmvetl by far 1129
zloughiicsl clmmpiurl,
until at lam. as more
and rrmre wine Wm
drunk, he asked Ill!‘
fluIt’—[)l{1}'(‘I‘I(I play him
a tune and began m
dance to it. Now it may
well be than ht,’ rlumsorl
to his own .mzis-/‘action;
C‘leirthene.s‘. howevvr,
who was wan.‘/ting
the perjmnmncc.
begun to have .s‘eriou\'
dmzlrfs about the wlwle
larzsiners. Presemly.
after a brirfprizaw.
Ilippzrr/eidtai rm: for :1
table; the table was
brought, and
2.56
LAW 34
could meet his demands: Queen Isabella. In 1487 he finally managed a
meeting with the queen, and although he could not convince her to finance
the voyage, he completely charmed her, and became a frequent guest in
the palace.
In 1492 the Spanish finally expelled the Moorish invaders who cen-
turies earlier had seized parts of the country. With the wartime burden on
her treasury lifted, Isabella felt she could finally respond to the demands of
her explorer friend, and she decided to pay for three ships, equipment, the
salaries of the crews, and a modest stipend for Columbus. More important,
she had a. contract drawn up that granted Columbus the titles and rights on
which he had insisted. The only one she denied——and only in the contract’s
fine print—was the 10 percent of all revenues from any lands discovered:
an absurd demand, since he wanted no time limit on it. (Had the clause
been left in, it would eventually have made Columbus and his heirs the
wealthiest family on the planet. Columbus never read the fine print.)
Satisfied that his demands had been met, Columbus set sail that same
year in search of the passage to Asia. (Before he left he was careful to hire
the best navigator he could find to help him get there.) The mission failed
to find such a passage, yet when Columbus petitioned the queen to finance
an even more ambitious voyage the following year, she agreed. By then
she had come to see Columbus as destined for great things.
Interpretation
As an explorer Columbus was mediocre at best. He knew less about the
sea than did the average sailor on his ships, could never determine the lati-
tude and longitude of his discoveries, mistook islands for vast continents,
and treated his crew badly. But in one area he was a genius: He knew how
to sell himself. How else to explain how the son of a cheese vendor, a. low-
level sea merchant, managed to ingratiate himself with the highest royal
and aristocratic families?
Columbus had an amazing power to charm the nobility, and it all
came from the way he carried himself. He projected a sense of confidence
that was completely out ofproportion to his means. Nor was his confidence
the aggressive, ugly selfipromotion of an upsmrt—it was a quiet and calm
selflassurance. In fact it was the same confidence usually shown by the no
bility themselves. The powerful in the o1d—style aristocracies felt no need to
prove or assert themselves; being noble, they knew they always deserved
more, and asked for it. With Columbus, then, they felt an instant aflinity,
for he carried himself just the way they clid——elevated above the crowd,
destined for greatness.
Understand: It is within your power to set your own price. How you
carry yourself reflects what you think of yourself. If you ask for little, shuf-
fle your feet and lower your head, people will assume this reflects your
character. But this behavior is not you»-—it is only how you have chosen to
present yourself to other people. You can just as easily present the Colum~
bus front: buoyancy, confidence, and the feeling that you were born to
wear a crown.
With all great decsivm there is a noteworthy occummre to which they owe their
power. In the actual act ofdeception they are overcome by belief in themselves: it is
this which then speaks so miraculously and campellingly to those mound them.
F7“H’(i7”iC}L Nietzr4‘Iu.>,
I6‘-’r‘4— I 900
KEYS TO POWER
As children, we start our lives with great exuberance, expecting and de-
manding everything from the world. This generally carries over into our
first forays into society, as we begin our careers. But as we grow older the
rebuffs and failures we experience set up boundaries that only get firmer
with time. Coming to expect less from the world, we accept limitations that
are really self-imposed. ‘We start to bow and scrape and apologize for even
the simplest of requests. The solution Lo such a shrinking of horizons is to
deliberately force ourselves in the opposite direction-——to downplay the
failures and ignore the limitations, to make ourselves demand and expect
as much as the child. To accomplish this, we must use a particular strategy
upon ourselves. Call it the Strategy of the Crown.
The Strategy of the Crown is based on a simple chain of cause and ef-
fect: If we believe we are destined for great things, our belief will radiate
outward, just as a crown creates an aura around a king. This outward radi-
ance will infect the people around us, who will think we must have reasons
to feel so confident. People who wear crowns seem to feel no inner sense of
the limits to what they can ask for or what they can accomplish. This too
radiates outward. Limits and boundaries disappear. Use the Strategy of the
Crown and you will be surprised how often it bears fruit. Take as an exa.m~
ple those happy children who ask for whatever they want, and get it. Their
high expectations are their charm. Adults enjoy granting their wishes-——just
as Isabella enjoyed granting the wishes of Columbus.
Throughouthistory, people ofundistinguished birth-—-the Theodora: of
‘ Byzantium, the Columbuses, the Beethovens, the Disraelis-——-have managed
to work the Strategy of the Crown, believing so firmly in their own greatness
that it becomes a seIf~fulfil1ing prophecy. The trick is simple: Be overcome
by your selfibelief. Even while you know you are practicing a kind of de-
ception on yourself, act like a king. You are likely to be treated as one.
The crown may separate you from other people, but it is up to you to
make that separation real: You have to act differently, demonstrating your
distance from those around you. One way to emphasize your difference is
to always act with dignity, no matter the circumstance. Louis~Philippe gave
no sense of being different from other people—he was the banker king.
And the moment his subjects threatened him, he caved in. Everyone
sensed this and pounced. Lacking regal dignity and firmness of purpose,
Louis-Philippe seemed an impostor, and the crown was easily toppled
from his head.
Regal bearing should not be confused with arrogance. Arrogance may
seem the king’s entitlement, but in fact it betrays insecurity. It is the very
opposite of a royal demeanor.
Ilippo('{oir1<<s'. rlimhing
on to it, dancvtrl first
Mwli’ Lucrmmn zlaazces,
marl some Attic ones,
and endnl by mzmlilzg
on his" In-ad and Imu-
irzg link‘ with his legs in
1/11’ air. The I.z11‘mu'an.
and Attic rlwzces were
but! mough; bur
Clei.\‘IlLm(e.\‘, I/tough
he alrmrly lomlzezl I/11>
I/tough! ofhlwing R
San -m~1aw like Ahm.
new/'!l1el¢'&r res-rrairxecl
lzimself mm’ nzzmogcd
to amid an m,uImr,s.r;
but win»: he saw
Hippwleidex boating
time with his legs‘, he
could bear 1'! no longer.
“Sari nf Tiyamler.
" he
CI‘i.(’d, “you have
dancer! away your
nmxriagr.
"
'IIHiHL\"!UR1i-'5.
HY-:li()l)(>1’L'S.
Fll")‘H (T.'\"! may or.
LAW :54
288
LAW 34
Haile Selassie, ruler of Ethiopia for forty or so years beginning in 1930,
was once a young man named Lij Tafari. He came from a noble family, but
there was no real chance of him coming to power, for he was far down the
line of succession from the king then on the throne, Menelik II. Neverthe-
less, from an early age he exhibited a self~coufidence and a royal bearing
that surprised everyone around him.
At the age of fourteen, Tafari went to live at the court, where he imme—
diately impressed Menelik and became his favorite. Tafarfs grace under
fire, his patience, and his calm selflassurance fascinated the king. The other
young nobles, arrogant, blustery, and envious, would push this slight,
bookish teenager around. But he never got angry-—-that would have been a
sign of insecurity, to which he would not stoop. There were already people
around him who felt he would someday rise to the top, for he acted as ifhe
were already there.
Years later, in 1936, when the Italian Fascists had taken over Ethiopia
and Tafari, now called Haile Selassie, was in exile, he addressed the League
of Nations to plead his country’s case. The Italians in the audience heckled
him with vulgar abuse, but he maintained his dignified pose, as if com-
pletely unaffected. This elevated him while making his opponents look
even uglier. Dignity, in fact, is invariably the mask to assume under difficult
circumstances: It is as if nothing can affect you, and you have all the time
in the world to respond. This is an extremely powerful pose.
A royal demeanor has other uses. Con artists have long known the
value of an aristocratic front; it either disazms people and makes them less
suspicious, or else it intimidates them and puts them on the defensive———and
as Count Victor Lustig knew, once you put a sucker on the defensive he is
doomed. The con man Yellow Kid Well, too, would often assume the trap
pings of a man of wealth, along with the nonchalance that goes with them.
Alluding to some magical method of making money, he would stand aloof,
like a king, exuding confidence as if he really were fabulously rich. The
suckers would beg to be in on the con, to have a chance at the wealth that
he so clearly displayed.
Finally, to reinforce the inner psychological tricks involved in project-
ing a royal demeanor, there are outward strategies to help you create the
effect. First, the Columbus Strategy: Always make a bold demand. Set your
price high and do not waver. Second, in a dignified way, go after the high-
est person in the building. This immediately puts you on the same plane as
the chief executive you are attacking. It is the David and Goliath Strategy:
By choosing a great opponent, you create the appearance of greatness.
Third, give a gift of some sort to those above you. This is the strategy
of those who have a patron: By giving your patron a gift, you are essentially
saying that the two of you are equal. It is the old con game ofgiving so that
you can take. When the Renaissance writer Pietro Aretino wanted the
Duke of Mantua as his nerd patron, he knew that if he was slavish and
sycophantic, the duke would think him unworthy; so he approached the
duke with gifts, in this case paintings by the wn‘ter’s good friend Titian.
Accepting the gifts created a kind of equality between duke and writer: The
duke was put at ease by the feeling that he was dealing with a man of his
own aristocratic stamp. He funded Aretino generously. The gift strategy is
subtle and brilliant because you do not beg: You ask for help in a dignified
way that implies equality between two people, one of whom just happens
to have more money.
Remember: It is up to you to set your own price. As}: for less and that
isjust what you will get Ask for more, however, and you send a signal that
you are worth a king’s ransom. Even those who turn you down respect you
for your confidence, and that respect will eventually pay off in ways you
cannot imagine.
Image: The Crown. Place it upon your head
and you assume a different pose——tranqui1
yet radiating assurance. Never show
doubt, never lose your dignity beneath
the crown, or it will not fit. It will seem
to be destined for one more worthy. Do
not wait for a coronation; the great»
est emperors crown themselves.
Authority: Everyone should be royal after his own fashion. Let all your
actions, even though they
are not those of a king, be, in their own
sphere, worthy of one.
BC sublime in your deeds, lofty in your
thoughts; and in all your doings Show that you deserve to be a king
even though you are not one in reality. (Baltasar Gracizin, l60l~lC>58)
LAW 34
289
290
LAW 34
R EV E RSAL
The idea behind the assumption of regal confidence is to set yourself apart
from other people, but if you take this too far it will be your undoing.
Never make the mistake of thinking that you elevate yourself by humiliat-
ing people. Also, it is never a good idea to loom too high above the
crowcl—you make an easy target. And there are times when an aristocratic
pose is eminently dangerous.
Charles I, king of England during the 16405, faced a profound public
disenchantment with the institution of monarchy. Revolts erupted through»
out the country, led by Oliver Cromwell. Had Charles reacted to the times
with insight, supporting reforms and making a show of sacrificing some of
his power, history might have been different. Instead he reverted to an
even more regal pose, seeming outraged by the assault on his power and
on the divine institution of monarchy. His stiff kingliness offended people
and spurred on their revolts. And eventually Charles lost his head, literally
Understand: You are radiating confidence, not arrogance or disdain.
Finally, it is true that you can sometimes find some power through af-
fecting a kind of earthy vulgarity, which will prove amusing by its extreme-
ness. But to the extent that you win this game by going beyond the limits,
separating yourself from other people by appearing even more vulgar than
they are, the game is dangerous: There will always be people more vulgar
than you, and you will easily be replaced the following season by someone
younger and worse.
LAW
35
MASTER THE ART
OF TIMING
‘JUDGMENT
Never seem to be in a hurrjv——h'wr1ying betrays a lack of
control aver yourselfi and over time. Always seem fra-
tient,
as 2]" you know that everything will come to you
eventually. Become a detective of the right moment; snijj’
out the spirit cflhe limes, tke tmnak that will sang; you to
power. Leam to stand back when the time is not yet ripe,
and to smkefiercely when it has reachedfmition.
291
.-l}R'H>l{ll
l I-‘:~~;4>\
S(’IN)VIlL\' ‘K strmgtlt wax
now Itlpltlly tm~reast'rt,q,
for all the tribes
lretweeh. the Ebro imr)
the I’yrt*nec.\' (It/lint’ over
to his Sllle, and troops
<'urm:jlncltt'rtg rluily to
join him from every
quarter. /it the sunte
time’ he was troubled
by the luck ofdisciplttte
and the ()V(’VCl)I’Z/ldfllltft’
aftlimér newly arrived
lmrhttrium. who would
slxrmt at him tn atturk
the erterny and had no
paticnte with his tlolttyu
mg luL‘l'lC.\', and he
Ih(?t'(f_ltH‘(‘, tried to win
them (IVCY by tlrgtumvlt.
But wlwn he saw that
they were dixcrmterttcd
and pt’V.\‘i.\It’tl in pren-
im; their (Iernantls
regurtllen of the
(‘lrt’tlm.\‘l(,lt'll.’£’.,\’, he let
them have their way
and alltrvwtl them to
engage the L-rmny; he
hopml that they would
suffer 4! severe defeat
without htetng
ttotitpletcly crushvd,
and that this would
malcr tlzrm better
di.\'p0.\'ed to obey his
orttcrs in j't¢turz*,
The event turned Uut as
he exporter! and St-r‘tu—
rius ctzrrw to llllflt
Vcflflll’. provirlrccl a
rallying point for the
[llglllH‘.&‘, and led them
safely brick in his
('tmtp. Hi.\‘ rzextstcp was
to revive tltcir (le;'t*cIm'l
spirits, amt so at few
days later ho
summoned [I general
a.\‘,\’(',ml)l}‘. BC_l(Irtf it he
produced two ltrtrsex,
one o/"them old and
(‘Ilfl‘t’hl£’ll, the ntlwr
large and lusty tlrlll
292
LAW 3 5
OBSERVAN CE OF THE LAW
Starting out in life as a nondescript French seminary-school teacher, Joseph
Fouché wandered from town to town for most of the decade of the 17805,
teaching mathematics to young boys. Yet he never completely committed
himself to the church, never took his vows as a pn'est—he had bigger plans.
Patiently waiting for his chance, he kept his options open. And when the
French Revolution broke out, in 1789, Fouché waited no longer: He got rid
of his cassock, grew his hair long, and became a revolutionary. For this was
the spirit of the times. To miss the boat at this critical moment could have
spelt disaster. Fouché did not miss the boat: Befriending the revolutionary
leader Robespierre, he quickly rose in the rebel ranks. In 1792 the town of
Nantes elected Fouché to be its representative to the National Convention
(created that year to frame a new constitution for a French republic).
When Fouché arrived in Paris to take his seat at the convention, a vio-
lent rift had broken out between the moderates and the radical Jacobins.
Fouché sensed that in the long run neither side would emerge victorious.
Power rarely ends up in the hands of those who start a revolution, or even
of those who further it; power sticks to those who bring it to a conclusion.
That was the side Fouché wanted to be on.
His sense of timing was uncanny. He started as a moderate, for moderv
ates were in the majority. When the time came to decide on whether or not
to execute Louis XVI, however, he saw that the people were clamoring for
the king’s head, so he cast the deciding vote~—for the guillotine. Now he
had become a radical. Yet as tensions came to the boil in Paris, he foresaw
the danger of being too closely associated with any one faction, so he ac-
cepted a position in the provinces, where he could lie low for a while. A
few months later he was assigned to the post of proconsul in Lyons, where
he oversaw the execution of dozens of aristocrats. At a certain moment,
however, he called a halt to the killings, sensing that the mood of the coun-
ny was turning—and despite the blood already on his hands, the citizens of
Lyons hailed him as a savior from what had become known as the Terror.
So far Fouché had played his cards brilliantly, but in 1794 his old
friend Robespierre recalled him to Paris to account for his actions in Lyons.
Robespierre had been the driving force behind the Terror. He had sent
heads on both the right and the left rolling, and Fouché, whom he no
longer trusted, seemed destined to provide the next head. Over the next
few weeks,
a tense struggle ensued: While Robespierre railed openly
against Fouché, accusing of him dangerous ambitions and calling for his ar»
rest, the crafty Fouché worked more indirectly, quietly gaining support
among those who were beginning to tire of Robespierre’s dictatorial con-
trol. Fouché was playing for time. He knew that the longer he survived, the
more disaffected citizens he could rally against Robespierre. He had to
have broad support before he moved against the powerful leader. He ral-
lied support among both the moderates and the jacobins, playing on the
widespread fear of Robespierre-—everyone was afraid of being the next to
go to the guillotine. It all came to fruition on July 27: The convention
turned against Robespierre, shouting down his usual lengthy speech. He
was quickly arrested, and a few days later it was Robespierre’s head, not
Fouché’s, that fell ‘into the basket.
Wlhen Fouché returned to the convention after Robespien-e’s death, he
played his most unexpected move: Having led the conspiracy against
Robespierre, he was expected to sit with the moderates, but lo and behold,
he once again changed sides, joining the radical Jacobins. For perhaps the
first time in his life he aligned himself with the minority. Clearly he sensed
a reaction stirring: He knew that the moderate faction that had executed
Robespierre, and was now about to take power, would initiate a new round
of the Terror, this time against the radicals. In siding with the jacobins,
then, Fouché was sitting with the martyrs of the days to eome—the people
who would be considered blameless in the troubles that were on their way.
Taking sides with what was about to become the losing team was a risky
gambit, of course, but Fouché must have calculated he could keep his head
long enough to quietly stir up the populace against the moderates and
watch them fall from power. And indeed, although the moderates did call
for his arrest in December of 1795, and would have sent him to the guillo~
line, too much time had passed. The executions had become unpopular
with the people, and Fouché survived the swing of the pendulum one more
time.
A new government took over, the Directoire. It was not, however, a
jacobin government, but a moderate one-———more moderate than the gov‘
emment that had reimposed the Terror. Fouché, the radical, had kept his
head, but now he had to keep a low profile. He waited patiently on the
sidelines for several years, allowing time to soften any bitter feelings
against him, then he approached the Directoire and convinced them he
had a new passion: intelligencegathering. He became a paid spy for the
government, excelled at the job, and in 1799 was rewarded by being made
minister of police. Now he was not just empowered but required to extend
his spying to every corner of Fra.nce—-~a responsibility that would greatly
reinforce his natural ability to sniff out where the wind was blowing. One
of the first social trends he detected, in fact,
came in the person of
Napoleon, a brash young general whose destiny he right away saw was en-
twined with the future of France. When Napoleon unleashed a coup d’état,
on November 9, 1799, Fouché pretended to be asleep. Indeed he slept the
whole day. For this indirect assistance-«it might have been thought his job,
after all, to prevent a military coup-—Napoleou kept him on as minister of
police in the new regime.
Over the next few years, Napoleon came to rely on Fcmché more and
more. He even gave this former revolutionary a title, duke of Otranto, and
rewarded him with great wealth. By 1808, however, Fouché, always at-
tuned to the times, sensed that Napoleon was on the downswing. His futile
war with Spain, a country that posed no threat to France, was a sign that he
was losing a sense of proportion. Never one to be caught on a sinking ship,
Fouché conspired with Talleyrand to bring about Napoleon’s downfall. Al—
possesxing a flowing
mil, which was remark-
able for the thickness
and baauqv ofits flair.
By the sirlc ofthe weak
Item: slood a tall
jrrrmg man. and by the-
ride of the povmrful
horse a short man of
mmn plxyslqne. At 1:
xignal rim strong man
seized the mil afhii
horse and tried with all
his .$'lYE’fl[{[]l to pull it
inwards him, as if 10
tear it of}: while the
weak man began I!)
pull [he hairs one by
one from the tail of the
strong lim-sr.e.
The strong man, after
tugging with ull his
might to no purpose
and (‘during the specta-
Iwas‘ it great deal of
amusmzwnl in the
protresmfirlully gave up
tlw attempt, while the
weak man quirkly and
with very little trouble
.3‘!l‘l[Ip¢’¢l his hr_vrse’s tail
(romp/elely bare. There
.S'm‘t(>rizl.r rate to his
feet and said, “Now
you can 381’. nay‘ friemis’
and allies. (I111! perse-
verance is more effrc»
rive I/mu hrulc strength,
and that (here are many
difficulllex thul (armor
be overcome if you try
10 do mmrything at
once. but which will
yield lfyuu master
them little by little. The
truth is that a steady
continu0u.\' effort is
irresistible, for this is
the way in. which Time
captures and sarbdrms
the grremesz powers on
eanh. Now Time, you
yhaultl remmwer, is a
good friend and ally I0
tli().s'z,' who use their
liztelliglance In C/10().$'(€
the right moment. but a
marl dangerous enemy
LAW 35
293
to thosze wlm rush int!)
action at the wrong
(me.
"
LIFE or SERTORIUS.
PLLTARCH.
c
A1). 46-120
Mr. S/iih had two sons:
om: loved lreumi1zg.‘tIiv
othrr war. Thefirst
cxpourided his mom!
teachings at the
rttlnziring court of Ch ’i
and was made a tutor.
while the second talked
strategy at the helli('o.\*e
court of Ch ":4 and was
made it gerwriii. '1'/te
impecuniour Mr. Mcng,
lwrtring nftharié
successes, sent his own
two .S‘!)lL\‘ out to follow
thc example of tin’
Shih bays. Thejirst
expmmdcd his mom]
tmching.s' at the mm‘!
afCh’a'rz, but the King
of C/fin will.’ “At
present flu: states are
quarrr,-ling violently
and everyv prince is
busy arming his troops
to the teeth. If I
followed this prigir
pratings WK’ .\‘lH)Lil(l
soon be annihilated."
So he had the fellow
castrated. Meanwhile.
the .im'0nrl bmtlurr
tiispliiyezl his military
genius at the court of
Wci. But thn King of
Wei said: “llrlirze is :1
weak riatra. l/‘I ftfliell
on farce imzeati of
dzplormtcy, we rlzould
soon be wiped out. If,"
on ilw mlicr hand, I let
this fire-eater go, hr
will offer his .\'ervice:; to
another start: and than
294
LAW 35
though the conspiracy failed—Talleyrand was fired; Fouché stayed, but
was kept on a tight leash—it publicized a growing discontent with the em-
peror, who seemed to be losing control. By 1814 Napoleon’s power had
crumbled and allied forces finally conquered him.
The next government was a restoration of the monarchy, in the form
of King Louis XVIII, brother of Louis XVI. Fouché, his nose always sniff-
ing the air for the next social shift, knew Louis would not last long—he had
none of Napoleon's flair. Fouché once again played his waiting game, lying
low, staying away from the spotlight. Sure enough, in February of 1815,
Napoleon escaped from the island of Elba, where he had been imprisoned.
Louis XVIII panicked: His policies had alienated the citizenry, who were
clamoring for Nap0leon’s return. So Louis turned to the one man who
could maybe have saved his hide, Fouché, the former radical who had sent
his brother, Louis XVI, to the guillotine, but was now one of the most pop-
ular and widely admired politicians in France. Fouché, however, would not
side with a loser: He refused Louis’s request for help by pretending that his
help was unnecessaiy—by swearing that Napoleon would never return
to power (although he knew otherwise). A short time later, of course,
Napoleon and his new citizen army were closing in on Paris.
Seeing his reign about to collapse, feeling that Fouché had betrayed
him, and certain that he did not want this powerful and able man on
Napoleon’s team, King Louis ordered the Ini.n.ister’s arrest and execution.
On March 16, 1815, policemen surrounded Fouché’s coach on a Paris
boulevard. Was this finally his end? Perhaps, but not immediately: Fouché
told the police that an exvmember of government could not be arrested on
the street. They fell for the story and allowed him to retum home. Later
that day, though, they came to his house and once again declared him
under arrest. Fouché nodded—but would the officers be so kind as allow a
gentleman to wash and to change his clothes before leaving his house for
the last time? They gave their permission, Fouché left the room, and the
minutes went by. Fouché did not return. Finally the policemen went into
the next room—where they saw a ladder against an open window, leading
down to the garden below.
That day and the next the police combed Paris for Fouché, but by then
Napoleon’s cannons were audible in the distance and the king and all the
king’s men had to flee the city. As soon as Napoleon entered Paris, Fouché
came out of hiding. He had cheated the executioner once again. Napoleon
greeted his former minister of police and gladly restored him to his old
post. During the 100 days that Napoleon remained in power, until Water-
loo, it was essentially Fouché who governed France. Alter Napoleon fell,
Louis XVIII returned to the throne, and like a cat with nine lives, Fouché
stayed on to serve in yet another goVemment—by then his power and in-
fluence had grown so great that not even the king dared challenge him.
Interpretation
In a period of unprecedented turmoil, Joseph Fouché thrived through his
mastery of the art of timing. He teaches us a number of key lessons.
First, it is critical to recognize the spirit of the times. Fouché always
looked two steps ahead, found the wave that would carry him to power,
and rode it. You must always work with the times, anticipate twists and
turns, and never miss the boat. Sometimes the spirit of the times is obscure:
Recognize it not by what is loudest and most obvious in it, but by what lies
hidden and dormant. Look forward to die Napoleons of the future rather
than holding on to the ruins of the past.
Second, recognizing the prevailing winds does not necessarily mean
running with them. Any potent social movement creates a powerful reac-
tion, and it is wise to anticipate what that reaction will be, as Fouché did
after the execution of Robespierre. Rather than ride the cresting wave of
the moment, wait for the tide’s ebb to carry you back to power. Upon occa~
sion bet on the reaction that is brewing, and place yourself in the vanguard
of it.
Finally, Fouché had remarkable patience. Without patience
as your
sword and shield, your timing will fail and you will inevitably find yourself
aloser. When the times were against Fouché, he did not struggle, get emo-
tional, or strike out rashly. He kept his cool and maintained a low profile,
patiently building support among the citizenry, the bulwark in his next rise
to power. Whenever he found himself in the weaker position, he played for
time, which he knew would always be his ally if he was patient. Recognize
the moment, then, to hide in the grass or slither under a rock, as well as the
moment to bare your fangs and attack.
Space we can recover, time never.
N:1;tmle07: Bomzpanle, 1 769-1821
KEYS TO POWER
Time is an artificial concept that we ourselves have created to make the
limitlessness of eternity and the universe more bearable,
more human.
Since we have constructed the concept of time, we are also able to mold it
to some degree, to play tricks with it. The time of a child is long and slow,
with vast expanses; the time of an adult whizzes by frighteningly fast.
Time, then, depends on perception, which, we know, can be willfully al-
tered. This is the first thing to understand in mastering the art of timing. If
the inner turmoil caused by our emotions tends to make time move faster,
it follows that once we control our emotional responses to events, time will
move much more slowly. This altered way of dealing with things tends to
lengthen our perception of future time, opens up possibilities that fear and
anger close off, and allows us the patience that is the principal requirement
in the art of timing.
There are three kinds of time for us to deal with; each presents prob-
lems that can be solved with skill and practice. First there is long time: the
drawn»out, years—long kind of time that must be managed with patience
and gentle guidance. Our handling of long time should be mostly defen-
sive—this is the art of not reacting impulsively, of waiting for opportunity.
we shall be in trouble.
”
So he’ had the fellows
feet on! off B0111 farm‘-
lies did exa(‘tl_y lhc
same thing, but one
timer! it right, the other
wrong. Thus ,\'uC(:(2.r.s'
depends on
.
.
. rhythm.
Lit}-1 T71
rm; cu
.
GLASS.
DENNIS Bi.o0owoR'rH,
1967
ll.0'l‘l—'.l) lN
. L LOOKING
The sullan /of Persia]
had sentenced two men
to death. One of /hem,
knowing how much the
Sltltflll loved his rm]-
lizm, offered to teach
the home to fly within a
year in return for his
life. The sulmn,fancy—
mg /zirn.s*el/‘as the ridcr
of the 0f1lyfl_YlI1g horse
in Ihe world, agreed,
The other prisoner
looked at his friend in
disbelief “You know
horses don ‘rfly. What
made you come up
with 4: crazy idea likc
that? You‘re only post—
porting Ihc inevitable."
“Not So," Xllill the /first
prisoner]. "I have acm-
ally given myselffaur
chances forfreedom.
First, the sultan might
die rlurmg the year.
Second, I might die.
Third, the horse might
rlie.AnrlfourIh
.
,
. I
might teach the horse
Io,/ly!"
[HE CRAFI‘ or-‘ POWER.
R. G. H. Sim,
1979
LAW 35
295
Till‘, l'Ri?l"l' KM)
HIE (Ll §§€.'l~i(),\
A ftlvlwrmmz in the
month of May .r(tmcl
angltng on the bank of
(Int Tltames with rm
arr!/lcitzlfly. He threw
his bail with so Inuch
an, that 4: young rmm
wax rurftmg ruwrzm’ it,
when she was
prevetztzrl by hm‘
tmvrhrr. “Navcr. "mid
rile, “my chtld, be too
precipitate, when: there
ix ll po.r.\'t'bili(_v of
danger. Take due Itme
to consider, ltefore you
risk an action aim: ntny
tie/"am! How know
you whether yon
tlppmtlailcz’ hr imlr.-ed a
fly. or Ihte snare ofan
unetny? Let someone
else make the expert?
mm: before you. Ifit
be u/i’)=, he will very
p!‘()b(£[71}' elude the fin:
tzlmck: and the Secottd
may be made, iftmt
with sitccesx. at least
with .st1fe1y."
Shit had no stmmtr spo-
lmn,1hmz a gttdgeon
suizecl the pretended
fly. and becmne mt
exanxplc to the giddy
tlaughrer oflhe impor-
tance of her mother":
counsel.
r/xnuas.
ROBERT Donsmv.
1'/tl3—l 764
Next there is fimed time: the short—term time that we can manipulate as an
offensive weapon, upsetting the timing of our opponents. Finally there is
end lime, when a plan must be executed with speed and force. We have
waited, found the moment, and must not hesitate.
Long Time. The famous seventeenth-century Ming painter Chou Yung
relates a story that altered his behavior forever. Late one winter afternoon
he set out to visit a town that lay across the river from his own town. He
was bringing some important books and papers with him and had commis-
sioned a young boy to help him carry them. As the ferry neared the other
side of the river, Chou Yung asked the boatman ifthey would have time to
get to the town before its gates closed, since it was a mile away and night
was approaching. The boatman glanced at the boy, and at the bundle of
loosely tied papers and books-“Yes,” he replied, “if you do not walk too
fast.”
As they started out, however, the sun was setting. Afraid of being
locked out of the town at night, prey to local bandits, Chou and the boy
walked faster and faster, finally breaking into a run. Suddenly the string
around the papers broke and the documents scattered on the ground. It
took them many minutes to put the packet together again, and by the time
they had reached the city gates, it was too late.
When you force the pace out of fear and impatience, you create a nest
of problems that require fixing, and you end up taking much longer than if
you had taken your time. Hurriers may occasionally get there quicker, but
papers fly everywhere, new dangers arise, and they find themselves in con-
stant crisis mode, fixing the problems that they themselves have created.
Sometimes not acting in the face of danger is your best move»-you wait,
you deliberately slow down. As time passes it will eventually present op
portunities you had not imagined.
Waiting involves controlling not only your own emotions but those of
your colleagues, who, mistaking acfion for power, may try to push you into
making rash moves. In your rivals, on the other hand, you can encourage
this same mistake: If you let them rush headlong into trouble while you
stand back and wait, you will soon find ripe moments to intervene and pick
up the pieces. This wise policy was the principal strategy of the great early-
seventeenthcentury emperor Tokugawa Ieyasu ofjapan. When his prede~
cessor, the headstrong Hideyoshi, whom he served as 3. general, staged a
rash invasion of Korea, leyasu did not involve himself. He knew the inva-
sion would be a disaster and would lead to Hideyoshfs downfall, Better to
stand patiently on the sidelines, evenfin many years, and then be in position
to seize power when the time is rightmexactly what Ieyasu did, with great
anistry.
You do not deliberately slow time down to live longer, or to take more
pleasure in the moment, but the better to play the game of power. First,
when your mind is uncluttered by constant emergencies you will see fur»
ther into the future. Second, you will be able to resist the baits that people
dangle in front of you, and will keep yourself from becoming another im~
patient sucker. Third, you will have more room to be flexible. Opportuni-
ties will inevitably arise that you had not expected and would have missed
had you forced the pace. Fourth, you will not move from one deal to the
next without completing the first one. To build your power’s foundation
can take years; make sure that foundation is secure. Do not be a flash in the
pan—-«success that is built up slowly and surely is the only kind that lasts.
Finally, slowing time down will give you a perspective on the times
you live in, letting you take a certain distance and putting you in a less
emotionally charged position to see the shapes of things to come. Hurriers
will often mistake surface phenomena for a real trend, seeing only what
they want to see. How much better to see what is really happening, even if
it is unpleasant or makes your task harder.
Forced Time. The trick in forcing time is to upset the timing of others-——t0
make them hurry, to make them wait, to make them abandon their own
pace, to distort their perception of time. By upsetting the timing of your op~
ponent while you stay patient, you open up time for yourself, which is half
the game.
In 1473 the great Turkish sultan Mehmed the Conqueror invited nego-
tiations with Hungary to end the elf-andam war the two countries had
waged for years. When the Hungarian emissary arrived in Turkey to start
the talks, Turkish officials humbly apologized——Mehmed hadjust left Istan-
bul, the capital, to battle his longtime foe, Uzun Hasan. But he urgently
wanted peace with Hungary, and had asked that the emissary join him at
the front.
When the emissary anived at the site of the fighting, Mehmed had al-
ready left it, moving eastward in pursuit of his swift foe. This happened
several times. Wherever the emissary stopped, the Thrks lavished gifts and
banquets on him, in pleasurable but timeconsuming ceremonies. Finally
Mehrned defeated Uzun and met with the emissary. Yet his terms for peace
with Hungary were excessively harsh. After a few days, the negotiations
ended, and the usual stalemate remained in place. But this was fine with
Mehmecl. In fact he had planned it that way all along: Plotting his cam-
paign against Uzun, he had seen that diverting his armies to the east would
leave his western flank vulnerable. To prevent Hungary from taking advan»
tage of his weakness and his preoccupation elsewhere, he flrst dangled the
lure of peace before his enemy, then made them wait»-all on his own
terms.
Making people wait is a powerful way of forcing time, as long as they
do not figure out what you are up to. You control the clock, they linger in
limbowand rapidly come unglued, opening up opportunities for you to
strike. The opposite effect is equally powerful: You make your opponents
hurry. Start off your dealings with them slowly, then suddenly apply pres-
sure, making them feel that everything is happening at once. People who
lack the time to think will make mistakes-—so set their deadlines for them.
298
LAW 3.1
This was the technique Machiavelli admired in Cesare Borgia, who, during
negotiations, would suddenly press vehemently for a decision, upsetting
his opponent’s timing and patience. For who would dare make Cesare
wait?
Joseph Duveen, the famous art dealer, knew that if he gave an indeci-
sive buyer like John D. Rockefeller a deadline»-the painting had to leave
the country, another tycoon was interested in it—the client would buy just
in time. Freud noticed that patients who had spent years in psychoanalysis
without improvement would miraculously recoverjust in time if he fixed a
definite date for the end of the therapy. Jacques Lacan, the famous French
psychoanalyst, used a variation on this tactic—he would sometimes end
the customary hour session of therapy after only ten minutes, without
warning. After this happened several times, the patient would realize that
he had better make maximum use of the time, rather than wasting much of
the hour with a lot of talk that meant nothing. The deadline, then, is a pow-
erful tool. Close off the vistas of indecision and force people to make up
their damn minds or get to the point—never let them make you play on
their excruciating terms. Never give them time.
Magicians and showmen are experts in forcing time. Houdini could
often wriggle free of handcuffs in minutes, but he would draw the escape
out to an hour, making the audience sweat, as time came to an apparent
standstill. Magicians have always known that the best way to alter our pet-
ception of time is often to slow down the pace. Creating suspense brings
time to a terrifying pause: The slower the magician’s hands move, the eas-
ier it is to create the illusion of speed, making people think the rabbit has
appeared instantaneously. The great nineteenthcentury magician _]ean—Eu—
gene Robert~Houdin took explicit notice of this effect: “The more slowly a
story is told,” he said, “the shorter it seems.”
Going slower also makes wha). you are doing more interesting»-the
audience yields to your pace, becomes entranced. It is a state in which time
whizzes delightfully by. You must practice such illusions, which share in the
hypnotisfs power to alter perceptions of time.
End Time. You can play the game with the utmost artistry—--waiting pa-
tiently for the right moment to act, putting your competitors off their form
by messing with their timing~—-but it won’t mean a thing unless you know
how to finish. Do not be one of those people who look like paragons of pa«
tieuce but are actually just afraid to bring things to a close: Patience is
worthless unless combined with a willingness to fall ruthlessly on your op-
ponent at the right moment. You can wait as long as necessary for the con
clusion to come, but when it comes it must come quickly. Use speed to
paralyze your opponent, cover up any mistakes you might make, and im-
press people with your aura of authority and finality.
With the patience of a snake charmer, you draw the snake out with
calm and steady rhythms. Once the snake is out, though, would you dangle
your foot above its deadly head? There is never a good reason to allow the
slightest hitch in your endgame. Your mastery of timing can really only be
judged by how you work with end time——-how you quickly change the pace
and bring things to a swift and definitive conclusion.
Image: The Hawk. Patiently and silently it circles the sky, high
above, allxseeing with its powerful eyes. Those below have
no awareness that they are being tracked. Suddenly,
when the moment arrives, the hawk swoops
down with
a speed that cannot be de
fancied against; before its prey
knows what has happened,
the bird‘s viselike talons
have carried it
up into the
sky.
Authority: There is a tide in the affairs of men, / Which, taken at the flood,
leads on to fortune; I’ Omitted, all the voyage of their life / Is bound in
shallows and in miseries. (julius Caesar, William Shakespeare, 1564-1616)
REVERSAL
There is no power to be gained in letting go of the reins and adapting to
whatever time brings. To some degree you must guide time or you will be
its merciless Victim. There is accordingly no reversal to this law.
LAW’
51 5
.900
300
36
DISDAIN THINGS
YOU CANNOT HAVE:
IGNORING THEM IS
THE BEST REVENGE
_]UDGMEN'I‘
By acknowledging a petty problem you give it existence
and credibility. The meme altentirm you pay an enemy,
the stronger you make him; and a small mistake is often
made worse and more visible when you try tofiic it. It is
sometimes best to leave things alone. If there is something
you want but cannot have, show mntemptfai it. The less
interest you reveal, the more supenbryou seem.
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
The Mexican rebel leader Pancho Villa started out as the chief of a gang of
bandits, but after revolution broke out in Mexico in 1910, he became
a.
kind of folk hero—robbing trains and giving the money to the poor, lead
ing daring raids, and charming the ladies with romantic escapades. His ex-
ploits fascinated Americans—he seemed a man from another era, part
Robin Hood, part Don Juan. After a few years of bitter fighting, however,
General Carranza emerged as the victor in the Revolution; the defeated
Villa and his troops went back home, to the northern state of Chihuahua.
His army dwindled and he turned to banditry again, damaging his popu-
larity. Finally, perhaps out of desperation, he began to rail against the
United States, the gringos, whom he blamed for his troubles.
In March of 1916, Pancho Villa raided Columbus, New Mexico. Ram»
paging through the town, he and his gang killed seventeen American sol-
diers and civilians. President Woodrow Wilson, like many Americans, had
admired Villa; now, however, the bandit needed to be punished. Wilson’s
advisers urged him to send troops into Mexico to capture Villa. For a
power as large as the United States, they argued, not to strike back at an
army that had invaded its territory would send the worst kind of signal.
Furthermore, they continued, many Americans saw Wilson as a pacifist, a
principle the public doubted as a response to violence; he needed to prove
his mettle and manliness by ordering the use of force.
The pressure on Wflson was strong, and before the month was out,
with the approval of the Carranza government, he sent an army of ten
thousand soldiers to capture Pancho Villa. The venture was called the
Punitive Expedition, and its leader was the dashing General john
Persh-
ing, who had defeated guerrillas in the Philippines and Native Americans
in the American Southwest. Certainly Pershing could find and overpower
Pancho Villa.
The Punitive Expedition became a sensational story, and carloads of
US. reporters followed Pershing into action. The campaign, they wrote,
would be
a test of American power. The soldiers carried the latest in
weaponry, communicated by radio, and were supported by reconnais-
sance from the air.
In the first few months, the troops split up into small units to comb the
wilds of northern Mexico. The Americans offered a $50,000 rewmd for in-
fonnation leading to Villa’s capture. But the Mexican people, who had
been disillusioned with Villa when he had returned to banditry, now idol-
ized him for facing this mighty American army. They began to give Persh-
ing false leads: Villa had been seen in this village, or in that mountain
hideaway, airplanes would be dispatched, troops would scurry after them,
and no one would ever see him. The wily bandit seemed to be always one
step ahead of the American military.
By the summer of that year, the expedition had swelled to 123,000
men. They suffered through the stultifying heat, the mosquitoes, the wild
terrain. Trudging over a countryside in which they were already resented,
HI; I‘().‘\ :\.\I)
‘lllli tIR.r\l’l'..‘s'
/l starving fox
.
.
.
saw :1 cluster
Of lurriour-looking
grapes ofpurplish.
luster
Dangling ubuve him an
a lrelliscvfrume.
He would have dearly
liked lhem for hir
lunch,
But when he tried and
failed to reach the
bunch:
“Ah well, it’s more than
likely the_v’re not
Sweet-
(load only for grew:
fools 1:) eat.’
"
Warn’! he wise to my
they were unripe
Rather than whine
and gripe?
FAELES.
JEAN
DE LA F<)N'IAlNI€.
16214695
Once when G. K.
Fliesterronlr ecrmorrzic
views were abu.\'t'd in
prim by George
Bernard Shaw, his
friends waited in vain
for him to reply.
Htrtoriurz Hiluire
Belloc re-pmached him.
"My dear Bellov,
"
Chesterton said, “I
have answerer! him.
To a man uf'§'huw's
wit, silence is [he one
unbearable reparlee.
"
ri-re LlT'l‘I.E, l$R()W.\'
BUOK
()1? AN!-,(‘I)()1
Cl.ll‘”l‘0N FAIHMAN, E17,,
1985
LAW 35
30]
'|H|.
\~«i \.\|)
IHI: (.\|il)l.\«‘I.li
/In um‘ lldll ()II1‘(' by
some accident lost his
tail, which was (1 griev-
ous ajflielion to him;
and he was every where
seeking :1/terit, being
fool enough /0 think he
could get it set on
again. He passed
through a meadow, and
afterwards go! into a
garden. The gardener
.Y€(’lllg him, and not
able to endure the
misehiefhe was doing
in trampling down his
plums, fell into a
violent rage, ran to the
u.i'.s‘, imd never sumding
on the (‘en*m0riy of a
pillory. out off both his
ears, and heal him out
ofthe ground. Thus the
ass. who henmanxid the
loss of his tail. was in
far greater ujflierion
when he raw himself
without ears.
FABLENZ
PILPAY.
INu1A,
FOURTH (‘ENTURY
llll‘. l'R<>l)|(.\r' U\'
Once, when the Toku-
daijr HllIll.Y1(’l' of the
right was chief of the
iI7t[M.’rl{1l])()li(,‘é', he was
holding a meeting of
his staff at the middle
gale when an ax
belonging to an official
nameilAkikane got
loose and wandered
into the ministry build-
ing. [I climbed up on
-302
LAW 36
they infuriated both the local people and the Mexican government. At one
point Pancho Villa hid in a mountain
cave to recover from
a. gunshot
wound he received in a skirmish with the Mexican army; looking down
from his aerie, he could watch Pershing lead the exhausted American
troops back and forth across the mountains, never getting any closer to
their goal.
All the way into winter, Villa played his cat-and—mouse game. Ameri-
cans came to see the affair as a kind of slapstick fa,rce—in fact they began to
admire Villa again, respecting his resourcefulness in eluding a superior
force. In January of 1917, Wilson finally ordered Pershing’s withdrawal. As
the troops made their way back to American territory, rebel forces pursued
them, forcing the U.S. Army to use airplanes to protect its rear flanks. The
Punitive Expedition was being punished itself—it had turned into a retreat
of the most humiliating sort.
Interpretation
Woodrow Wilson organized the Punitive Expedition as a show of force: He
would teach Pancho Villa a lesson and in the process Show the world that
no one, large or small, could attack the mighty United States and get away
with it. The expedition would be over in a few weeks, and Villa would be
forgotten,
That was not how it played out. The longer the expedition took, the
more it focused attention on the Americans’ incompetence and on Villa’s
cleverness. Soon what was forgotten was not Villa but the raid that had
started it all. As a minor annoyance became an international embarrass-
ment, and the enraged Americans dispatched more troops, the imbalance
between the size of the pursuer and the size of the pursued—who still man-
aged to stay free—ma.de the affair a joke. And in the end this white ele-
phant of an army had to lumber out of Mexico, humiliated. The Punitive
Expedition did the opposite of what it set out to do: It left Villa not only
free but more popular than ever.
What could Wilson have done differently? He could have pressured
the Carranza government to catch Villa for him. Alternatively, since many
Mexicans had tired of Villa before the Punitive Expedition began, he could
have worked quietly with them and won their support for a much smaller
raid to capture the bandit. He could have organized a trap on the Ameri-
can side of die border, anticipating the next raid. Or he could have ignored
the matter altogether for the time being, waiting for the Mexicans them-
selves to do away with Villa of their own accord.
Remember: You choose to let things bother you. You can just as easily
choose not to notice the irritating offender, to consider the matter trivial
and unworthy of your interest That is the powerful move. What you do
not react to cannot drag you down in a futile engagement. Your pride is not
involved. The best lesson you can teach an irritating gnat is to consign it to
oblivion by ignoring it. If it is impossible to ignore (Pancho Villa had in fact
killed American citizens), then conspire in secret to do away with it, but
never inadvertently draw attention to the bothersome insect that will go
away or die on its own. If you waste time and energy in such entangle
ments, it is your own fault. Learn to play the card of disdain and turn your
back on what cannot harm you in the long run.
jusi thinkwit cast your government $130 million to try to get me. I took them
over rough, hilly country. Szrmetmwrforfifty miles at a stretch they had no water:
They had nothing but the sun and mosquitoes.
.
. And nothing was gainerl.
Ikmcfw Villa, 1878-1923
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
In the year 1527, King Henry VIII of England decided he had to find a
way to get rid of his wife, Catherine of Aragon. Catherine had failed to pro-
duce a son, a male heir who would ensure the continuance of his dynasty,
and Henry thought he knew why: He had read in the Bible the passage,
“And if a man shall take his brother’s wife, it is an unclean thing: he hath
uncovered his brother‘s nakedness; they shall be childless.” Before marry
ing Henry, Catherine had married his older brother Arthur, but Arthur
had died five months later. Henry had waited an appropriate time, then
had married his brother’s widow.
Catherine was the daughter of King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella of
Spain, and by marrying her Henry had kept alive a valuable alliance. Now,
however, Catherine had to assure him that her brief marriage with Arthur
had never been consummated. Otherwise Henry would view their rela-
tionship as incestuous and their marriage as null and void. Catherine in-
sisted that she had remained a virgin through her marriage to Arthur, and
Pope Clement VII supported her by giving his blessing to the union, which
he could not have done had he considered it incestuous. Yet after years of
marriage to Henry, Catherine had failed to produce a son, and in the early
1520s she had entered menopause. To the king this could only mean one
thing: She had lied about her virginity, their union was incesmous, and
God had punished them.
There was another reason why Henry wanted to get rid of Catherine:
He had fallen in love with a younger woman, Anne Boleyn. Not only was
he in love with her, but if he married her he could still hope to sire a legiti-
mate son. The marriage to Catherine had to be annulled. For this, how-
ever, Henry had to apply to the Vatican. But Pope Clement would never
annul the marriage,
By the summer of 1527, rumors spread throughout Europe that Henry
was about to attempt the impossible-—to annul his marriage against
Clement’s wishes. Catherine would never abdicate, let alone voluntarily
enter a nunnery, as Henry had urged her. But Henry had his own strategy:
He stopped sleeping in the same bed with Catherine, since he considered
her his sister~in-law, not his lawful wife. He insisted on calling her Princess
the dais wlzexre the C/tie]
was Seated and hay
tltere, chewing its cud.
Ewrrylzne Wm‘ sure that
this was some grave
portem, and urged that
the ox be sent to a yin-
yrmg (liviner. Ilowe yer,
the prime minister. the
father ofrlxe minister of
the right, said, “An ox
has no dr‘_scrimr'uariorz.
It hm leg.r—-(here is
nowhere it won '1 go. it
does not make senor In
deprive rm unrlsrpuirl
a ma! afthe wretched
(1.: he needs in order I!)
attend court.
" He
returned the we to its
owner and changed the
matting on which it had
Iain. N0 untoward
event of any kind
occurrarl afterward.
'1‘hey.my that ifyou see
a prodigy and do not
near it as such, its char-
acter as a prodigy is
iiertroyed.
ESSAYS IN nn.i~m«:ssx
Kenko.
JAPAN,
mum:-zrwm camunv
LAW 36
303
Am] in this View it is
advimhle to let everyone
ofyaur (lL‘(.,'ulItIl1(1IlL‘t‘4
whether man or
wornan—frrel now and
than that you could
very well (lisprznse Wlill
zlmir company. This
will consolidate
friena'ship. Nuy. with
most people there will
be no harm in occa-
sionally mixing at grain
ofdisdaln with your
rmatmem of tliomg that
will make them value
your friendship all the
mom. Chi non stima
vieu stimato, as a
subtle Italian proverb
has it— 10 (lismgard is
/0 win regard. But if we
really xhmk very highly
ofa person, we should
contract I! from him
like A: Crime. This is not
a very gratifying thing
to do, but it is right.
Why. u (lug Will not
bear being treated (00
kindly, [(51 alrmre ll nmn!
ARTHUR
S(‘HL)|’l€‘~lllAlVI4R.
17884860
'l||l‘ \1(l’\K|l\’ .v\?\l)
‘rm-3 vr.\.<
A monkey was ctm‘_V-
ing two handfuls ul
peas. Our’ little pea
dropped out. He tried
to pick it up, and spill
twenty. He tried to pick
up the twmty. and spilt
them ull. Then he Iurt
his !<’Nl]7£'t‘, smtmred rim
peas in all directions.
and ran Away.
mores.
Ll.-‘U To1,s'roY.
l8Z8—l9l0
304
LAW 36
Dowager of Wales, her title as A.rthur’s widow. Finally, in 1531, he ban-
ished her from court and shipped her off to a distant castle. The pope or»
dared him to return her to court, on pain of excommunication, the most
severe penalty a Catholic could suffer. Henry not only ignored this threat,
he insisted that his marriage to Catherine had been dissolved, and in 1533
he married Anne Boleyn.
Clement refused to recognize the marriage, but Henry did not care.
He no longer recognized the pope‘s authority, and proceeded to break
with the Roman Catholic Church, establishing the Church of England in
its stead, with the king as the head of the new church. And so, not surpris-
ingly, the newly formed Church of England proclaimed Anne Boleyn Eng-
land’s rightful queen.
The pope tried every threat in the book, but nothing worked. Henry
simply ignored him. Clement fumed—no one had ever treated him so con-
temptuously. Henry had humiliated him and he had no power of recourse.
Even excommunication (which he constantly threatened but never camed
out) would no longer matter.
Catherine too felt the devastating sting of Henry’s disdain. She tried to
fight back, but in appealing to Henry her words fell on deaf ears, and soon
they fell on no one’s. Isolated from the court, ignored by the king, mad
with anger and frustration, Catherine slowly deteriorated, and finally died
in January of 1536, from a cancerous tumor of the heart.
Interpretation
Vllhen you pay attention to a person, the two of you become partners of
sorts, each moving in step to the actions and reactions of the other. In the
process you lose your initiative. It is a dynamic of all interactions: By ac-
knowledging other people, even if only to fight with them, you open your-
self to their influence. Had Henry locked horns with Catherine, he would
have found himself mired in endless arguments that would have weakened
his resolve and eventually worn him down. (Catherine was a strong, stub-
bom woman.) Had he set out to convince Clement to change his verdict on
the marriages validity, or tried to compromise and negotiate with him, he
would have gotten bogged down in Clement’s favorite tactic: playing for
time, promising flexibility, but actually getting what popes always got-
their way.
Henry would have
none of this. He played
a devastating power
game——tota.l disdain. By ignoring people you cancel them out. This unset
tles and infuriates them—but since they have no dealings with you, there is
nothing they can do.
This is the offensive aspect of the law. Playing the card of contempt is
immensely powerful, for it lets you determine the conditions of the conflict.
The war is waged on your terms. This is the ultimate power pose: You are
the king, and you ignore what offends you. Watch how this tactic infuriates
people-—half of what they do is to get your attention, and when you with-
hold it from them, they flounder in fmstralzion.
MAN: Kick him.—Iae’l€forrg£ve you. Flatter him-~51: may or may not
see through you. But igrzore him and he 'll hate you.
Idries Shah, Caravan ol"Dreams. I968
KEYS TO POWER
Desire often creates paradoxical effects: The more you want something,
the more you chase after it, the more it eludes you. The more interest you
show, the more you repel the object of your desire. This is because your in«
terest is too su~ong—--it makes people awkward, even fearful. Uncontrol-
lable desire makes you seem weak, unworthy, pathetic.
You need to turn your back on what you want. show your contempt
and disdain. This is the kind of powerful response that will drive your tar-
gets crazy. They will respond with a desire oftheir own, which is simply to
have an effect on you—perhaps to possess you, perhaps to hurt you. If they
want to possess you, you have successfully completed the first step of se-
duction. If they want to hurt you, you have unsettled them and made them
play by your rules (see Laws 8 and 39 on baiting people into action).
Contempt is the prerogative of the king. Where his eyes turn, what he
decides to see, is what has reality; what he ignores and turns his back on is
as good as dead. That was the weapon of King Louis XlV—-if he did not
like you, he acted as if you were not there, maintaining his superiority by
cutting off the dynamic of interaction. This is the power you have when
you play the card of contempt, periodically showing people that you can
do without them.
If choosing to ignore enhances your power, it follows that the opposite
approach-—commitment and engagement--ofien weakens you. By paying
undue attention to a puny enemy, you look puny, and the longer it takes
you to crush such an enemy, the larger the enemy seems. When Athens set
out to conquer the island ofSicily, in 415 B.C., 3, giant power was attacking a
tiny one. Yet by entangling Athens in a long—drawn—out conflict, Syracuse,
Sicily’s most important city-state, was able to grow in stature and confi»
dence. Finally defeating Athens, it made itself famous for centuries to
come. In recent times, President john F. Kennedy made a similar mistake
in his attitude to Fidel Castro of Cuba: His failed invasion at the Bay of
Pigs, in 1961, made Castro an international hero.
A second danger: If you succeed in crushing the irritant, or even ifyou
merely wound it, you create sympathy for the weaker side. Critics of
Franklin D. Roosevelt complained bitterly about the money his adminis-
tration spent on government projects, but their attacks had no resonance
with the public, who saw the president as working to end the Great De~
pression. His opponents thought they had an example that would showjust
how wasteful he had become: his dog, Fala, which he lavished with favors
and attention.
Critics railed
at his insensifivitywspendmg taxpayers‘
money on a dog while so many Americans were still in poverty. But Roo-
sevelt had a response: How dare his critics attack a defenseless little dog?
As‘ some rrzake g()S.\‘.'{I
out of ever_va‘hing, so
others make much ado
about everything. They
am‘ always mlking big,
[and] lake tcvcryrhing
.verir)u.x'i'y, making (1
quarrel and a mystery
ofil. You should mke
wry few grievances tn
/mart‘ for to do so is to
gr‘ W yourselfgmzmat
less worry. I! is a mp5):-
Iurvy way ufbelzaving
to rake to hear! care-;
which you ought £0
throw over your shoal’
der. Man V 1}:ings which
scented imporiam [at
the rimrtj turn out in he
ofno rwrvuur what:
they are lg/lured; and
01/1!-r.\', whirh seem
trifling, appear formi-
dable when you /my
rmenIx'r.m to tliem,
‘I'll/rig»: can wlxily be
settled at flu.’ olcfset, hm
not A!) later on. In
many miss, the rctnect‘_r
itself is Ihe cause of she
disease.‘ to 11'! rlzingx E3.’
is not the least saIi.r_{ac—
wry (lflifek rules:
BALMSAR GnA<‘iA~,
l 601
— 1658
LAW 36
305
306
'|'lllC ’\1l\'\ \\ll
H11‘ :~'|lr\l)()\\
There wax u cerium
original man who
desire!) to catch his
own shadow. He makes
a s'(¢>p or two toward it,
but it mover away from
him. He quickenr his
pare; it does the mine.
A: (as: he takes to
mrming; but the’
quicker he goes, Iltr
quicker mm the
.vhaa'ow aim, umarly
rrfusing to give itself‘
up, just as if it hail beer:
a treasure. But see.’ our
eccemriu friend
smidenly turns mumi.
and walks away from
it. And presently lie
looks behind him; now
me shadow f‘IN’l..S‘
ufier him.
I.arlie.rfair. I have
often ()h.verved .
.
. that
Forzunz: treaty us in 1!
Similar way. One mun
tries with I!” his might
to seize (he gotltlz.-23$
and only l().\’6.5 his lime
and his tmublu.
Annrhm .veen2.s'. In all
uppmruncc, to be
winning (ml of her
siglii; hug. no: she
l1:’r.u’lf mini: (1 piezzmre
in pm:vm'ng him.
r/\m.Ls.
lwm Kkimrr.
17684844
LAW 3!")
His speech in defense of Fala was one of the most popular he ever gave. In
this case, the weak party involved was the president’s dog and the attack
backfired-in the long run, it only made the president more sympathetic,
since many people will naturally side with the “underdog,” just as the
American public came to sympathize with the wily but outnumbered Pan-
cho Villa.
It is tempting to want to fix our mistakes, but the harder we try, the
worse we often make them. It is sometimes more politic to leave them
alone. In 1971, when the New Ybrk limes published the Pentagon Papers, a
group of government documents about the history of US. involvement in
Indochina, Henry Kissinger erupted into a volcanic rage. Furious about the
Nixon administi-ation’s vulnerability to this kind of damaging leak, he
made recommendations that eventually led to the formation of a group
called the Plumbers to plug the leaks. This was the unit that later broke into
Democratic Party offices in the Watergate Hotel, setting off the chain of
events that led to Nixon’s downfall. In reality the publication of the Penta-
gon Papers was not a serious threat to the administration, but Kissingefs
reaction made it a big deal. In trying to fix one problem, he created an-
other: a paranoia for security that in the end was much more destructive to
the government. Had he ignored the Pentagon Papers, the scandal they
had created would eventually have blown over.
Instead of inadvertently focusing attention on a problem, making it
seem worse by publicizing how much concern and anxiety it is causing
you, it is ofien far wiser to play the contemptuous aristocrat, not deigning
to acknowledge the problem’s existence. There are several ways to execute
this strategy.
First there is the sour-grapes approach. If there is something you want
but that you realize you cannot have, the worst thing you can do is draw at-
tention to your disappointment by complaining about it. An infinitely
more powerful tactic is to act as if it never really interested you in the first
place. When the writer George Sand’s supporters nominated her to be the
first female member of the Académie Frangaise, in 1861, Sand quickly saw
that the academy would never admit her. Instead of whining, though, she
claimed she had no interest in belonging to this group of worn—out, over-
rated, outAof—touch windbags. Her disdain was the perfect response: Had
she shown her anger at her exclusion, she would have revealed how much
it meant to her. Instead she branded the academy a club of old mem-and
why should she be angry or disappointed at not having to spend her time
with them? Crying “sour grapes” is sometimes seen as a reflection of the
weak; it is actually the tactic of the powerful.
Second, when you are attacked by an inferior, deflect people’s atten-
tion by making it clear that the attack has not even registered. Look away,
or answer sweetly, showing how little the attack concerns you. Similarly,
when you yourself have committed a blunder, the best response is often to
make less of your mistake by treating it lightly
The Japanese emperor Go-Saiin, a great disciple of the tea ceremony,
owned a priceless antique tea howl that all the coui-tiers envied. One day a
guest, Dainagon Tsunehiro. asked if he could carry the tea bowl into the
light, to examine it more closely. The bowl rarely left the table, but the em-
peror was in good spirits and he consented. As Dainagori carried the bowl
to the railing of the verandah, however, and held it up to the light, it
slipped from his hands and fell on a rock in the garden below, smashing
into tiny fragments.
The emperor of course was furious. “It was indeed most clumsy of me
to let it drop in this way,” said Dainagon, with a deep how, “but really
there is not much harm done. This ldo tea~bowl is a very old one and it is
impossible to say how much longer it would have lasted, but anyhow it is
not a thing of any public use, so I think it rather fortunate that it has broken
thus.” This surprising response had
an immediate effect: The emperor
calmed down. Dainagon neither sniveled nor overapologized, but signaled
his own worth and power by treating his mistake with a touch of disdain.
The emperor had to respond with a similar aristocratic indifference; his
anger had made him seem low and petty——an image Dainagon was able to
manipulate.
Among equals this tactic might bacldire: Your indifference could make
you seem callous. But with a master, if you act quickly and without great
fuss, it can work to great effect: You bypass his angry response, save him
the time and energy he would waste by brooding over it, and allow him the
opportunity to display his own lack of pettiness publicly.
If we make excuses and denials when we are caught in a mistake or a
deception, we stir the waters and make the situation worse. It is ofien wiser
to play things the opposite way. The Renaissance writer Pietro Aretino
often boasted of his aristocratic lineage, which was, of course, a fiction,
since he was actually the son of a shoemaker. When an enemy of his finally
revealed the embarrassing truth, word quiddy spread, and soon all of
Venice (where he lived at the time) was aghast at Aretino’s lies. Had he
tried to defend himself, he would have only dragged himself down. His re-
sponse was masterful: He announced that he was indeed the son of a shoe-
maker, but this only proved his greatness, since he had risen from the
lowest stratum of society to its very pinnacle. From then on he never men-
tioned his previous lie, trumpeting instead his new position on the matter
of his ancestry.
Remember: The powerful responses to niggling, petty annoyances and
irritations are contempt and disdain. Never show that something has af-
fected you, or that you are offended——that only shows you have acknowl-
edged a problem. Contempt is a dish that is best served cold and without
affectarion.
LAW 36
307
308
3
LAW 36
Image:
The Tiny
Wound.
It is small but painful and irritating. You
try all sorts of medicaments, you
Corn-
plain, you scratch and pick at the scab.
Doctors only make it worse, transforming
the tiny wound into a grave matter. If only
you had left the wound alone, letting time
heal it and freeing yourself of worry.
Authority: Know how to play the card of contempt. It is the most politic
kind of revenge. For there are many of whom we should have known
nothing if their distinguished opponents had taken no notice of them.
There is no revenge like oblivion, for it is the entombment of the unwor-
thy in the dust of their own nothingness. (Baltasar Gracién, 1601-1658)
REVERSAL
You must play the card of contempt with care and delicacy. Most small
troubles will vanish on their own if you leave them be; but some will grow
and fester unless you attend to them. Ignore a person of inferior stature and
the next time you look he has become a serious rival, and your contempt
has made him vengeful as well. The geat princes of Renaissance Italy
chose to ignore Cesare Borgia at the outset of his career as a young general
in the army of his father, Pope Alexander VI. By the time they paid a1ten~
tion it was too lat.e——the cub was now a lion, gobbling up chunks of Italy.
Often, then, while you show contempt publicly you will also need to keep
an eye on the problem privately, monitoring its status and making sure it
goes away. Do not let it become a cancerous cell.
Develop the skill of sensing problems when they are still small and
taking care of them before they become intractable. Leam to distinguish
between the potentially disastrous and the mildly irritating, the nuisance
that will quietly go away on its own. In either case, though, never com—
pletely take your eye oil" it. As long as it is alive it can smolder and spark
into life.
LAW
37
CREATE COMPELLING
SPECTACLES
JUDGMENT
Striking imagery and grand symbolic gestums create the
aura ofpower-—-—everycme responds to them. Stage spectcr
clesfar those zmnmd you, then, full of arrasting visuals
and radiant symbols that heighten your presence. Daz-
zled by appearancas,
no one will mvlice tuba! you are
really drying.
‘
309
.\\'l‘U\\
\\.|) f l.!Il)l’\l'k\
She relied above all
upon her physical pms»
enre and the spell and
eurhmurnern which [I
wait! cream.
.
.
. She
came sailing up the
rn-‘rr Cydrms in $1 barge
wirh a pimp 0f,L,'m'(1. its
purple sails billowing
in the wind. while her
rowers curesrcd the
water with arm‘ of
rilt-er whirrlt dippnl in
lime to the music of tho
flaw, in-cmiapmzied by
pipes and liner.
CIL’0}1alI(I herself
rcr liner! beneath it
rrannpy ofcioth of
gold. tlrerxuzd in Iht’
character ofAphmrlilf.
us‘ we see her In par!!!-
ings, while on eiiher
siaie In rr)m;rIe!c the
piCIurr' stool! boys‘
rusmnzcd ax Cupid;
who cu0I('a' her’ wirh
lherr farm Ireslem! of :1
crew the barge was
lined wilh 11:4’ m()sr
brzauliful ofhcr wailv
mg-women mtirml as
Nereids mm’ Graces,
came at the ruzms.-:5,
otizcrx or the lm-kie of
the mils, and all (he
while an irztir'sr:rrIhab[y
rid! perfume, e.r1mle:1
from mnurnerublr
cehserx, was we/led
from the verve! to (he
rivrtrbtmks (Irma:
mzilmndzm zIc‘cmnpa-
rvieri this royal
pmgre.r.r. some of them
following the zjuecm on
both sides‘ ofthe river
from in wry mouth,
while others hurried
down from the city of
'l‘ur.su.r to gaze at the
siglx/. Gratlzmllv the
crowds rlri/led LH1-‘(U2
from the nzarkaiplucc.
370
LAW 3 7
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I
In the early 1780s. word spread through Berlin of the strange and spectacu-
lar medical practice of a Dr. Weisleder. He performed his miracles in an
enormous converted beer hall, outside which Berliners began to notice
ever longer lines of people—-the blind, the lame, anyone with an illness in
curable by normal medicine. When it leaked out that the doctor worked by
exposing the patient to the rays of the moon, he soon became dubbed The
Moon Doctor of Berlin.
Sometime in 1783, it was reported that Dr. Weisleder had cured a well»
to—do woman of a terrible ailment. He suddenly became a celebrity. Previ~
ously only the poorest Berliners had been seen waiting outside the beer
hall in their rags; now magnificent carriages were parked outside, and gen-
tlemen in frock coats, and ladies with enormous coiffures, lined the street
as sunset drew near. Even folk with the mildest of ailments came, out of
sheer curiosity, As they waited in line, the poorer clients would explain to
the gentlemen and ladies that the doctor only practiced when the moon
was in its increscent phase. Many would add that they themselves had al
ready been exposed to the healing powers he called forth from the rays of
the moon. Even those who felt cured kept coming back, drawn by this
powerful experience.
Inside the beer hall, a strange and stirring spectacle greeted the visitor:
Packed into the entrance hall was a crowd of all classes and ethnic bar.k~
grounds, a veritable Tower of Babel. Through tall windows on the northern
side of the hall, silvery moonlight poured in at odd angles. The doctor and
his wife, who, it seemed, was also able to effect the cure, practiced on the
second floor, which was reached by at stairway, at the end of the hall. As the
line edged closer to the stairs, the sick would hear shouts and cries from
above, and word would spread of, perhaps, a blind gentleman suddenly
able to see.
Once upstairs, the line would fork in two directions, toward a north-
ern room for the doctor, a southern one for his wife, who worked only on
the ladies. Finally, after hours of anticipation and waiting in line, the gen-
tlemen patients would be led before the amazing doctor himself, an cl‘
derly man with a few stalks of wild gray hair and an air of nervous energy.
He would take the patient (let us say a young boy, brought in by his fa-
ther), uncover the afflicted body part, and lift the boy up to the window,
which faced the light of the moon. He would rub the site of the injury or
illness, mumble something unintelligible, look knowingly at the moon,
and then, after collecting his fee, send the boy and his father on their way.
Meanwhile, in the sout.h~faciug room, his wife would be doing the same
with the 1adies~——which was odd, really, since the moon cannot appear in
two places at once; it cannot have been visible, in other words, from both
windows. Apparently the mere thought, idea, and symbol of the moon
were enough, for the ladies did not complain, and would later remark
confidently that the wife of the Moon Doctor had the same healing powers
as he.
Interpretation
Dr Weislecler may have known nothing about medicine, but he under-
stood human nature. He recognized that people do not always want words,
or rational explanations, or demonstrations of the powers of science; they
want an immediate appeal to their emotions. Give them that and they will
do the rest—such as imagine they can be healed by the light reflected from
a rock a quarter million miles away. Dr. Weisleder had no need of pills, or
oflengthy lectures on the moon’s power, or of any silly gadgetry to amplify
its rays. He understood that the simpler the spectacle the better—just the
moonlight pouring in from the side, the stairway leading to the heavens,
and the rays of the moon, whether directly visible or not. Any added ef-
fects might have made it seem that the moon was not strong enough on its
own. And the moon was strong enough——it was a magnet for fantasies, as it
has been throughout history. Simply by associating himself with the image
of the moon, the doctor gained power.
Remember: Your search for power depends on shortcuts. You must al-
ways circumvent people’s suspicions, their perverse desire to resist your
will. Images are an extremely effective shortcut: Bypassing the head, the
seat of doubt and resistance, they aim straight for the heart. Overwhelming
the eyes, they create powerful associations, bringing people together and
stirring their emotions. With the white light of the moon in their eyes, your
targets are blinded to the deceptions you practice.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II
In 1536 the future king Henri II of France took his first mistress, Diane de
Poitiers. Diane was t.hirty—seven at the time, and was the widow of the
grand seneschal of Normandy. Henri, meanwhile, was a sprightly lad of
seventeen, who was just beginning to sow his wild oats. At first their union
seemed merely platonic, with Henri showing an intensely spiritual devo-
tion to Diane. But it soon became clear that he loved her in every way, pre-
ferring her bed to that of his young wife, Catherine de’ Médicis.
In 1547 King Francis died and Henri ascended to the throne. This new
situation posed perils for Diane de Poitiers. She had just turned forty-eight,
and despite her notorious cold baths and rumored youth potions, she was
beginning to show her age; now that Henri was king, perhaps he would re-
turn to the queen's bed, and do as other kings had done—choose mis-
tresses from the bevy of beauties who made the French court the envy of
Europe. He was, after all, only twenty-eight, and cut a dashing figure. But
Diane did not give up so easily. She would continue to enthrall her lover,
as she had enthralled him for the past eleven years.
Diane’s secret weapons were symbols and images, to which she had al-
ways paid great attention. Early on in her relationship with Henri, she had
created a motif by intertwining her initials with his, to symbolize their
union. The idea worked like a charm: Henri put this insignia everywhere-
on his royal robes,
on monuments, on churches, on the facade of the
where Antony uwaitvri
the queen emhroned on
his tribunal, mm"! at last
he was left sitting quite
alonn. And the word
spread on every side
[hat Aphrodite had
come to navel with
Dionysus for the
happiness ofAxia.
/imony than smr a
message inviting
C'Ieo[1utra to dine with
him. But she thought it
more appmprime thal
he should come to her,
and so. as he wished to
show his courtesy and
goodwill, he accepted
and went. He found the
prcpariuirmx made to
receive him rnagnificent
Ileyolxd words, but
what a.s'toni.s'hezl him
most of all was the
extraordinary number
of Iiglits. So many of
them it is said, were let
down from the roof
and ¢Il.x‘[)luyell on all
sides at ante. and they
were arranged and
grouped m .Yll('l’l inge-
nious patterns in rela-
tion to emrh olhr-.r, .s'mm-
in squares and some in
circles, thm they (.‘f€(lll’ll
as brilliant a spectacle
as can ever haw been
zle\«'is'ed to delight
the eye.
LIFE OF ANTONY.
l’LlI'i‘AR(‘H.
c. A.D. 4ti—l20
In the Middle Ages /he
.\’ymlwli.\‘t umrudv was
much more in evidmce.
.
.
. Syrnbolisrn appears
as (1 sort o_/Crlwrt out of
thought. lmtezul of
looking for the relaliml
LAW 37
311
between two things by
following the hidden
demurs of their causal
cormexions, thought
makes a leap and
discovers their relation
nothnhecnnnenon
of cause and effects,
but in a connexion of
signification.
.
.
.
Symbolist thought
permits an infinity of
relations between
things. Each thing may
denote a number of
distinct ideas by its
different special quali-
ties. and a quality may
have several symbolic
meanings. The highest
conceptions have
symbols by the thou-
sand. Nothing is too
humble to represent
and glory the sublime.
The walnut signifies
Christ: the sweet kernel
is His divine nature, the
green and pulpv outer
peel is His humanity,
the wooden shell
between is the cross.
Thus all things raise
his thoughts to the
eternal.
.
.
. Every
precious stone, besides
its natural splendour
sparkles with the bril-
liance ofits symbolic
values. The assimilation
ofmrer and virginity is
much more than a
poetic comparison, for
it reveals their common
essence. As each nation
arises in the mind the
logic of.t_vmbolism
creates an harmony
ofitieas.
ll-IF. wmsmo or TH}:
MIDDLE AGES.
.ImmN HUIZINGA,
I928
312
LAW 37
Louvre, then the royal palace in Paris. Dia.ne’s favorite colors were black
and white, which she wore exclusively, and wherever it was possible the in-
signia appeared in these colors. Everyone recognized the symbol and its
meaning. Soon after Henri took the throne, however, Diane went still fur»
ther: She decided to identify herself with the Roman goddess Diana, her
namesake. Diana was the goddess of the hunt, the traditional royal pastime
and the particular passion of Henri. Equally important, in Renaissance an
she symbolized chastity and purity. For a woman like Diane to identify her-
self with this goddess would instantly call up those images in the court, giv-
ing her an air of respectability. Symbolizing her “chaste” relationship with
Henri, it would also set her apart from the adulterous liaisons of royal mis-
tresses past.
To efiect this association, Diane began by completely transforming her
castle at Anet. She razed the building’s structure and in its place erected a
magnificent Doric-columned edifice modeled after a Roman temple. It was
~
made in white Normandy stone flecked with black silex, reproducing
Diane’s trademark colors of black and white. The insignia of her and
Henn"s initials appeared on the columns, the doors, the windows, the can
pet. Meanwhile, symbols of Diana—crescent moons, stags, and hounds-
adomed the gates and
facade. Inside,
enormous tapestries depicting
episodes in the life of the goddess lay on the floors and hung on the walls.
In the garden stood the famous Goujon sculpture Diane Chasseresxe, which is
now in the Louvre, and which had an uncanny resemblance to Diane de
Poitiers. Paintings and other depictions of Diana appeared in every comer
of the castle.
Anet overwhelmed Henri, who soon was trumpeting the image of
Diane de Poitiers as a Roman goddess. In 1548, when the couple appeared
together in Lyons for a royal celebration, the townspeople welcomed them
with a tableau vimznt depicting a scene with Diana the huntress. France’s
greatest poet of the period, Pierre de Ronsard, began to write verses in
honor of Diana—indeed a kind of cult of Diana sprang up, all inspired by
the king’s mistress. It seemed to Henri that Diane had given herself a kind
of divine aura, and as if he were destined to worship her for the rest of his
life. And until his death, in 1559, he did remain faithful to her—making her
a duchess, giving her untold wealth, and displaying an almost religious do
votion to his first and only mistress.
Interpretation
Diane de Poitiers, a woman from a modest bourgeois background, man-
aged to captivate Henri for over twenty years. By the time he died she was
well into her sixties, yet his passion for her only increased with the years.
She knew the king well. He was not an intellectual but a lover of the out-
doors——he particularly loved jousting tournaments, with their bright pen-
nants, brilliantly caparisoned horses,
and beautifully dressed
women.
Henri’s love of visual splendor seemed childlike to Diane, and she played
on this weakness of his at every opportunity.
Most astute of all was Diane’s appropriation of the goddess Diana.
Here she took the game beyond physical imagery into the realm of the psy-
chic symbol. It was quite a feat to transform a king’s mistress into an em-
blem of power and purity, but she managed it. Vfithout the resonance of
the goddess, Diane was merely anraging courtesan. With the imagery and
symbolism of Diana on her shoulders, she seemed a mythic force, destined
for greatness.
You too can play with images like these, weaving visual clues into an
encompassing gestalt, as Diane did with her colors and her insignia. Estab-
lish a trademark like these to set yourself apart. Then take the game fur
ther: Find an image or symbol from l'.l1e past that will neatly fit your
situation, and put it on your shoulders like a cape. It will make you seem
larger than life.
Because of the light it shines on the other stars which make up a kind of
court around it, became ofthejust and equal distribution ofits rays to
all alike, because of the good it brings to all places, [zmducing life, joy
and action, bemuse of its wnstamyfrom which it never varies, I chose
the mm as the most magnificent image to represent a great leader.
Louis XIV the Sun King, 16384715
KEYS TO POWER
Using words to plead your case is
business: Words are dangerous in-
struments, and often go astray. The words people use to persuade us virtu-
ally invite us to reflect on them with words of our own; we mull them over,
and often end up believing the opposite of what they say. (That is part of
our perverse nature.) It also happens that words offend us, stirring up asso-
ciations unintended by the speaker.
The visual, on the other hand, short-circuits the labyrinth of words. It
strikes with an emotional power and immediacy that leave no gaps for re-
flecfion and doubt. Like music, it leaps right over rational, reasonable
droughts. Imagine the Moon Doctor trying to make a case for his medical
practice, trying to convince the unconverted by telling them about the
healing powers of the moon, and about his own special connection to a dis-
tant object in the sky. Fortunately for him, he was able to create a com-
pelling spectacle that made words unnecessary. The moment his patients
entered the beer hall, the image of the moon spoke eloquently enough.
Understand: Words put you on the defensive. If you have to explain
yourself your power is already in question. The image, on the other hand,
imposes itself as a given. It discourages questions, creates forceful associa-
tions,
resists unintended interpretations,
communicates instantly,
and
forges bonds that transcend social dilferences. Words stir up arguments
and divisions; images bring people together. They are the quintessential in-
struments of power.
The symbol has the
same force, whether it is visual (the statue of
Then: was a man
named Saknmoroyn
Hechigwan who [wed
in upper Kyoto.
.
.
.
When [Emperor]
Hideyor/zi gave his
great Chmno-yu [ma
ceremony] meeting at
Kimno in the temh
month of 1588. Her:hig-
wrm rel up a grant red
mnhrelln nine feet
across mounted on a
stick seven feet high,
The circunrference of
the handle lu-
.-rurrourzdedfor allow
two feet by a reed fence
in such a way that the
rays of the rim were
reflected from it and
difjizsed the colour of
the umbrella all
around. '1‘}ri.r device
pleased Hide}-oshi so
much that he remitted‘
Hechigwuniv laxex as a
reward.
can-no-yo:
run .3/\ PA NESF TEA
¢‘léRl?M(\NY.
A. L. Sm»;-.n.
1962
LAW 3 7
313
314
LAW 37
Diana) or a verbal description of something visual (the words “the Sun
King”). The symbolic object stands for something else, something abstract
(such as the image “Diana” standing for chastity). The abstract concept-
purity, patriotism, courage, lovc~—~is full of emotional and powerful associa-
tions. The symbol
is
a shortcut of expression, containing dozens of
meanings in one simple phrase or object. The symbol of the Sun King, as
explained by Louis XIV, can be read on many layers, but the beauty of it is
that its associations required no explanation, spoke immediately to his sub-
jects, distinguished him from all other kings, and conjured up a kind of
majesty that went far beyond the words themselves. The symbol contains
untold power.
The first step in using symbols and images is to understand the pri-
macy of sight among the senses. Before the Renaissance, it has been an
gued, sight and the other senses--taste, touch, and so on-—-operated on a
relatively equal plane. Since then, however, the visual has come to domi-
nate the others, and is the sense we most depend on and trust. As Gracién
said, “The truth is generally seen, rarely heard.” When the Renaissance
painter Fra Filippo Lippi was a captured slave among the Moors, he won
his freedom by sketching a drawing of his master on a white wall with a
piece of charcoal; when the owner saw the drawing, he instantly under-
stood the power of a man who could make such images, and let Fra Lippi
go. That one image was far more powerful than any argument the artist
could have made with words.
Never neglect the way you arrange things visually. Factors like color,
for example, have enormous symbolic resonance. When the con artist Yel-
low Kid Weil created a newsletter touting the phony stocks he was ped-
dling, he called it the “Red Letter Newsletter” and had it printed, at
considerable expense, in red ink. The color created a sense of urgency,
power, and good fortune. Weil recognized details like these as keys to de-
ception—as do modern advertisers and mass-marketers. If you use “gold”
in the title of anything you are trying to sell, for example, print it in gold.
. Since the eye predominates, people will respond more to the color than to
the word.
The wsual contains great emotional power. The Roman emperor Con-
stantine worshipped the sun as a god for most of his life; one day, though,
he looked up at the sun, and saw a cross superimposed on it. The vision of
the cross over the sun proved to him the ascendancy of the new religion,
and he converted not just himself but the whole Roman Empire to Chris-
tianity soon thereafter. All the preaching and proselytizing in the world
could not have been as powerful. Find and associate yourself with the im-
ages and symbols that will communicate in this immediate way today, and
you will have untold power.
Most effective of all is anew con1bination—a fusion ofimages and sym-
bols that have not been seen together before, but that through their associ-
ation clearly demonstrate your new idea, message, religion. The creation of
new images and symbols out of old ones in this way has a poetic effect-
viewers’ associations run rampant. giving them a sense of participation.
Visual images often appear in a sequence, and the order in which they
appear creates
a symbol. The first to appear, for instance, symbolizes
power; the image at the center seems to have central importance‘
Near the end of World War II, orders came down from General Eisen-
hower thax American troops were to lead the way into Paris after its liber~
ation from the Nazis. The French general Charles de Gaulle, however,
realized that this sequence would imply that the Americans now com-
manded the fate of France. Through much manipulation, de Gaulle made
certain that he and the French Second Armored Division would appear at
the head of the liberating force. The strategy worked: After he had success
fully pulled off this stunt, the Allies started treating him as the new leader
of an independent France. De Gaulle knew that a leader has to locate him’
self literally at the head of his troops. This visual association is crucial to the
emotional response that he needs to elicit.
Things change in the game of symbols: It is probably no longer possiv
ble to pose as a “sun king,” or to wrap the mantle of Diana around you. Yet
you can associate yourself with such symbols more indirectly. And, of
course, you can make your own mythology out of figures from more re-
cent history, people who are comfortably dead but still powerfully associaw
five in the public eye. The idea is to give yourself an aura, a stature that
your normal banal appearance simply will not create. By herself Diane de
Poitiers had no such radiant powers; she was as human and ordinary as
most of us. But the symbol elevated her above the human lot, and made
her seem divine.
Using symbols also has a courtierlike effect, since they are often gen-
tler than brutish words. The psychotherapist Dr. Milton H. Erickson al-
ways tried to find symbols and images that would communicate to the
patient in ways that words could not. When dealing with a severely trou~
bled patient, he would not question him directly but would talk about
something irrelevant, such as driving through the desert in Arizona, where
he practiced in the 19505. In describing this he would eventually come to
an appropriate symbol for what he suspected was the man’s problem. If he
felt the palient was isolated, say, Dr. Erickson would talk of a single iron-
wood tree, and how its isolation left it battered by the winds. Making an
emotional connection with the tree as a symbol, the patient would open up
more readily to the doctor’: probing.
Use the power of symbols as a way to rally, animate, and unite your
troops or team. During the rebellion against the French crown in 1648,
those loyal to the king disparaged the rebels by comparing them to the
slingshots (in French, fiandesl that little boys use to frighten big boys. Cardi~
nal de Retz decided to turn this disparaging term into the rebels’ symbol:
The uprising was now known as the Fronde, and the rebels as fivndeurs.
They began to wear sashes in their hats that symbolized the slingshot, and
the word became their rallying cry. Without it the rebellion might well
have petered out Always find a symbol to represent your cause—the more
emotional associations, the better.
The best way to use images and symbols is to organize them into a
LAW 37
.315
grand spectacle that awes people and distracts them from unpleasant reali-
ties. This is easy to do: People love what is grand, spectacular, and larger
than life. Appeal to their emotions and they will flock to your spectacle in
hordes. The visual is the easiest route to their heans.
Image:
The Cross and the
Sun. Crucifixion and
total radiance. With one
imposed
over the other,
a
new reality takes shape—
a
new power is in the
ascendant. The sym-
bol-no explanation
necessary.
Authority: The people are
always impressed by
the
superficial
appearamze
of
things.
.
.
. The [prince] should,
at fitting times of the year,
keep the people occupied
and distracted with festivities
and spectacles. (Niccolo
Maclliavelli,
1469-»l527)
REVERSAL
No power is made available by ignoring images and symbols. There is no
possible reversal to this law.
316
LAW 37
38
TT{INH§¢AS’Y()[IIJI{E
BIJ17I3EI{AOJE LIFCE
OTHERS
JUDGMENT
Ifyou make a show ofgoing against the times, flaunting
your unconventional ideas and unorthodox ways, people
will think that you only want attention and that you
look down upon them. They will find a way to punish
youfor making themfeel inferior. It isfor safer to blend
in and nurture the common touch. Share your orig2'nal—
ity only wéth tolerant fiiends and those who are sure to
appreciate your uniqueness.
317'
|HI\|\ \\II‘l| Illl
Ivl
\X
\\|)«'I*l-Hi \H‘HI
|I|I.\l\\\
/I in. ctzsy‘ (0 nm mm
drzluzcr by try:/lg 10
rwinz against the
szream. Onty a Smrrarav
coufri attempt m do
that. Diwzgreemwil is‘
rztgaldeti as o/'f<>:z.~u'x'<>
herzmw ii is a 1 1Imlr‘m-
Manon 1/fihe view of
U1/l(3r.Y;H1(‘ riumhmxx‘ of
111:» rlisgmnrlwl grow,
on urcoimt ei/her of
mum‘ mm/er I/mt hm‘
been the alum‘! of
(‘é,'I1.\‘lIre or ufsunm
person who {tux prai.\'ei1
it: 'l’m1li iv for NH’ few,
error I)‘ as nsmll as
'3'
vulgar. Nor ix‘ IP14: n
e
man (0 he re<'ogni:»',4*d
by lfhilf he rays in the
marketplace. for hf
vpcakr rhrre mil with
his own voice. but will
that (7fur1iver.\'rII /‘ally,
h(m'ewrr mm:Iz /li.\’
imnnrt tlirzughlx may
gcunsay 11.‘ The wise
man avuiilx beirig
cantradtcletl ax sedu-
laurly (IA he amid:
cmrlmdicfi/lg; Ilw
pm‘)[ir£ty of l7£!Il.\I4l r’ it
wirlxhe-Iii ]‘l‘()IIl that
which re'ut§1e'_y provokes
Ir. Timzrgh: is flrca: ii
Lamml and rshnuld not
be crierctrd; retire into
(her .ram'tuary 0f_\=r)ur
.5‘
nce und I/you
5()melimes allow your-
rulf to break it, do so
under the ne;:i.s' of u
llI.S'L‘Vt’L’I few.
BALTAX/xR (‘rR.-xi‘!/x.~.
l(>(ll W058
318
LAW 38
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
Around the year 478 B.C., the city of Sparta sent an expedition to Persia led
by the young Spartan nobleman Pausanias. The city—states of Greece had
recently fought off a mighty invasion from Persia, and now Pausanias,
along with allied ships from Athens, had orders to punish the invaders and
win back the islands and coastal towns that the Persians had occupied.
Both the Athenians and the Spartans had great respect for Pausanias-—he
had proven himself as a fearless warrior, with a flair for the dramatic.
With amazing speed, Pausanias and his troops took Cyprus, then
moved on to the mainland of Asia Minor known as the Hellespont and
captured Byzantium {modem-day Istanbul). Now master of part of the Per-
sian empire, Pausanias began to show signs of behavior that went beyond
his normal flarnboyance. He appeared in public wearing pomades in his
hair and flowing Persian robes, and accompanied by a bodyguard of Egyp-
tians. He held lavish banquets in which he sat in the Persian manner and
demanded to be entertained. He stopped seeing his old friends, entered
into communication with the Persian King Xerxes, and all in all affected
the style and manner of a Persian dictator.
Clearly power and success had gone to Pausanias’s head. His army-
Athenians and Spartans alike—at first thought this a passing fancy: He had
always been a bit exaggerated in his gestures. But when he ilaunted his dis-
dain for the Greeks’ simple way of life, and insulted the common Greek
soldier, they began to feel he had gone too far. Although there was no con’
crete evidence for this, rumors spread that he had gone over to the other
side, and that he dreamed of becoming a kind of Greek Xerxes. To quell
the possibility of mutiny, the Spartans relieved Pausanias of his command
and called him home.
Pausanias, however, continued to dress in the Persian style, even in
Sparta. After a few months be independently hired a trireme and returned
to the Hellespont, telling his compatriots he was going to continue the Fight
against the Persians. Actually, however, he had different plans———to make
himself ruler of all Greece, with the aid of Xerxes himself. The Spartans
declared him a public enemy and sent a ship to Capture him. Pausanias sur-
rendered, certainlthat he could clear himself of the charges of treason. It
did come out during the trial that during his reign as commander he had
offended his fellow Greeks time and again, erecting monuments, for in-
stance, in his own name, rather than in those of the cities whose troops had
fought alongside him, as was the custom. Yet Pausanias proved right: De~
spite the evidence of his numerous contacts with the enemy, the Spartans
refused to imprison a man of such noble birth, and let him go.
Now thinking himself untouchable, Pausanias hired a messenger to
take a letter to Xerxes, but the messenger instead took the letter to the
Spartan authorities. These men wanted to find out more, so they had the
messenger arrange to meet Pausanias in a temple where they could hide
and listen behind a partition. l/Vhat Pausanias said shocked them»-they
had never heard such contempt for their ways spoken so brazenly by one
of their 0wn—-—and they made arrangements for his immediate arrest.
On his way home from the temple, Pausanias got word of what had
happened. He ran to another temple to hide, but the authorities followed
him there and placed sentries all around. Pausanias refused to surrender.
Unwilling to forcibly remove him from the sacred temple, the authorities
kept him trapped inside, until he eventually died of starvation.
Interpretation
At first glance it might seem that Pausanias simply fell in love with another
culture, a phenomenon as old as time. Never comfortable with the asceti-
cism of the Spartans, he found himself enthralled by the Persian love of
luxury and sensual pleasure. He put on Persian robes and perfumes with a
sense of deliverance from Greek discipline and simplicity.
This is how it appears when people adopt a culture in which they were
not raised. Often, however, there is also something else at play: People
who flaunt their infatuation with a different culture are expressing a dis
dain and contempt for their own. They are using the outward appearance
of the exotic to separate themselves from the common folk who unques-
tioningly follow the local customs and laws, and to express their sense of
superiority. Otherwise they would act with more dignity, showing respect
for those who do not share their desires. Indeed their need to show their
difference so dramatically often makes them disliked by the people whose
beliefs they challenge, indirectly and subtly, perhaps, but’ offensively
nonetheless.
As Thucydides wrote of Pausanias, “By his contempt for the laws and
his imitation of foreign ways he had made himself very widely suspected of
being unwilling to abide by normal standards.” Cultures have norms that
reflect centuries of shared beliefs and ideals. Do not expect to scoff at such
things with impunity. You will be punished somehow, even ifjust through
isolation—a position of real powerlessness.
Many of us, like Pausanias, feel the siren call of the exotic, the foreign‘
Measure and moderate this desire. Flaunting your pleasure in alien ways of
thinking and acting will reveal a different motive————to demonstrate your su-
periority over your fellows.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAVV
During the late sixteenth century, a violent reaction against the Protestant
Reformation erupted in Italy. The Counter-Reformation, as it was called,
included its own version of the Inquisition to root out all deviations from
the Catholic Church. Among its victims was the scientist Galileo, but an
important thinker who suffered even greater persecution was the Domini-
can monk and philosopher Tommaso Campanella.
A follower of the materialist doctrine of the Roman philosopher Epi-
cums, Campanella did not believe in miracles, or in heaven and hell. The
Church had promoted such superstitions, he wrote, to control the common
folk by keeping them in fear. Such ideas verged on atheism, and Cam-
panella. expressed them incautiously. In 1593 the Inquisition threw him
Bone vixil, qui bone
latuit~“lIe lives well
who (‘0fl(,‘(,’lZl.\‘ himself
_
well."
Ovm,
c. 43 B.(7.—/\.D. 18
Wise men /should be]
like (‘offers with double
bottoms: Which when
ozhem look into, being
opened. they see not all
that they hold.
SIR \V/\l,TFR l{Al.F.!(‘vH.
1554-161 8
\K |l|Cl\ 'l'| ll; \\ NI lil(~2
\X|~‘,l{l“,(1|M,\(y|ul)
()Il(‘.I.’ upon a yirrw
Klzidn the teacher of
Moms, culled upon
Immklml with it warm-
ing. At a certain dtllt’,
he said. all the water in
the world which had
no! been specially
huunlerl, would lllSLl[r-
pear. It would then be
l‘(f7té,’W€(l. with difjfarrzrtr
water. wlzlcli would
drive men marl.
Only one man /iivtz-nod
to the meaning of this
advice. He collected
water and went to ll
secure plum where he
.\‘t0red it, and waiwd for
the wiuer 11) change its
i'ht2raL'm'.
On the Il[)]7(IlH{(‘.tl (I/715’
the streanm .Str>p]7P(l
running, the wells‘ want
dry. and the man who
had llA‘(€H(>.’(l, seeing this
LAW 33
319
happening. went to fair
retreat and rlmvak hrs
preserved water.
When he saw, from his
s‘ecuri!y, the wan-rfnlls
again bagimzing to
flow, this man
(lra.\'m>nded armmg (he
other sores nfmen. HP
found that (hey were
thinking and mlking in
an mzrirely different
way from before; ye!
they had no menzwy of
who! had Imppened.
nor of having been
warned. When he tried
to talk to them, he real»
ized that they thought
that he was mad. and
they showed hostility or
compassion, no: tmdan
standing.
A! first he drank nmw
oflhe new water, but
went back to his
concealment, I1) draw
on his supplies, every
day. Finally, however.
he took the ditrisimr to
drink the new water
bc(‘au.ra he could not
bear the lormlirresr of
living. In-Imwng and
thinking in re different
way from everyone
else. He drank the new
water, and became like
the res!. ‘T1101; he forgo!
all aboul his own rmre
of special water. and
his fellows began to
look upon him at a
mailman who had
miruc'ulr)u.vly been
reslored Z0 sanity.
'lA1.ES OF
‘nu: ma Rvisnss,
IDRIES SHAH.
I 967
320
LAW 38
into prison for his heretical beliefs. Six years later, as a form of partial re
lease, he was confined to a monastery in Naples.
Southern Italy was controlled by Spain at the time, and in Naples
Campanella became involved in a plot to fight and throw out these in»
vaders. His hope was to establish an independent republic based on his
own ideas of utopia. The leaders of the Italian Inquisition, working with
their Spanish counterparts, had him imprisoned again. This time they also
tortured him, to discover the true nature of his impious beliefs: He was sub-
jected to the infamous la zzeglia, a torture in which he was suspended by his
arms in a squatting position a few inches above a seat studded with spikes.
The posture was impossible to sustain, and in time the victim would end up
sitting on the spikes, which would tear his flesh at the slightest contact.
During these years, however, Campanella learned something about
power. Facing the prospect of execution for heresy, he changed his s|:a.t~
egy: He would not renounce his beliefs, yet he knew he had to disguise
their outward appearance.
To save his life, Campanella feigned madness. He let his inquisifors
imagine thax his beliefs stemmed from an inconuollable unsoundness of
mind. For a while the tortures continued, to see if his insanity was faked,
but in 1603 his sentence was commuted to life in prison. The first four
years of this he spent chained to a wall in an underground dungeon. De»
spite such conditions, he continued to write--although no longer would he
be so foolish as to express his ideas directly.
One book of Ca.mpa.uella’s, 771:: Hispanic Monardzy, promoted the idea
that Spain had a divine. mission to expand its powers around the world,
and offered the Spanish king practical, Machiavelli-type advice for achiev-
ing this. Despite his own interest in Machiavelli, the book in general pre
sented ideas completely the opposite to his own. The Hispanirr Monarchy was
in fact a ploy, an attempt to show his conversion to orthodoxy in the bold-
est manner possible. It worked: In 1626, six years after its publication, the
pope finally let Campanella out of prison.
Shortly afier gaining his freedom, Campanella wrote Atheism
Con»
guered,
a book attacking ‘free-thinkers, Machiavellians, Calvinists, and
heretics of all stripes. The book is written in the form of debates in which
heretics express their beliefs and are countered by arguments for the supe
riority of Catholicism. Campanella had obviously reformed-his book
made that clear. Or did it?
The arguments in the mouths of the heretics had never before been
expressed with such verve and freshness. Pretending to present their side
only to knock it down, Campanella actually summarized the case against
Caxholicism with striking passion. “Then he argued the other side, suppos-
edly his side, on the other hand, he resorted to stale clichés and convoluted
rationales. Brief and eloquent, the heretics’ arguments seemed bold and
sincere. The lengthy arguments for Catholicism seemed tiresome and 1m»
convincing.
Catholics who read the book found it disturbing and ambiguous, but
they could not claim it was heretical, or that Campanella should be re-
turned to prison. His defense of Catholicism, after all, used arguments they
had used themselves. Yet in the years to come, Atizeism Conquered became a
bible for atheists, Machiavellians and liberfines who used the arguments
Campanella had put in their mouths to defend their dangerous ideas. Com-
bining an outward display of conformity with an expression of his true he»
liefs in a way that his sympathizers would understand, Campanella showed
that he had learned his lesson.
Interpretation
In the face of awesome persecution, Campanella devised three strate-
gic moves that saved his hide, freed him from prison, and allowed him to
continue to express his beliefs. First he feigned ma.dness—«the medieval
equivalent of disavowing responsibility for one’s actions, like blaming
one’s parents today. Next he wrote a book that expressed the exact oppo-
site of his own beliefs. Finally, and most brilliantly of all, he disguised his
ideas while insinuating them at the same time. It is an old but powerful
trick: You pretend to disagree with dangerous ideas, but in the course of
your disagreement you give those ideas expression and exposure. You
seem to conform to the prevailing orthodoxy, but those who know will un-
derstand the irony involved. You are protected.
It is inevitable in society that certain values and customs lose contact
with their original motives and become oppressive. And there will always
be those who rebel against such oppression. harboring ideas far ahead of
their time. As Campanella was forced to realize, however, there is no point
in making a display of your dangerous ideas if they only bring you sullen
ing and persecution. Martyrdom serves no purpose~——better to live on in an
oppressive world, even to thrive in it Meanwhile find a way to express
your ideas subtly for those who understand you. Laying your pearls before
swine will only bring you trouble.
For a longtime I have not said what I believed, nor do I ever believe
what I say, and if indeed sometimes I do happen to tell the truth,
I hide it among so many lies that it is hard tofind.
Ni(.'col1}Mazhzauelli, in a letter to ["mnc¢=,,vco Gmaciardini, May 17, 1521
KEYS TO POWER
We all tell lies and hide our true feelings, for complete free expression is a
social impossibility. From an early age we learn to conceal our thoughts,
telling the prickly and insecure what we know they want to hear, watching
carefully lest we otfend them. For most of us this is natural—there are ideas
and values that most people accept, and it is pointless to argue. We believe
what we want to, then, but on the outside we wear a mask.
There are people, however, who see such restraints as an intolerable
infringement on their freedom, and who have a need to prove the superi-
Ncver combat any
man '5 opml'tm,'_)"nr
though you readied the
age ofil/Iethuselaix, you
would rzevw have dorm
setting him right upon
all the absurd things
that he believes.
II is also well to avoid
correcting people 3'
rnismket in com-ersw
lion, hmvn vet gum)
your intentirms may he;
for ti‘ is easy to offend
people, and diffictilz, if
not irriposxilvle to rruzml
Ihem.
Ifyau feel irritated by
the absurd remarks of
my people whose
can vemmon you
happen [0 overhear.
you should irnagine
that you are /ixrenittg m
Ihfl dialogue of two
fools in a comedy.
Probatum est.
The mum who comes
into the world with the
noiion that he is really
going to inslmcz it in
marten‘ of the highesz
irrzptlrltzmrr, may Ihtmlt
his stuns iflw £'S(’t2peS
with a whole skin.
ARTHUR
SCHOPENHAICER,
l788—- 1860
LAW 38
321
HM", fil’|'|Zl{\ .\\D
Tll|vL'l‘|i;\
.l.I.|:N
“Look aromitl _w2z1,"
said the cirizcn. "This is
the largest maria’! in
the world.
"
"Oh xurely I101,
" said
I/ta traveller.
“Well. perhaps not
the largesl,
" mid the
cilizzm, "but much
the‘ best.
"
"You are certainlv
wrong tfzerc,"s(1id the
traveller. “I can Isl!
you.
.
.
They buried the
xmznger in the dusk.
MEL:-;x,
R<)HIiIl'l‘ Lot. is
STEV1-LNSKJN. 18504894
IfMachfav<-,llihz1dlm(l
a prim‘? for (llSc‘lplP,
tlaefirsr lining he would
have recomrrzendezf
him to do would have
been to wrize a [wok
aguirm MucI1i1weIli.a‘m.
VULFAIRE.
1694
l778
3.12
LAW 38
ority of their values and beliefs. In the end, though, their arguments con-
vince only a few and offend a great deal more. The reason arguments do
not work is that most people hold their ideas and values without thinking
about them. There is a strong emotional content in their beliefs: They re-
ally do not want to have to rework their habits of thinking, and when you
challenge them, whether directly through your arguments or indirectly
through your behavior, they are hostile.
Wise and clever people learn early on that they can display conven-
tional behavior and mouth conventional ideas without having to believe in
them. The power these people gain from blending in is that of being left
alone to have the thoughts they want to have, and to express them to the
people they want to express them to, without suliering isolation or as
tracism. Once they have established themselves in a position of power,
they can try to convince a wider circle of the correctness of their ideas-
perhaps working indirectly, using Campanella’s strategies of irony and in-
sinuation.
In the late fourteenth century, the Spanish began a. massive persecu-
tion of the Jews, murdering thousands and driving others out of the coun»
try. Those who remained in Spain were forced to convert. Yet over the next
three hundred years, the Spanish noticed a phenomenon that disturbed
them: Many of the converts lived their outward lives as Catholics, yet
somehow managed to retain their Jewish beliefs, practicing the religion in
private. Many of these so-called Marranos (originally a derogatory term,
being the Spanish for “pig”) attained high levels of government office, mar-
ried into the nobility, and gave every appearance of Christian piety, only
to be discovered late in life as practicing Jews. (The Spanish Inquisition
was specifically commissioned to ferret them out.) Over the years they
mastered the art of dissimulation, displaying cmcifixes liberally, giving
generous
gifts
to
churches,
even
occasionally
making
anti-Semitic
rema.rks—~and all the while maintaining their inner freedom and beliefs.
In society, the Man-anos knew, outward appearances are what matter.
This remains true today. The strategy is simple: As Campanella did in writ-
ing Atheism Conquered, make a show of blending in, even going so far as to
be the most zealous advocate of the prevailing orthodoxy. If you stick to
conventional appearances in public few will believe you think differently
in private.
Do not be so foolish as to imagine that in our own time the old ortho—
doxies are gone. Jonas Salk, for instance, thought science had gotten past
politics and protocol. And so, in his search for a polio vaccine, he broke all
the rules--going public with a discovery before showing it to the scientific
community, taking credit for the vaccine without acknowledging the scien-
tists who had paved the way, making himself a star. The public may have
loved him but scientists shunned him. His disrespect for his community’s
orthodoxies left him isolated, and he wasted years trying to heal the
breach, and struggling for funding and cooperation.
Bertolt Brecht underwent a modern form of Inquisition—tl1e House
Un—American Activities Committee-and approached it with considerable
canniness. Having worked off and on in the American film industry during
World War II, in 1947 Brecht was summoned to appear before the commit-
tee to answer quesfions on his suspected Communist sympathies. Other
writers called before the committee made a point of attacking its members,
and of acting as belligerently as possible in order to gain sympathy for
themselves. Brecht, on the other hand, who had actually worked stead»
lastly for the Communist cause, played the opposite game: He answered
questions with ambiguous generalities that defied easy interpretation. Call
it the Carnpanella strategy. Brecht even were a suit————a rare event for him—-
and made a point of smoking a cigar during the proceedings, knowing that
akey committee member had a passion for cigars. In the end he charmed
the committee members, who let him go scobfree.
Brecht then moved to East Germany, where he encountered a differ-
ent kind ofInquisition. Here the Communists were in power, and they crit»
icized his plays as decadent and pessimistic. He did not argue with them,
but made small changes in the performance scripts to shut them up. Mean«
while he managed to preserve the published texts as written. His outward
conformity in both cases gave him the freedom to work unhindered, with
out having to change his thinking. In the end, he made his way safely
through dangerous times in different countries through the use of little
dances of orthodoxy, and proved he was more powerful than the forces of
repression.
Not only do people of power avoid the offenses of Pausanias and Salk,
they also learn to play the clever fox and feign the common touch. This has
been the ploy of con artists and politicians throughout the centuries. Lead-
ers like Julius Caesar and Franklin D. Roosevelt have overcome their nab
ural aristocratic stance to cultivate a familiarity with the common man.
They have expressed this familiarity in little gestures, often symbolic, to
show the people that their leaders share popular values, despite their differ-
ent status.
The logical extension of this practice is the invaluable ability to be all
things to all people. When you go into society, leave behind your own
ideas and values, and put on the mask that is most appropriate for the
group in which you find yourself. Bismarck played this game successfully
for yearsmthere were people who vaguely understood what he was up to,
but not clearly enough that it mattered. People will swallow the bait be-
cause it flatters them to believe that you share their ideas. They will not
take you as a hypocrite if you are careful~——for how can they accuse you of
hypocrisy if you do not let them know exactly what you stand for? Nor will
they see you as lacking in values. Of course you have values~——the values
you share with them, while in their company.
Authority: Do not give dogs what is holy; and do not throw
your pearls before swine, lest they trample them under
foot and turn to attack you. Uesus Christ, Matthew 7:6)
LAW 38
323
."1'.‘.’-?
LAW 38
Image:
'
The Black
The
herd
shuns
the
Sheep
black
sheep,
uncertain
whether or not it belongs
with them.
So it stragles be-
hind,
or wanders away from
the herd, where it is cornered
by
wolves
and promptly
de-
voured. Stay with
the herd—
there is safety in numbers, Keep
your
differences
in
your
thoughts and not in your fleece.
REVE RSAL
The only time it is worth standing out is when you already stand out-
when you have achieved an unshakable position of power, and can display
your difference from others as a sign of the distance between you. As pres—
ident of the United States, Lyndon Johnson would sometimes hold meet-
ings while he sat on the toilet. Since no one else either could or would
claim such a “privilege,” Johnson was showing people that he did not have
to observe the protocols and nicefies of others. The Roman emperor
Caligula played the same game: He would wear a woman’s negligee, or a
bathrobe, to receive important visitors. He even went so far as to have his
horse elected consul. But it backfired, for the people hated Caligula, and
his gestures eventually brought his overthrow. The truth is that even those
who attain the heights of power would be better off at least affecting the
common touch, for at some point they may need popular support.
Finally, there is always a place for the gadfly, the person who success-
fully defies custom and mocks what has grown lifeless in a culture. Oscar
Wilde, for example, achieved considerable social power on this founda-
tion: He made it clear that he disdained the usual ways ofdoing things, and
when he gave public readings his audiences not only expected him to in-
sult them but welcomed it We notice, however, that his eccentric role
eventually destroyed him. Even had he come to a better end, remember
that he possessed an unusual genius: Without his gift to amuse and delight,
his barbs would simply have offended people.
LAW
39
STIR UP WATERS
TO CATCH FISH
jUDGMENT
Anger and ematizm are strategically counterproductive.
You must always stay calm. and objective. But zfyou can
make your enemies angry while staying calm yomselfi
you gain a decided advanlagv. Put your enemies ojf~bal~
ance: Find the ciaink in their vanity through wlzich you
can rattlz them and you hold the strings.
1325
|‘I,\|\l l{\ h|I|t,|.Vl| \I:
(}l<l\|).‘".|I1‘(t\\\.
II‘..\
The K}/(7!(t Sltttsltttitti
Itttkttra Suwu-no-kami
Sltigetmtrw was very
fond t)fChtt-no-yu
(the tctt (’£’l‘('ht()rIy), am!
used to grind his own
It'll Wl1llL‘.\'llll7tg in the
court as judge. And the
reason was this He
once asked a friend ql
his who WAD‘ his
companion in Cha-no-
ytt, 4) tea rnerchttnt
named Eiki, to tell him
fnmkly what was the
public opirtion about
him. "Well,
" stud Eikt.
“they say that you get
irritated with those who
don ‘I give their
irvitlimcie very cllcarly
and scold them, and to
people we afraid to
bring lawsuits before
you rmtl iftlwy do, the
truth does not come
out.
"
“Ah, lam glad you
have told the that,
"
replied Shigemtme, “for
now that I L'onxidvr it, I
have fallen into the
habit ()f.\‘[I(’{1l(lVlg
sharply to people in
this way, and no (l()ttl2Y
httmltlefolk and those
who are not rettrly in
speech getflttrried and
are ttmtble to put their
cttsc in the best light.
I will see to it that rltix
does not occur in the
future.
” So after this he
had a tea mill plmwl
before him in court and
in from 0/ it the paper-
irtiverml shvji were
drawn to, and Shtge-
mime mt behind them
tttttl gmuntl the tea and
thus kept his mint]
calm while he heart!
the t:ttse.\: And he multl
326
LAW 3 9
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
In January of 1809, an agitated and anxious Napoleon hurried back to
Paris from his Spanish wars. His spies and confidants had confirmed a
rumor that his foreign minister Talleyrand had conspired against him with
Fouché, the minister of police. Immediately on arriving in the capital the
shocked emperor summoned his ministers to the palace. Following them
into the meeting right after their arrival, he began pacing up and down,
and started rambling vaguely about plotters working against him, specula-
tors bringing down the stock market, legislators delaying his policies—a.nd
his own ministers undermining him.
As Napoleon talked, Talleyrand leaned on the mantelpiece, looking
completely indifferent. Facing Talleyrand directly, Napoleon announced,
“For these ministers, treason has begun when they permit themselves to
doubt.” At the word “treason” the ruler expected his minister to be afraid.
But Talleyrand only smiled, calm and bored.
The sight of a subordinate apparently serene in the face of charges that
could get him hanged pushed Napoleon to the edge. There were ministers,
he said, who wanted him dead, and he took a step closer to Talleyrand—
who stared back at him unfazed. Finally Napoleon exploded. “You are a
coward,” he screamed in Talleyrand’s face, “a man of no faith. Nothing is
sacred to you. You would sell your own father. I have showered you with
riches and yet there is nothing you would not do to hurt me.” The other
ministers looked at each other in disbelief—they had never seen this fear-
less general, the conqueror of most of Europe, so unhinged.
“You deserve to be broken like glass,” Napoleon continued, stamping.
“I have the power to do it, but I have too much contempt for you to bother.
Why didn’t I have you hanged from the gates of the Tuileries? But there is
still time for that.” Yelling, almost out of breath, his face red, his eyes
bulging, he went on, “You, by the way, are nothing but shit in a silk stock-
ing.
.
.
. What about your wife? You never told me that San Carlos was your
wife’s lover?” “Indeed, sire, it did not occur to me that this information had
any bearing on Your Majesty’s glory or my own,” said Talleyrand calmly,
completely unflustered. After a few more insults, Napoleon walked away.
Talleyrand slowly crossed the room, moving with his characteristic limp.
As an attendant helped him with his cloak, he turned to his fellow ministers
(all afraid they would never see him again), and said, “What a pity, gentle
men, that so great a man should have such bad manners.”
Despite his anger, Napoleon Hid not arrest his foreign minister. He
merely relieved him of his duties
d banished him from the court, believ-
ing that for this man humiliation would be punishment enough. He did not
realize that word had quickly spread of his tirade—of how the emperor had
completely lost control of himself, and how Talleyrand had essentially hu-
miliated him by maintaining his composure and dignity. A page had been
turned: For the first time people had seen the great emperor lose his cool
under fire. A feeling spread that he was on the way down. As Talleyrand
later said, “This is the beginning of the end.”
Interpretation
This was indeed the beginning of the end. Waterloo was still six years
ahead, but Napoleon was on a slow descent to defeat, ciystallizing in 1812
with his disastrous invasion of Russia. Talleyrand was the first to see the
signs of his decline, especially in the irrational war with Spain. Sometime in
1808, the minister decided that for the future peace of Europe, Napoleon
had to go. And so he conspired with Fouché.
It is possible that the conspiracy was never anything more than a
ploy~—a device to push Napoleon over the edge. For it is hard to believe
that two of the most practical men in history would only go halfway in their
plotting. They may have been only stirring the waters, trying to goad
Napoleon into a misstep. And indeed, what they got was the tarrtmrn that
laid out his loss of control for all to see. In fact, Napoleorfs soon—famous
blowup that afternoon had
a profoundly negative effect on his public
image.
This is the problem with the angry response. At first it may strike fear
and terror, but only in some, and as the days pass and the storm clears,
other
responses
erne:ge—embar1:assment
and
uneasiness
about
the
shouter’s capacity for going out of control, and resentment of what has
been said. Losing your temper, you always make unfair and exaggerated
accusations. A few such tirades and people are counting the days until you
are gone.
In the face of a conspiracy against him, a conspiracy between his two
most important ministers, Napoleon certainly had a right to feel angry and
anxious. But by responding so angrily, and so publicly, he only demon-
strated his frustration. To show your frustration is to show that you have
lost your power to shape events; it is the helpless action of the child who re-
sorts to a hysterical fit to get his way. The powerful never reveal this kind of
weakness.
There were a number ofthings Napoleon could have done in this situ~
alien. He could have thought about the fact that two eminently sensible
men had had reason to turn against him, and could have listened and
learned from them. He could have tried to win them back to him. He could
even have gotten rid of them, making their imprisonment or dead; an omi-
nous display of his power. No tirades, no childish fits, no embarrassing
afler-elfects—just a quiet and definitive severing of ties.
Remember: Tantrums neither intimidate
nor inspire loyalty. They
only create doubts and uneasiness about your power. Exposing your weak’
ness, these stormy eruptions often herald a. fall.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
By the late 1920s, Haile Selassie had nearly achieved his goal of assuming
total control over Ethiopia, a country he felt needed strong and unified
leadership. As regent to the empress Zauditu (stepdaughter of the late
queen) and heir to the throne, Selassie had spent several years weakening
the power of Ethiopia’s various warlords. Now only one real obstacle stood
easily see whether Iris
t‘()I1l}lU.$'I1f(’ was ruffled
or not by looking ax the
tea. wizich would not
fall evenly ground to
the proper carlsislency
iflrc go! excited. And
so /‘usllm was (lone
impartially and ptmplfl
wml away from his
court .raIi.sfz‘ed.
CHA-N0-YU:
we w-Auwsr». "rm
L'l§RlZM()NY
A. L. SADLER.
l962
1}’/m.s'.\‘lblv, no animat-
l‘tyslmu1rt he felt for
rznymw.
.
,
. To speak
angrily to ll person, to
show your hatred by
what you my or by the
way you look, Lr an
!lIlIlL‘C(‘S.i‘aIy proceed-
i):g-dangerorrs. fool»
£312, rtrlicrllous, and
vulgar.
A rrger or hatred xhoul'rr'
Izever be show; other»
wise than in what you
do; and feelings will be
all the more effective in
action, in so far as you
avoid the exhibition of
them in any other way.
It is only the cold-
blvorlell arlinmlx whose
bile is pui.s'mIr)u.r.
Am‘n1;n
S\“Ilf)l’F,NliAlJFR,
1 78244 860
LAW 39
327
Tlll" \14):'\|\'l".Y :\Nl)
lllll‘. \XV\Sl’
A monkey. whilst
munching a ripe pear.
was pcslered by the
l7(lf€r_ffl(?€{l imporruml
lies ofu wasp, who,
noims vnlens. would
have :1 part. After
threatening the monkey
with his anger rfize
further hesitated to
submit to his derrmmi,
he .\‘4'tfl(’(l on the fruit.
but was as 3‘Or)n
knocked ofI by the
nwnkey.
The irritable wasp now
hurl recourse to in vec-
tiv(:—»and, after using
the most imuliing
language. which the
other calmly listened
to, he so worker!
lximselfup irim violmr
passion that, losing all
consideration oftlw
yenally, he flew to the
face of the monkey.
and slung him with
such rage that he was
unable do extricate his
weapon, and was
compelled to tear
himself away. leaving it
in the wound-—thus
4-nfaclirzg on himself a
lingering death. accom»
partied hy pm‘:25 much
greater than rhose he
had t".-zflicled.
FAB! [753
JoN.\TH.«:~: Biscu.
1783
1847
32.8
LAW 39
in his way: the empress and her husband, Ras Gugsa. Selassie knew the
royal couple hated him and wanted to get rid of him, so to cut short their
plotting he made Gugsa the governor of the
northern province of
Begemeder, forcing him to leave the capital, where the empress lived.
For several years Gugsa played the loyal administrator. But Selassie
did not trust him: He knew that Gugsa and the empress were plotting re-
venge. As time passed and Gugsa made no move, the chances of a plot
only increased. Selassie knew what he had to do: draw Gugsa out, get
under his skin, and push him into action before he was ready.
For several years, a northern tribe, the Azebu Gallas, had been in vir»
tual rebellion against the throne, robbing and pillaging local villages and
refusing to pay taxes. Selassie had done nothing to stop them, letting them
grow stronger. Finally, in 1929, he ordered Ras Gugsa to lead an anny
against these
disobedient tfibesmen. Gugsa agreed, but inwardly he
seethed--he had no gmdge against the Azebu Gallas, and the demand that
he fight them hurt his pride. He could not disobey the order, but as he
worked to put together an army, he began to spread an ugly rumor«-that
Selassie was in cahoois with the pope, and planned to convert the country
to Roman Catholicism and make it a colony ofItaly. Gugsifs army swelled,
and some of the tribes from which its soldiers came secretly agreed to fight
Selassie. In March of 1930 an enormous force of 35,000 men began to
march, not on the Azebu Gallas but souih, toward the capital of Addis
Ababa. Made confident by his growing strength, Gugsa. now openly led a
holy war to depose Selassie and put the country back in the hands of true
Christians.
He did not see the trap that had been laid for him. Before Selassie had
ordered Gugsa to fight the Azebu Gallas, he had secured the support of the
Ethiopian church. And before the revolt got underway, he had bribed sev-
eral of Gugsa’s key allies not to show up for battle. As the rebel army
marched south, airplanes flew overhead dropping leaflets announcing that
the highest church officials had recognized Selassie as the tme Christian
leader of Ethiopia, and that they had excommunicated Gugsa for foment-
ing a civil war. These leaflets severely blunted the emotions behind the
holy crusade. And as battle loomed and the support that Gugsa’s allies had
promised him failed to show up, soldiers began to flee or defect.
When the battle came, the rebel army quicky collapsed. Refusing to
surrender, Ras Gugsa was killed in the fighting. The empress, distraught
over her l1usba.nd’s death, died a few days later. On April 80, Selassie is-
sued a formal proclamation announcing his new title: Emperor of Ethiopia.
Interpretation
Haile Selassie always saw several moves ahead. He knew that if he let Ras
Gugsa decide the time and place of the revolt, the danger would be much
greaier than if he forced Gngsa to act on Selassie’s terms. So he goaded him
into rebellion by offending his manly pride, asking him to fight people he
had no quarrel with on behalf of a man he hated. Thinking everything out
ahead, Selassie made sure that Gugsa’s rebellion would come to nothing,
and that he could use it to do away with his last two enemies.
This is the essence of the Law: When the waters are still, your oppo~
nents have the time and space to plot actions that they will initiate and com
trol. So stir the waters, force the fish to the surface, get them to act before
they are ready, steal the initiative. The best way to do this is to play on un-
controllable emotions—-pride, vanity, love, hate. Once the water is stirred
up, the little fish cannot help but rise to the bait. The angrier they become,
the less control they have, and finally they are caught in the whirlpool you
have made, and they drown.
A sovereign should never launch an army out ofanger.
a leader should never start a war out ofurrath.
Sun-zzu, fourth cmlury .li.C.
KEYS TO POWER
Angry people usually end up looking ridiculous, for their response seems
out of proportion to what occasioned it. They have taken things too seri-
ously, exaggerating the hurt or insult that has been done to them. They are
so sensitive to slight that it becomes comical how much they take person~
ally. More comical still is their belief that their outbursts signify power: The
truth is the opposite: Fetulance is not power, it is a sign of helplessness.
People may temporarily be cowed by your tantrums, but in the end they
lose respect for you. They also realize they can easily undermine a person
with so little selflcontrol.
The answer, however, is not to repress our angry or emotional re
sponses. For repression drains us of energy and pushes us into strange be-
havior. lnstead we have to change our perspective: We have to realize that
nothing in the social realm, and in the game of power, is personal.
Everyone is caught up in a chain of events that long predates the pre-
sent moment. Our anger often stems from problems in our childhood,
from the problems of our parents which stem from their own childhood, on
and on. Our anger also has roots in the many interactions with others, the
accumulated disappointments and heartaches that we have suffered. An in-
dividual will often appear as the instigator of our anger but it is much more
complicated, goes far beyond what that individual did to us. If a person ex-
plodes with anger at you (and it seems out ofproportion to what you did to
them), you must remind yourselfthat it is not exclusively directed at you-—
do not be so vain. The cause is much larger, goes way bad: in time, in-
volves dozens of prior hurts, and is actually not worth the bother to
understand. Instead of seeing it as a personal grudge, look at the emotional
outburst as a disguised power move, an attempt to control or punish you
cloaked in the form of hurt feelings and anger.
This shift of perspective will let you play the game of power with more
clarity and energy. Instead of overreasting, and becoming ensnared in pet)»
DlT(2!l llllill l'Rll’s'l'
Kirfyo. an officer ofrhe
Second’ rank, had a
brwher called the High
Priest Ryogaku, an
extremely bad-
lempered mam. Next to
his monastery grew :2
large nettle-tree which
octrafloned the ruck-
rmme people gave him,
the Nertletrze High
Priest. “Thar name is
outrageous,
” ruin? the
high priest, and cut
down the me. The
stump still being left.
people referred to him
now as the Slump High
Priest. More furious
than ever, Ryogaku had
the rmmp dug up and
thrown away, but this
left (1 big ditch. People
now called him the
Ditch High Priest.
ESSAYS IN xnrerzrsss.
Kr,NK<'>,
lA!’AN,
i«'<'n.=R1ne,>:m rir,.~2rmw
LAW 39
329
330
LAW 39
ple’s emotions, you will turn their loss of control to your advantage: You
keep your head while they are losing theirs.
During an important battle in the War of the Three Kingdoms, in the
third century A.D., advisers to the commander Ts’ao Ts’ao discovered docu»
ments showing that certain of his generals had conspired with the enemy,
and urged him to arrest and execute them. Instead he ordered the docu-
ments burned and the matter forgotten. At this critical moment in the bat-
tle, to get upset or demand justice would have reverberated against him:
An angry action would have called attention to the generals’ disloyalty,
which would have harmed the troops’ morale. justice could wait-he
would deal with the generals in time. Ts‘ao Ts’ao kept his head and made
the right decision.
Compare this to Napoleon's response to Talleyrand: Instead of taking
the conspiracy personally, the emperor should have played the game like
Ts’ao Ts’ao, carefully weighing the consequences of any action he took.
The more powerful response in the end would have been to ignore Tal~
leyr-and, or to bring the minister gradually back to his side and punish him
later.
Anger only cuts off our options, and the powerful cannot thrive with
out options. Once you train yourself not to take matters personally, and to
control your emotional responses, you will have placed yourself in a posi-
tion of tremendous power: Now you can play with the emotional responses
of other people. Stir the insecure into action by impugning their manhood,
and by dangling the prospect of an easy victory before their faces. Do as
Houdini did when challenged by the less successful escape artist Kleppini:
Reveal an apparent weakness (Houdini let Kleppini steal the combination
for a pair of cuffs) to hire your opponent into action. Then you can beat
him with ease. With the arrogant too you can appear weaker than you are,
taunting them into a rash action.
Sun Pin, commander of the armies of Ch’i and loyal disciple of Sun-
tzu, once led his troops against the armies of Wei, which outnumbered him
two to one. “Let us light a hundred thousand fires when our army enters
Wei,” suggested Sun Pin, “fifty thousand on the next day, and only thirty
thousand on the third.” On the third day the Wei general exclaimed, “I
knew the men of Ch’i were cowards, and after only three days more than
half of them have deserted!” So, leaving behind his slow-moving heavy in
fantry, the general decided to seize the moment and move swiftly on the
Ch’i camp with a lightly armed force. Sun Pin’s troops retreated, luring
Wei’s army into a narrow pass, where they ambushed and destroyed them.
With the Wei general dead and his forces decimated, Sun Pin now easily
defeated the rest of his army.
In the face of a hot—headed enemy, finally, an excellent response is no
response. Follow the Talleyrand tactic: Nothing is as infuriating as a man
who keeps his cool while others are losing theirs. If it will work to your ad-
vantage to unsettle people, affect the aristocratic, bored pose, neither
mocking nor triumphant but simply indifferent. This will light their fuse.
When they embarrass themselves with a temper tantrum, you will have
gained several victories, one of these being that in the face of their childish-
ness you have maintained your dignity and composure.
Image: The Pond of Fish. The waters
are clear and calm, and the fish are well below the surface.
Stir the waters and they emerge. Stir it some more and they get
angry, rising to the surface, biting whatever comes near-
including a freshly baited hook.
Authority: If your opponent is of a hot temper. try to irritate him. If he
is arrogant, try to encourage his egotism,
.
.
. One who is skilled at
making the enemy move does so by creating a situation according to
which the enemy will act; he entices the enemy with something he is
ccxtajn to take. He keeps the enemy on the move by holding out bait
and then attacks him with picked troops. (Sun—tzu, fourth century 15.0.)
REVERSAL
When playing with people’s emotions you have to be careful. Study the
enemy beforehand: Some fish are best left at the bottom of the pond.
The leaders of the city of Tyre, capital of ancient Phoenicia, felt confl-
dent they could withstand Alexander the Great, who had conquered the
Oiient but had not attacked their city, which stood well protected on the
water. They sent ambassadors to Alexander saying that although they
would recognize him as emperor they would not allow him or his forces to
enter Tyre. This of course enraged him, and he immediately mounted a
siege. For four months the city withstood him, and finally he decided that
the struggle was not worth it, and that he would come to terms with the
Tyrians. But they, feeling that they had already baited Alexander and got-
ten away with it, and confident that they could withstand him, refused to
LAW 39
331
332
E
LAW 39
negotiate«—-in. fact they killed his messengers,
This pushed Alexander over the edge. Now it did not matter to him
how long the siege lasted or how large an army it needed; he had the re-
sources, and would do whatever it took He remounted his assault so siren-
uously that he captured Tyre within days, burned it to the ground, and sold
its people into slavery.
You can bait the powerful and get them to commit and divide their
forces as Sun Pin did, but test the waters first. Find the gap in their strength.
If there is no gap--if they are impossibly strong——you have nothing to gain
and everything to lose by provoking them. Choose carefully whom you
bait, and never stir up the sharks.
Finally there are times when a we1l—timed burst of anger can do you
good, but your anger must be manufactured and under your control. Then
you can determine exactly how and on whom it will fall. Never stir up re
actions that will work against you in the long run. And use your thunder
bolts rarely, to make them the more intimidating and meaningful. Whether
purposefully staged or not, if your outbursts come too often, they will lose
their power.
LAW
40
DESPISE THE
FREE LUNCH
JUDGMENT
What is offemdforfiee is dangerous-—-—z‘t usually involves
either (1: trick or a hidden obligation. What has worth is
worth paying for. By paying your own way you stay
clear ofgmtitude, guilt, and deceit. It is also often wise
to pay lhefnll ;:1rice~—-there is nu cutting cmnm with ex-
cellence. Be lavish with your money and keep it cir-
culating, for generosity is a sign and a magnet for
[Iowa/.
333
|ll'l(l|-'.|)'H
«HI RI,
Many wmk-numlezl
per.x*mn‘ in cities hope
in dis(‘r)I»‘e1' properly
nmicr tho xurfare oflhe
mnh and m make
some profit from It. In
the Mugltrib there are
many Serber
“.rrudnzIs"‘ wlm art:
unable to rnakz’ a living
by natural ways and
means‘, They uppmach
we?!-to-zio peopfe with
papers that have mm
margins and rmzfain
rilhcr non/Amine’ writ»
ing or what they claim
to he (hr llanxlaticm of
u docu/new wmten by
the owner 0/lmricrl
a‘reo.mrtm', giving the‘
clue to the hiding plum
In this way. they try to
get their suszenurxce by
[persuuafing the well»
m-do] to semi rhem our
to dig and humfor
treasure. ()ccusimm[ly.
une of these tremmru
hunters displays
strange informatio.-1 or
some remarkable trick
afmagic will: which he
frmls people into
believing his’ ollzvr
1:/zzims‘. although,
in fact. he kmmhs
nothing nfmugic and
its pIor:¢'dure.\.
.
.
.
The tlzings that haw
been saitt about /mm-
sure.’ hunting] have no
scientffit: Imvis, nor are
they hosed upon
[factual] iufnrmamm.
Ir shrmld be realized
that although treasures
are found. this happens
rarely and by chance,
not by .\‘_v.s’lemau'<;
seurth.
.
.
. Those who
are dt?ll.i(lé'i’/l or afflizrled
by [how thmgs nun!
(aka refuge in Gm?
LAW 4 0
MONEY AND POWER
In the realm of power, everything must be judged by its cost, and every-
thing has a price. What is offered for free or at bargain rates often comes
with a. psychological pn’ce tag—-complicated feelings of obligation, com-
promises with quality, the insecurity those compromises bring, on and on.
The powerful learn early to protect their most valuable resources: indepen-
dence and room to maneuver. By paying the full price, they keep them-
selves free of dangerous entanglements and worries.
Being open and flexible with money also teaches the value of strategic
generosity, a variation on the old trick of “giving when you are about to
take.” By giving the appropriate gift, you put the recipient under obliga-
tion. Generosity softens people up——to be deceived. By gaining a reputa-
tion for liberality, you win people’: admiration while distracting them from
your power plays. By strategically spreading your wealth, you charm the
other courtiers, creating pleasure and making valuable allies.
Look at the masters of power——the Caesars, the Queen Elizabeths, the
Michelangelos, the Mecljcis: Not a miser among them. Even the great con
artists spend freely to swindle. Tight purse strings are unattractive——when
engaged in seduction, Casanova would give completely not only of himself
but of his wallet. The powerful understand that money is psychologically
charged, and that it is also a vessel of politeness and sociability. They make
the human side of money a weapon in their armory.
For everyone able to play with money, thousands more are locked in a
self-destructive refusal to use money creatively and strategically. These
types represent the opposite pole to the powerful, and you must learn to
recognize them-——either to avoid their poisonous natures or to turn their in-
flexibility to your advantage:
The Greedy Fish. The greedy fish take the human side out of money.
Cold and ruthless, they see only the lifeless balance sheet; viewing others
solely as either pawns or obstructions in their pursuit of wealth, they tram-
ple on people’s sentiments and alienate valuable allies. No one wanis to
work with the greedy fish, and over the years they end up isolated, which
ofien proves their undoing.
Greedy fish are the con a.rtist’s bread and butter: Lured by the bait of
easy money, they swallow the ruse hook, line, and sinker. They are easy to
deceive, for they spend so much time dealing with numbers (not with peer
ple) that they become blind to psychology, including their own. Either
avoid them before they exploit you or play on their greed to your gain.
The Bargain Demon. Powerful people judge everything by what it costs,
not just in money but in time, dignity, and peace of mind. And this is ex»
actly what Bargain Demons cannot do. Wasting valuable time digging for
bargains, they worry endlessly about what they could have gotten else
where for a little less. On top of that, the bargain item they do buy is often
shabby; perhaps it needs costly repairs, or will have to be replaced twice as
fast
as
a high-quality item. The costs of these pursuits-——not always in
money (though the price of a bargain is often deceptive) but in time and
peace of mind—discoura.ge normal people from undertaking them, but for
the Bargain Demon the bargain is an end in itself.
These types might seem to harm only themselves, but their attitudes
are contagious: Unless you resist them they will infect you with the inse~
cure feeling that you should have looked harder to find a cheaper price.
Don’t argue with them or try to change them. just mentally add up the
cost, in time and inner peace if not in hidden financial expense, of the irra-
tional pursuit of a bargain.
The Sadist. Financial sadists play vicious power games with money as a
way of asserting their power. They might, for example, make you wait for
money that is owed you, promising you that the check is in the mail. Or if
they hire you to work for them, they meddle in every aspect of the job,
haggling and giving you ulcers. Sadists seem to think that paying for some
thing gives them the right to torture and abuse the seller. They have no
sense of the couriier element in money. If you are unlucky enough to get
involved with this type, accepting a financial loss may be better in the long
run than getting entangled in their destructive power games.
The Indiscriminate Giver. Generosity has a definite function in power:
It attracts people, softens them up, makes allies out of them. But it has to be
used strategically, with a. definite end in mind. Indiscriminate Givers, on
the other hand, are generous because they want to be loved and admired
by all. And their generosity is so indiscriminate and needy that it may not
have the desired effect: Ifthey give to one and all. why should the recipient
feel special? Attractive as it may seem to make an Indiscriminate Giver
your mark, in any involvement with this type you will often feel burdened
by their insatiable emotional needs.
TRANSGRESSIONS OF THE LAW
Transgression I
After Francisco Pizarro conquered Peru, in 1532, gold from the Incan Em-
pire began to pour into Spain, and Spaniards of all classes started dreaming
of the instant riches to be had in the New World. The story soon spread of
an Indian chief to the east of Peru who once each year would ritually cover
himself in gold dust and dive into a lake. Soon word of mouth transformed
El Damrio, the “Golden Man,” into an empire called El Dorado, wealthier
than the Incan, where the streets were paved and the buildings inlaid with
gold. This elaboration of the story did not seem implausible, for surely a
chief who could afiord to waste gold dust in a lake must rule a golden em-
pire. Soon Spaniards were searching for El Dorado all over northern South
America.
from their aizubility it}
make a Iiviizg and their
laziness’ in this impact.
They should not
occupy IheIn.wIves' with
abSuI'dl'lir:.s' and untrue
vtnrirs.
THE MUDADDIMAH.
hm KHAi,i>17~N.
1332-1406
Tiili Ml2~.F.R
A mixer, (0 make sun:
ofllis properly, S0111 all
(ha! he had and
converted it into a great
lump ofgvld, which he
hill in a hole in the
ground, and went
cominuully [(1 viii: and
inspect it. This tamed
the curiosity of one of
his workmen, who,
suxpecting that there
was a treasure, when
his marreriv back was
Iurncd, wan! to the
spot, and rrole it away.
When the mixer
returned and formal Jim
place empty. he wept
and tore his hair. But a
mzighbor who saw him
in this extravagant
grief: and learned the
cause ofil, raid: “Frrl
rhymlfno longer, but
lake or stone and put ii
in the same place. and
think that it is your
lump ofgolri;/"or. as
you never meant to use
it, the one will do _\'au
as much good as the
other."
The worth of money is‘
no! in its pnsscrsiorz,
but in its use.
FABI es.
/\I§S0l’.
SIXTH ci:.\n'uRv s.c.
LAW 4 0
335
336
There is a popular
saving in Japan that
goer “Tada yori takai
mono wa nai." mean-
ing: "Nothing is’ more
costly than xnmetliing
given fret" of charge.
"
TH1: UNSPOKEN wmr.
Ml(‘H|HlR0
lvlA'l'SHM()T().
1988
MU'\F.Y
Yusuf lbn Jafar el-
Altlutli user! to lake
sums of money, some-
times very large ones,
from those who canto
to study with him.
A distinguished legalist
visiting him once said:
“I am enchanted and
impressed by your
teachings, and I am
sure that you are
directing your disciples
in a proper munner.
But it is not in accor-
dance with tradition to
take money for knowl-
edge. Besides, the
action is open to rinsin-
terprelatiun.
"
El-Amudi said: “I have
never sold any knowl-
edge. Then: is no
money on earth suffi-
cient to pay for it. As
/or misinterpretation,
the abstaining from
taking money will not
prevent it, for it will
find some other object.
Rather should you
know that a man who
takes money may be
greedy for money, or
he may not. But a man
who takes nothing at
all is under the gravest
LAW 40
In February of 1541, the largest expedition yet in this venture, led by
Piza.rr0’s brother Gonzalo, left Quito, in Ecuador. Resplendent in their ar-
mors and colorful silks, 340 Spaniards headed east, along with 4,000 Indi-
ans to carry supplies and serve as scouts, 4,000 swine, dozens of llamas,
and close to 1,000 dogs. But the expedition was soon hit by torrential rain,
which rotted its gear and spoiled its food. Meanwhile, as Gonzalo Pizarro
questioned the Indians they met along the way, those who seemed to be
withholding information, or who had not even heard of the fabulous king-
dom, he would torture and feed to the dogs. Word of the Spaniards’ mur-
derousness spread quickly among the Indians, who realized that the only
way to avoid Gonzalds wrath was to make up stories about El Dorado
and send him as far away as possible. As Gonzalo and his men followed
the leads the Indians gave them, then, they were only led farther into deep
jungle.
The explorers’ spirits sagged. Their uniforms had long since shredded;
their armor rusted and they threw it away; their shoes were torn to pieces,
forcing them to walk barefoot; the Indian slaves they had set out with had
either died or deserted them; they had eaten not only the svsnne but the
hunting dogs and llamas. They lived on roots and fruit. Realizing that they
could not continue this way, Pizarro decided to risk river travel, and
a
barge was built out of rotting wood. But the journey down the treacherous
Napo River proved no easier. Setting up camp on the n‘ver’s edge, Gonzalo
sent scouts ahead on the barge to find Indian settlements with food. He
waited and waited for the scouts to return, only to find out they had de-
cided to desert the expedition and continue down the river on their own.
The rain continued without end. Gonzalo’s men forgot about El Do-
rado; they wanted only to return to Quito. Finally, in August of 1542, a lit-
tle over a hundred men, from an expedition originally numbering in the
thousands, managed to find their way back. To the residents of Quito they
seemed to have emerged from hell itself, wrapped in tatters and skins, their
bodies covered in sores, and so emaciated as to be unrecognizable. For
over a year and a half they had marched in an enormous circle, two thou-
sand miles by foot. The vast sums of money invested in the expedition had
yielded nothing-—no sign of El Dorado and no sign of gold.
interpretation
Even after Gonzalo Pizano’s disaster, the Spaniards launched expedition
after expedition in Search of El Dorado. And like Pizarro the conquistadors
would burn and loot villages, torture Indians, endure unimaginable hard-
ships, and get no closer to gold. The money they spent on such expeditions
cannot be calculated; yet despite the futility of the search, the lure of the
fantasy endured.
Not only did the search for El Dorado cost millions of lives——both In»
dian and Spanish—it helped bring the ruin of the Spanish empire. Gold be-
came Spain’s obsession. The gold that did find its way back to Spain——and
a lot clid~—was reinvested in more expeditions, or in the purchase of luxu-
ries, rather than in agriculture or any other productive endeavor. Whole
Spanish towns were depopulated as their menfolk left to hunt gold. Farms
fell into min, and the army had no recruits for its European wars. By the
end of the seventeenth century, the entire country had shrunk by more
than half of its population; the city of Madrid had gone from a population
of 400,000 to 150,000. With diminishing returns from its efforts over so
many years, Spain fell into a decline from which it never recovered.
Power requires selfidiscipline. The prospect of wealth, particularly
easy, sudden wealth, plays havoc with the emotions. The suddenly rich be
lieve that more is always possible. The free lunch, the money that will fall
into your lap, is just around the corner.
In this delusion the greedy neglect everything power really depends
on: self-control, the goodwill of others, and so on. Understand: With one
exception—death--no lasting change in fortune comes quickly. Sudden
wealth rarely lasts, for it is built on nothing solid. Never let lust for money
lure you out of the protective and enduring fortress of real power. Make
power your goal and money will find its way to you. Leave El Dorado for
suckers and fools.
Transgression ll
In the early eighteenth century, no one stood higher in English society
than the Duke and Duchess of Marlborough. The duke, having led sue»
cessful campaigns against the French, was considered Europe’s premier
general and strategist. And his wife, the duchess, after much maneuvering,
had established herself as the favorite of Queen Anne, who became ruler
of England in 1702. In 1704 the duke’s triumph at the Battle of Blenheim
made him the toast of England, and to honor him the queen awarded him
a large plot of land in the town of Woodstock, and the funds to create a
great palace there. Calling his planned home the Palace of Blenheim, the
duke chose as his architect the young john Vanbrugh, a kind of Renais-
sance man who wrote plays as well as designed buildings. And so
con—
struction began, in the summer of 1705, with much fanfare and great
hopes.
Vanbrugh had a dramatist’s sense of architecture. His palace was to be
a monument to Mar1borough’s brilliance and power, and was to include
artificial lakes, enormous bridges, elaborate gardens, and other fantastical
touches. From day one, however, the duchess could not be pleased: She
thought Vanbrugh was wasting money on yet another stand of trees; she
wanted the palace finished as soon as possible. The duchess tortured Van~
brugh and his workmen on every detail. She was consumed with petty
matters; although the government was paying for Blenheim, she counted
every penny. Eventually her grumbling, about Blenheim and other things
too, created an irreparable rift between her and Queen Anne, who, in 1711,
dismissed her from the court, ordering her to vacate her apartments at the
royal palace. When the duchess left (fuming over the loss of her position,
and also of her royal salary), she emptied the apartment of every fixture
down to the brass doorknobs.
Over the next ten years, work on Blenheim would stop and start, as
the funds became harder to procure from the government. The duchess
suspicion of rubbing
the disciple of his soul.
People who say, ’I take
Imtliing,’ may be found
lo take away the vol!»
tion. of their victim.
"
Tl-Hi I)I<RMlS Pl{()Bli,
IDRIES SHAH,
I970
'I‘llli W/\,’\ \Xll()
l.U\’l‘\l) 5/lll\l§\ l‘ll7["l‘l7.ll
TIMTV l.Il"lz
In ancient tiinzrs tlmre
was an old wondculter
who wont to the moun-
Iuin (IlII1()SY ewry day
to cm wood.
It wL1.s‘.\'1/zirl that this old
man was a miser who
hoarderl his silver until
it changed to gold. and
that llf! carter/I rnorefor
gold than anything «Ire
in all the world.
One day (1 wilderrw5.\‘
tiger sprang or him and
Ilzough he run he multl
not escape, and the
tiger carried him 0/fin
its mouth.
T/m wor>rl¢'urtz-,r's mu.
Saw lziyfatheris’ (lunger,
and ran to save him if
pox.s'zl)le. He can rial a
long kmfe, and as he
(‘OIll(l run fu.s'Irr than
the tiger. who had 11
man 442 mrry, he won
overtook them.
Hr"; father was not
nmrh hurt, /or the Iiger
held him by his clothes;
When the old wm)1l<'uI—
ter raw lm you about In
rmb the tiger he ('allr2(1
out m great alarm:
"Do not spoil the
/igcriv skin! Do not
.\'[I0il the rigmfr skin! If
you can kill him with-
out cutting holes in his
LAW 40
337
skin We can gel many
pieces ofsilver for it
Kill him, but do nu! ma!
his body.
While the mm was
listening (0 Iiir fallizeris‘
imrrucrtiorw the tiger
.mr1d(mly dmvhed 0/]
into the forest, carrying
the old mun where the
.\“(m could not reach
him, (mil he was soon
killed.
“Cnwr-‘st; mete."
vmuous i-ABLEX
FROM V/\Kl()l.S PLACES.
Dome Di PRl.\vlr\. L0,,
E963
TIIIC l~"I(ll€V HI‘
\«1H.\|
is
'\.\|) I’ll‘\Itr\UlI
It is wrimm in the
hl.S‘I()fi¢.\' uf the
proplzcxs iizal Moses
was sent to Plturuoh
with many nziraciex,
wonders and iionorsz
Now the daily ration
for Plumzm'z 3' rafrle was
4,000 sheep. 400 rows,
200 annrlr. am? (1
mrmsponding amount
0/‘rlzic/cm.\‘. firk. hover‘
(1g<’.V‘.fI'i(‘([ m(:at.\‘,
.‘1'W('L"I.)‘, and other
I/tings. All the people of
lf,i,'_Vpl and all his army
user! to eat at his (able
every day. For 400
yerlrs lw hail rt/ainurd
divinity and newrr
L‘eu.\‘ad providing this‘
food.
When Mtmw praycd.
.w1}'izxg. “O Lorri.
zlesiroy I’/zararziz,
" Goo‘
tltimverezl his prayer
tmrl mid. “I mail
a‘€_s'tr¢)y him in warez.
and I shall bexmw ail
his wealth am! that of
his soldiers‘ on you and
your prllp/c’,\‘.
" Szrwrul
33%‘
LAW 4 o
thought Vanbrugh was out to ruin her. She quibbled over every carload of
stone and bushel of lime, counted every extra yard of iron railing or foot of
wainscot, hurling abuse at the wasteful workmen, contractors, and survey-
ors. Marlborough, old and weaiy, wanted nothing more than to settle into
the palace in his last years, but the project became bogged down in
a
swamp of litigation, the workmen suing the duchess for wages, the duchess
suing the architect right back. In the midst of this interminable wrangling,
the duke died. He had never spent a night in his beloved Blenheim.
After Ma.rlborough’s death, it became clear that he had a vast estate,
worth over £2 million—-more than enough to pay for finishing the palace.
But the duchess would not relent: She held back Vanbrugh’s wages as well
as the workmerfs, and finally had the architect dismissed. The man who
took his place finished Blenheim in a few years, following Vanbruglfs de-
signs to the letter. Vanbrugh died in 1726, locked out of the palace by the
duchess, unable to set foot in his greatest creation. Foreshadowing the ro-
mantic movement, Blenheim had started a whole new trend in architec-
ture, but had given its creator a twenty—year nightmare.
Interpretation
For the Duchess of Marlborough, money was a way to play sadistic power
games. She saw the loss of money as a symbolic loss of power. With Van-
brugh her contortions went deeper still: He was a great artist, and she en~
vied his power to create, to attain a fame outside her reach. She may not
have had his gifts, but she did have the money to torture and abuse him
over the pettiest details—to ruin his life.
This kind of sadism, however, bears an awful price. It made construe»
tion that should have lasted ten years take twenty. It poisoned many a rela-
tionship, alienated the duchess from the court. deeply pained the duke
(who wanted only to live peacefully in Blenheim), created endless lawsuits,
and took years off Vanbruglfs life. Finally, too, posterity had the last word:
Vanbrugh is recognized as a genius while the duchess is forever remem«
bered for her consummate cheapness.
The powerful must have grandeur of spirit»-they can never reveal any
petfiness. And money is the most visible arena in which to display either
grandeur or pettiness. Best spend freely, then, and create a reputation for
generosity, which in the end will pay great dividends. Never let financial
details blind you to the bigger picture of how people perceive you. Their
resentment will cost you in the long run. And if you want to meddle in the
work of creative people under your hire, at least pay them well. Your
money will buy their submission better than your displays of power.
OBSERVANCES OF THE LAW
Observance I
Pietro Aretino, son of a lowly shoemaker, had catapulted himself into fame
as a writer of biting satires. But like every Renaissance artist, he needed to
find a patron who would give him a comfortable lifestyle while not inter
fering with his work. In 1528 Aretino decided to attempt a new strategy in
the patronage game. Leaving Rome, he established himself in Venice,
where few had heard of him. He had a fair amount of money he had man-
aged to save, but little else. Soon after he moved into his new home, how-
ever, he flirew open its doors to rich and poor, regaling them with
banquets and amusements. He befriended each and every gondolier, tip-
ping them royally. In the streets, he spread his money liberally, giving it
away to beggars, orphans, Washerwomen. Among the city’s commoners,
word quickly spread that Aretino was more than just a great writer, he was
a man of power—-a kind of lord.
Artists and men of influence soon began to frequent Areu‘no’s house.
Within a few years he made himself a celebrity; no visiting dignitary would
think of leaving Venice without paying him a call. His generosity had cost
him most of his savings, but had bought him influence and a good name—
a cornerstone in the foundation of power. Since in Renaissance Italy as
elsewhere the ability to spend freely was the privilege of the rich, the arisv
tocracy thought Aretino had to be
a man of influence, since he spent
money like one. And since the influence of a man of influence is worth
buying, Aretino became the recipient of all sorts of gifts and moneys.
Dukes and duchesses, wealthy merchants, and popes and princes com-
peted to gain his favor, and showered him with all kinds of presents.
Aretino’s spending habits, of course, were strategic, and the strategy
worked like a charm. But for real money and comfort he needed a great
patron’s bottomless pockets. Having surveyed the possibilities, he eventu-
ally set his sights on the extremely wealthy Marquis of Mantua, and wrote
an epic poem that he dedicated to the marquis. This was a common prac-
tice of writers looking for patronage: In exchange for a dedication they
would get a small stipend, enough to write yet another poem, so that they
spent their lives in a kind of constant servility. Aretino, however, wanted
power, not a measly wage. He might dedicate a poem to the marquis, but
he would offer it to him as a gift, implying by doing so that he was not a
hired hack looking for a stipend but that he and the marquis were equals.
Aret.ino’s gift-giving did not stop there: As a close friend of two of
Venice’s greatest artists, the sculptor Jacopo Sansovino and the painter
Titian, he convinced these men to participate in his gift-giving scheme.
Aretino had studied the marquis before going to work on him, and knew
his taste inside and out; he was able to advise Sansovirio and Titian what
subject matter would please the marquis most. When he then sent a Sanso-
vino sculpture and a Titian painting to the marquis as gifts from all three of
them, the man was beside himself with joy.
Over the next few months, Aretino sent other gifts——swords, saddles,
the glass that was a Venetian specialty, things he knew the marquis prized.
Soon he, Titian, and Sansovino began to receive gifts from the marquis in
return. And the strategy went further: When the son-in—law of a friend of
Aretino’s found himself in jail in Mantua, Aretino was able to get the mar-
quis to arrange his release. Aretinds friend, a wealthy merchant, was a
man of great influence in Venice; by turning the goodwill he had built up
your: pussrrrl by after
{his promlxe, and
Pharaoh, (loomed 10
min, rrnntinmrrl to live
in all his I?1agIl|fi(‘(!fl(,‘f’.
Mums’ u-as impulienl
for God to destroy
Plmruolz quickly, and
he could nor endure to
wail any longer. So he
V/listed for forty (lays
and went to Mount
Sinai, and in lzir
communing with god
he said, "0 Lord, Thou
didrr pVI)mtS£‘ (hut
Tlwu wouldst rlesrrov
Pharaoh, and Still he
has formkm none of
his hlrzsphenzies and
prr',t('n.vim1x. So when
Wlll Thou dc.\'lroy
him?"
A voice came from The
Truth xnyirig, “0
Moses, you wam Me to
destroy Pharaoh as
quickly as possilzle. but
a thousand times a
rlwuscmd of My
servants want Mt: never
(0 do so, b€(’IIIlSt' they
partake nflzis hmmty
and enjoy tranquillity
umlcr his rule. By My
power I swear that as
long as he provides
abunrlam‘ food and
comfort for My crea-
tures, I shall not
destroy him
"
Moses said, "Then
when will Thy promixc
be fulfilled?" God mid,
“My promise will be
fulfilled wlmn he with-
holds lzis provisirm
from My creulzares, If
ever he begins Io larsrlrz
his bounty. lmow that
his hour is drawing
near.
"
It clmnrezl than one day
Plmmoh sazd to
Ihzmnzn, "Moses has
gmherell the Szms of
l.S'fl1l’.l1lb()Ill him and is
causing us rlixquiel. ll/I’
know nor what will be
LAW 40
339
the issue trfhls affurr
with us. We must keep
our stores full [eat at
any time we be without
resources. 50 we must
halve our daily ration:
and keep the saving in
reserve.
" He deducted
2,000 sheep, 200 cows‘,
and ct I00 camels, and
sintilarly every two or
three days reduced the
ration. Moses then
know that the promise
of The Truth was near
tofulfillntenz. for exces-
sive economy is Q sign
ofdecline and .1 bad
omen. The matters of
tradition say that on
rite day when Pharaoh
was drowned only two
ewes had been killed in
his kitchen.
Nothittg is better I/um
generosity.
.
.
. Ifa man
is rich and desires,
withouf a royal charter;
to act like a lord; ifize
wants men to humble
tiwrrwllvrrs before him,
10 revere him and call
him lord and prince,
then tell him every day
to spread a table with
vicluals. All those who
have acquired renown
in the world, have
gained it mainly
through hospitality,
while the miscrly and
twttriczous are despised
in both worlds,
THE BOOK or
GOVER.‘-‘MEN’? on
RULES Hm KINGS.
NtzAM AL—MuLK,
l:LEVI:N'l‘H (‘ENIURY
340
LAW 40
with the marquis to use, Aretino had now bought this man’s indebtedness,
too, and he in turn would help Aretino when he could. The circle of influ-
ence was growing wider. Time and again, Aretino was able to cash in on
the immense political power of the marquis, who also helped him in his
many court romances.
Eventually, however, the relationship became strained,
as Aretino
came to feel that the marquis should have requited his generosity better.
But he would not lower himself to begging or whining: Since the exchange
of gifts between the two men had made them equals, it would not seem
right to bring up money. He simply withdrew from the marquis’s circle and
hunted for other wealthy prey, settling first on the French king Francis,
then the Medicis, the Duke of Urbino, Emperor Charles V, and more. In
the end, having many patrons meant he did not have to bow to any of
them, and his power seemed comparable to that of a great lord.
Interpretation
Aretino understood two fundamental properties of money: First, that it has
to circulate to bring power. What money should buy is not lifeless objects
but power over people. By keeping money in constant circulation, Aretino
bought an ever—expanding circle of influence that in the end more than
compensated him for his expenses.
Second, Aretino understood the key property of the gift. To give a gift
is to imply that you and the recipient are equals at the very least, or that
you are the recipient’s superior. A gift also involves an indebtedness or
obligation; when friends, for instance, offer you something for free, you
can be sure they expect something in return, and that to get it they are
making you feel indebted. (The mechanism may or may not be entirely
conscious on their paxt, but this is how it works.)
Aretino avoided such encumbrances on his freedom. Instead of acting
like a menial who expects the powerful to pay his way in life, he turned the
whole dynamic around; instead of being indebted to the powerful, he
made the powerful indebted to him. This was the point of his gift-giving, a
ladder that carried him to the highest social levels. By the end of his life he
had become the most famous writer in Europe.
Understand: Money may determine power relationships, but those re-
lationships need not depend on the amount of money you have; they also
depend on the way you use it Powerful people give freely, buying influ-
ence rather them things. If you accept the inferior position because you
have no fortune yet, you may find yourself in it forever. Play the trick that
Aretino played on Ita.ly’s aristocracy: Imagine yourself an equal. Play the
lord, give freely, open your doors, circulate your money, and create the fa-
cade of power through an alchemy that transforms money into influence.
Observance II
Soon after Baron James Rothschild made his fortune in Paris in the early
1820s, he faced his most intractable problem: How could ajew and 3. Ger
man, a total outsider to French society, win the respect of the xenophobic
French upper classes? Rothschild was a man who understood power--—he
knew that his fortune would bring him status, but that if he remained so
cially alienated neither his status nor his fortune would last. So he looked at
the society of the time and asked what would win their hearts.
Charity? The French couldn’t care less. Political influence? He already
had that, and if anything it only made people more suspicious of him. The
one weak spot, he decided, was boredom. In the period of the restoration
of the monarchy, the French upper classes were bored. So Rothschild
began to spend astounding sums of money on entertaining them. He hired
the best architects in France to design his gardens and ballroom; he hired
Marie-Antoine Caréme, the most celebrated French chef, to prepare the
most lavish parties Paris had ever witnessed; no Frenchman could resist,
even if the parties were given by
a German Jew. Rothschild’s weekly
soirées began to attract bigger and bigger numbers. Over the next few
years he won the only thing that would secure an outsider’s power: social
acceptance.
Interpretation
Strategic generosity is always a great weapon in building a support base,
particularly for the outsider. But the Baron de Rothschild was cleverer still:
He knew it was his money that had created the barrier between him and
the French, making him look ugly and untrustworthy. The best way to
overcome this was literally to waste huge sums, a gesture to show he valued
French culture and society over money. What Rothschild did resembled
die famous potlatch feasts of the American Northwest: By periodically de-
stroying its wealth in a giant orgy of festivals and bonfires, an Indian tribe
would symbolize its power over other tribes. The base of its power was not
money but its ability to spend, and its confidence in a superiority that
would restore to it all that the potlatch had destroyed.
In the end, the baron’s soirées reflected his desire to mingle notjust in
France’s business world but in its society. By wasting money on his pet-
latches, he hoped to demonstrate that his power went beyond money into
the more precious realm of culture. Rothschild may have won social accep-
tance by spending money, but the support base he gained was one that
money alone could not buy. To secure his fortune he had to “waste” it. That
is strategic generosity in a nutshell——the ability to be flexible with your
wealth, putting it to work, not to buy objects, but to win people’s hearts.
Observance III
The Medicis of Renaissance Florence had built their immense power on
the fortune they had made in banking. But in Florence, centuries—old re-
public that it was, the idea that money bought power went against all the
city’s proud democratic Values. Cosimo de’ Medici, the first of the family to
gain great fame, worked around this by keeping a low profile. He never
flaunted his wealth. But by the time his grandson Lorenzo came of age, in
the 1470s, the family’s wealth was too large, and their influence we notice-
able, to be disguised any longer.
Lorenzo solved the problem in his own way by developing the strat-
egy of distraction that has served people of wealth ever since: He became
TH1-LI-l,'\MF-(1()l.()Hl~‘,l)
(ILOAK
During the Campaign
of Chmbyses in Egypt,
a great many Greeks
visited that country for
Oil? VCUSUU 07 another:
some, as was to be
expected, for (rude,
some to serve in the
army, others, no doubt,
out of mere curiosity, to
see what they could see.
Amongst the sighlseers
was Aeacer '5 son Sylv-
son, [lie exiled brother
of Polycralm of Samos.
While he was in Egypt,
Sylosun hat! my extra-
onlinary stroke ofluck:
he was hanging about
the streets of Memphis
rimrscd in u flame-
rolored Cloak, when
Darius, who at (hat
time was a member of
Cambyxes '3 guard and
not yer of any particu-
lar importancri,
happened to catch
sight ofhim and, seized
with a sudden longing
to p0.rse.\*s the cloak,
came up to Syloson
and made him an offer
for It.
His extreme anxiety to
get it way obvious
enough to Syloson,
who was inspired to
say: “I am not sellmg
this for any money, but
ifyou must have it, I
will give it 10 youfor
free.
" Darius thereupon
thanked him warmly
and took it. Syloron at
the moment merely
thought he had lost it
by his fr>olis’h good
nature,‘ then came the
death of Camhyxes and
the revolt of the seven
against the Magus, and
Darius ascended the
throne. Sylavon now
LAW 40
347
hud the mews that the
man whose n*quN,\'t for
lll£’fltU7l£"-l.‘t1lU/t:‘(l cloak
he had formerly grati-
fied in Egypt had
become king ofl’ar.s‘t'a.
Ile hutrietl tr) Sum. mt
down at the entrance of
the royal palttte, and
claimed to be incltttled
in the uflivial list ofther
kitigk henojatrtorx‘ The
smtry on guard
rqmrtcri his claim to
Darius, who asked in
surprise who the man
might be. “For surely,
"
he said. “as lhave so
mntntly trtmtc to tha
thmne, there rtmrtnt he
(1rI_V Greek I0 whom I
am imlelmzd for t!
service. lltmlly any of
them have been here
yet. and I certainly
canrtot remember
owing anytltirtg to a
Greek. But bring him
in all the Xtlltlt’, that I
may know what ho
matrix by thtv rlaim.
"
The guard escorted
Syluson into the royal
[)re.s'ence, and when the
interpreters asked him
who he was and what
he had dorm to justify
the statetrtertt that he
was the king is’ lJé'V1L’ft!C-
tor, he reminder!
Darittr nfthe story of
the cloak, and said that
he was the man who
had given it him.
“Sir,
" exclaimed
I)ariu.r, “you are the
nmst getmroax of tmw;
for while I was still (1
person ofrm power or
t.‘u’nS€¢]ttenL'e you gate
me u prt3\‘e‘!1I—.S‘I11ttll
indeed. but deserving
than tn‘ much gratitude
from me as would the
most splemlnl ufgtfts
today. 1 will give you in
return IVIOH’ xilwr and
gold than you can
mum, that you may
342
LAW 40
the most illustrious patron of the arts that history has ever known. Not only
did he spend lavishly on paintings, he created Italy’s finest apprentice
schools for young artists. It was in one of these schools that the young
Michelangelo first caught the attention of Lorenzo, who invited the artist to
come and live in his house. He did the same with Leonardo da Vinci. Once
under his wing, Michelangelo and Leonardo requited his generosity by be»
coming loyal artists in his stable.
Whenever Lorenzo faned an enemy, he would wield the weapon of
patronage. When Pisa, Florence’s traditional enemy, threatened to rebel
against it in 1472, Lorenzo placated its people by pouring money into its
university, which had once been its pride and joy but had long ago lost its
luster. The Pisans had no defense against this insidious maneuver, which si-
multaneously fed their love of culture and blunted their desire for battle.
Interpretation
Lorenzo undoubtedly loved the arts, but his patronage of artists had a prac-
tical function as well, of which he was keenly aware. In Florence at the
time, banking was perhaps the least admired way of making money, and
was certainly not a respected source of power. The arts were at the other
pole, the pole of qua.si—religious transcendence. By spending on the arts,
Lorenzo diluted people’s opinions of the ugly source of his wealth, disguis-
ing himself in nobility. There is no better use of strategic generosity than
that of distracting attention from an unsavory reality and wrapping oneself
in the mantle of art or religion.
Observance IV
Louis XIV had an eagle eye for the strategic power of money. When he
came to the throne, the powerful nobility had recently proven a thump in
the monarchy’s side, and seethed with rebelliousness. So he impoverished
these aristocrats by making them spend enormous sums on maintaining
their position in the court. Making them dependent on royal largesse for
their livelihood, he had them in his claws.
Next Louis brought the nobles to their knees with strategic generosity.
It would work like this: Vtlhenever he noticed a stubborn courtier whose in-
fluence he needed to gain, or whose troublemaking he needed to squelch,
he would use his vast wealth to soften the soil. First he would ignore his vic-
tim, making the man anxious. Then the man would suddenly find that his
son had been given a well»paid post, or that funds had been spent liberally
in his home region, or that he had been given a painting he had long cov-
eted. Presents would flow from Louis’s hands. Finally, weeks or months
later, Louis would ask for the favor he had needed all along. A man who
had once vowed to do anything to stop the king would find he had lost the
desire to fight. A straightforward bribe would have made him rebellious;
this was far more insidious. Facing hardened earth in which nothing could
take root, Louis loosened the soil before he planted his seeds.
Interpretation
Louis understood that there is a. deep-rooted emotional element in our atti-
tude to money, an element going back to childhood. When we are chil-
dren, all kinds of complicated feelings about our parents center around
gifts; we see the giving of a
as a Sign of love and approval. And that
emotional element never goes away. The recipients of gifts, financial or
otherwise, are suddenly as vulnerable as children, especially when the
comes from someone in authority. They cannot help opening up; their will
is loosened, as Louis loosened the soil.
To succeed best, the gift should come out of the blue. It should be re
markable for the fact that a
like it has never been given before, or for
being preceded by a cold shoulder from the giver. The more often you give
to particular people, the blunter this weapon becomes. If they don’t take
your gifts for granted, becoming monsters of ingratitude, they will resent
what appears to be charity. The sudden, unexpected, onetime gift will not
spoil your children; it will keep them under your thumb.
Observance V
The antique dealer Fushimiya, who lived in the city of Edo (former name
for Tokyo) in the seventeenth century, once made a stop at a village tea~
house. After enjoying a cup of tea, he spent several minutes scrutinizing the
cup, which he eventually paid for and took away with him. A local artisan,
watching this, waited until Fushimiya left the shop, then approached the old
woman who owned the teahouse and asked her who this man was. She told
him it was japan’s most famous connoisseur, antique dealer to the lord of
Izurno. The artisan ran out of the shop, caught up with Fushimiya, and
begged him to sell him the cup, which must clearly be valuable ifFushimiya
judged it so. Fushimiya laughed heartily: “It’s just an ordinary cup of Bizen
ware,” he explained, “and it is not valuable at all. The reason I was looking
at it was that the steam seemed to hang about it strangely and I wondered if
there wasn’t a leak somewhere.” (Devotees of the Tea Ceremony were in-
terested in any odd or accidental beauty in nature.) Since the artisan still
seemed so excited about it, Fushimiya gave him the cup for free.
The artisan took the cup around, trying to find an expert who would
appraise it at a high price, but since all of them recognized it as an ordinary
teacup he got nowhere. Soon he was neglecting his own business, thinking
only of the cup and the fortune it could bring. Finally he went to Edo to
talk to Fushimiya at his shop. There the dealer, realizing that he had inad~
vertently caused this man pain by making him believe the cup had great
worth, paid him 100 ryo (gold pieces) for the cup as a kindness. The cup
was indeed mediocre, but he wanted to rid the artisan of his obsession,
while also allowing him to feel that his effort had not been wasted. The ar-
tisan thanked him and went on his way.
Soon word spread of Fushimiya’s purchase of the teacup. Every dealer
injapan clamored for him to sell it, since a cup he had bought for 100 ryo
must be worth much more. He tried to explain the circumstances in which
he had bought the cup, but the dealers could not be dissuaded. Fushimiya
finally relented and put the cup up for sale.
During the auction, two buyers simultaneously bid 200 ryo for the
teacup, and then began to fight over who had bid first. Their fighting
never regret that you
omit,’ did 11 favor to
I)ariu.s' the son of
Hy,s\Irt.\'pes.
'’ "My [or/I,
"'
replied Sylosmz, “do
not give my gold or
Silver. hut recover
Sizmrzs for me. my
native i.s‘((Iml, whit‘/1
now .s'inct' Oraetes
killed my brother Poly
crates /iv in the hamiv
ofunc 0/our serwmlsx
Let Stmzos be your gff!
to me -1211! In! no man
in the island he kitlni
or enslaven‘.
"
Darius wnsenled to
Syloxorz is request, and
dispatched a form-
url/lur the command
of()tune.>‘, one 0/r/te
seven, with orders to do
ex/eryrhtng that Sy/molt
had axkzui.
Tm: HISIORIES.
l'lr.ll(!!)n’l‘(.'S.
rrwm PFNTURY ac.
Money is newr spent an
.\'o Imtch mlwmlage us
when you have been
cheated out of it; for at
one stroke you have
pllrclm rerl prurlerlve.
Al{‘l'HL'lt
$(‘Il0PENllAl'F.R.
1788-1860
LAW 40
343
A (;Il<"|‘ OF I’ ISII
Kmzgsyi Hsiu, prmnter
ofLtt, was fond offish.
Therefore, people in
the whole murttry
consrivntiuttsly bougltt
fivh. which they
presented to trim.
However, Kurtg-_vt'
would not accept the
preterm‘. Agaimt such a
step his younger
brother remon5mztt’a'
with him and said:
"You !ilce_/isft, irldectl.
Why don ‘t you accept
the ]7rK.Y(’.ttf affixh?
" In
reply, he said: “I! is
solely bccttuse I like
fivlt that I wottltl not
accept t/ze/ixh they
gave me.
Imleetl, i/'1 accept the
fish, I will he platted
under an nizligarion m
tltern. ()m‘c pltzctett‘
under rm ohltgatirm It)
them, I will some time
have tr) bend the law. If
I bwzd 1451.’ law, I will be
dz'.s‘!nis'Sc‘tI from the
premierxixip. A/ter
being Liislmsl etl from
the pVdI?’ti('I2\hip, I
rniglxt not by nhlt’ to
supply myself with fish.
On tiw ctmtmry, tfl do
not t1(‘II(‘]?l /hr’ fish from
tlmn and am not
tti,vnis'.s(.'d the premier-
sltip, h()Wt’t’ct‘ flmd of
fish, I cut: always
supply rrtysclf
with fish.
"
HA.\-I~‘[;t- I717.
CHINLSI; yHn.0s<mi1«:P..
rt-mm run run n.<*.
344
LAW 40
tipped over a. table and the teacup fell to the ground and broke into several
pieces. The auction was clearly over. Fushimiya glued and mended the
cup, then stored it away, thinking the affair finished. Years later, however,
the great tea master Matsudalra Fumai visited the store, and asked to see
the cup, which by then had become legendazy. Fumai examined it. “As a
piece,” he said, “it is not up to much, but a Tea Master prizes sentiment and
association more than intrinsic value.” He bought the cup for a high sum.
A gluedtogelher work of less than ordinary craftsmanship had become
one of the most famous objects injapan.
Interpretation
The story shows, first, an essential aspect of money: That it is humans who
have created it and humans who instill it with meaning and value. Second,
with objects as with money, what the courtier most values are the semi»
ments and emotions embedded in them»-these are what make them worth
having. The lesson is simple: The more your gifts and your acts of generos-
ity play with sentiment, the more powerful they are. The object or concept
that plays with a charged emotion or hits a chord of sentiment has more
power than the money you squander on an expensive yet lifeless present.
Observance VI
Akimoto Suzutomo, a wealthy adherent of the tea ceremony, once gave his
page 100 ryo (gold pieces) and instructed him to purchase a tea bowl of-
fered by a particular dealer. When the page saw the bowl, he doubted it
was worth that much, and after much bargaining got the price reduced to
95 ryo. Days later, afler Suzutomo had put the bowl to use, the page
proudly told him what he had done.
“What an ignoramus you are!” replied Suzutomo. “A tea. bowl that
anyone asks 100 pieces of gold for can only be a family heirloom, and a
thing like that is only sold when the family is pressed for money. And in
that case they will be hoping to find someone who will give even 150
pieces for it. So what sort of fellow is it who does not consider their feel-
ings? Quite apart from that, a curio that you give l0O ryo for is something
worth having, but one that has only cost 95 gives a mean impression. 50
never let me see that tea bowl again!” And he had the bowl locked away,
and never took it out.
Interpretation
When you insist on paying less, you may save your five ryo, but the insult
you cause and the cheap impression you create will cost you in reputation,
which is the thing the powerful prize above all. Learn to pay the full
price-—it vn'll save you a lot in the end.
Observance Vll
Sometime near the beginning of the seventeenth century injapan, a group
of generals whiled away the lime before a big battle by staging an incense»
smelling competition. Each participant anted up a prize for the contesfs
winners-—bows, arrows, saddles, and other items a warrior would covet.
The great Lord Date Masamune happened to pass by and was induced to
parficipate. For a prize, he offered the gourd that hung from his belt. Every~
one laughed, for no one wanted to win this cheap item. A retainer of the
host finally accepted the gourd.
When the party broke up, however, and the generals were chatting
outside the tent, Masamune brought over his magnificent horse and gave it
to the retainer. “There,” he said, “a horse has come out of the gourd.” The
stunned generals suddenly regretted their scorn at Masamune’s gift.
Interpretation
Masamune understood the following: Money gives its possessor the ability
to give pleasure to others. The more you can do this, the more you attract
admiration. When you make a horse come out of a gourd, you give the ul-
timate demonstration of your power.
Image: The River. To protect
yourself or to
save the resource,
you dam it up. Soon, however,
the
waters
become
dank
and
pestilent.
Only
the
foulcst
forms of life
can
live
in
such
stagnant waters; nothing train
els
on
them, all
commerce
stops. Destroy the dam. When
water flows and circulates, it gen
erates abundance, wealth, and
power in ever larger circles. The
River
must
flood
periodically
for good things
to flourish.
Authority: The great man who is a miser is a great fool, and a man in
high places can have no vice so harmful as avarice. A miserly man can
conquer neither lands nor lordships, for he does not have a plentiful
supply of friends with whom he may work his will. ‘Whoever wants to
have friends must not love his possessions but must acquire friends by
means of fair gifts; for in the same way that the lodestone subtly draws
iron to itself, so the gold and silver that a man gives attract the hearts
of men. (7712 Romance oft/Le Rose, Guillaume do Lorris, c. 1200-1238)
I took money only
from tlmse who could
rtflortl it and were will~
mg /0 go in with me in
.\'cIumm,«' they fancied
would fimcv others.
Tlmy wanled money
for its own xuke. 1
warzletl ilfor the luxu-
ries t.1Itrl[)lEa2.9llr'o‘..s It
would a/"ford ma They
were seldom: crmcr,-rned
with human nature.
'I'izey knew }mle~mm‘
carer} lrm‘-—ai7oi1I their
fellow men. If they had
been keener .311ltleIlI.~.’ of
human nature. if they
had given more time 10
wrnparziorzship with
their /'ell0w.s' and loss to
the chase oft/it’.
almigIzI_v dollar, I/my
would»: ‘I have hcvn
mch vary mm'k.s'.
“YH.i,ow Km" Wm.
18754970
LAW 40
345
LAVV 40
REVERSAL
The powerful never forget that what is offered for free is inevitably a trick.
Friends who offer favors without asking for payment will later want some
thing far dearer than the money you would have paid them. The bargain
has hidden problems, both material and psychological. Learn to pay, then,
and to pay well.
On the other hand, this Law offers great opportunities for swindling
and deception if you apply it from the other side. Dangling the lure of at
free lunch is the con artisfs stock in trade.
No man was better at this than the most successful con artist of our
age, Joseph Weil, a.k.a. “The Yellow Kid.” The Yellow Kid learned early
that what made his swindles possible was his fellow humans’ greed. “This
desire to get something for nothing,” he once wrote, “has been very costly
to many people who have dealt with me and with other can men.
,
.
.
When people lea.rn——a3 I doubt they will—that they can’t get something
for nothing, crime will diminish and we shall all live in greater harmony.”
Over the years Weil devised many ways to seduce people with the prospect
of easy money. He would hand out “free” real estate——who could resist
such an offer?——and then the suckers would learn they had to pay $25 to
register the sale. Since the land was free, it seemed worth the high fee, and
the Yellow Kid would make thousands of dollars on the phony registration.
In exchange he would give his suckers a phony deed. Other times, he
would tell suckers about a fixed horse race, or a stock that would earn 200
percent in a few weeks. As he spun his stories he would watch the sucker’s
eyes open wide at the thought of a free lunch.
The lesson is simple: Bait your deceptions with the possibility of easy
money. People are essentially lazy, and want wealth to fall in their lap
rather than to work for it. For
at small sum, sell them advice on how to
make millions (P. T. Barnum did this later in life), and that small sum will
become a fortune when multiplied by thousands of suckers. Lure people in
with the prospect of easy money and you have the room to work still more
deceptions on them, since greed is powerful enough to blind your victims
to anything. And as the Yellow Kid said, half the fun is teaching a moral
lesson: Greed does not pay.
LAW
41
AVOID STEPPING INTO
A GREAT MAN’S SHOES
jU D GMENT
What happmsfirst always appears better and more mig-
ina! than what comes afier. Ifyou succeed a great man
or have (1 jiugzous parent, you will have to accomplish
doubka their achievements to outshine them. Do not get
lost in their shadow, or stuck in a past not ofyam own
making: Establish your
own
name and identity by
changing comse. .S'lay the overfieafingfatheg diypamgv
his legacy, and gain power by shining in your own way.
.‘)'4»‘>’
Hli-, l‘,X('lIl.l,l-‘ll’!-I
OF Bl-'l.\(,. H!
J’
Many would have
shone like (hr: very
phoenix in th('iI' 017(11-
palions :'foth<'r.\' had
not precerimi them.
Being first is a great
advurirsge: l1-‘Ill!
eminence, twice as
good. Deal the firsi
hand and you will win
the upper ground.
.
.
.
Those who gr)“/irsl
win fame‘ by right of
bir!-P1, and {lime who
follow are like scicond
sans. contouring them-
selves with nmager
portions.
.
.
.
Solomrm awed wisely
for parmsrn, yielding
warlike things to his
father. B)2 changing
course he foimci it
mxicr to become a
hero.
.
.
.
And uurgreal Philip [I
gmzerncrl the entire
world from (hi? throne
of/iis prudence, aston-
ishing the agent If his
imconqurred fa!/ier
was a modal oferrergy.
Philip was tl paradigm
ofprmhznce.
.
.
. This
sort ofnovelly has
lzelpsd the wellwtlvisrrd
win a place in the roll
ofzhc great.
Without leaving their
own art, the ingerzions
[came the common path
and take, even in
profrssions gray wiIl1
age, new steps inward
eminence. Horace
yielded epic poetry to
Virgil, imd Mama] the
lyric to Horace. Terence
opted for cwnedy.
Persirix jbr satire. elicit
hoping to be first in his
genre. Bold fancy never
mccumhzarl m facile
irrzimtimz.
A POCKET Muzuox
‘FOR Hi-:R0[-.5‘.
BALFAS/\R GRAN
.
IRAN>3I.!\'l'l3D BY
Cmusr<>PHF,R MAURER,
1996
LAW 11
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
When Louis XIV died, in 1715, after a glorious fifty—five-year reign, all eyes
focused on his great-grandson and chosen successor, the future Louis XV.
Would the boy, only five at the time, prove as great a leader as the Sun
King? Louis XIV had transforrned a country on the verge of civil war into
the preeminent power in Europe. The last years of his reign had been difli~
cult—-he had been old and l:ired——but it was hoped that the child would de-
velop into the kind of strong ruler who would reinvigorate the land and
add to the firm foundation that Louis XIV had laid.
To this end the child was given the best minds of France as his tutors,
men who would instruct him in Lhe ads of statecraft, in the methods that
the Sun King had perfected. Nothing was neglected in his education. But
when Louis XV came to the throne, in 1726, a sudden change came over
him: He no longer had to study or please others or prove himself. He stood
alone at the top of a great country, with wealth and power at his command.
He could do as he wished.
In the first years of his reign, Louis gave himself over to pleasure, leav-
ing the government in the hands of a ousted minister, André-Hercule de
Fleuiy. This caused little concern, for he was a. young man who needed to
sow his wild oats, and de Fleury was a good minister. But it slowly became
clear that {his was more than a passing phase. Louis had no interest in gov-
erning. His main worry was not France’s finances, or a possible war with
Spain, but boredom. He could not stand being bored, and when he was not
hunting deer, or chasing young girls, he whiled away his time at the gain-
bling tables, losing huge sums in a single night.
The court, as usual, reflected the tastes of the ruler. Gambling and lav-
ish parties became the obsession. The courtiers had no concern with the fu-
ture of France-—they poured their energies into charming the king, angling
for titles that would bring them life pensions, and for cabinet positions de-
manding little work but paying huge salaries. Parasites flocked to the court,
and the state’s debts swelled.
In 1745 Louis fell in love with Madame de Pompadour, a woman of
middle~cla,ss origin who had managed to rise through her charms, her intel-
ligence, and a good marriage. Madame de Pompadour became the ofiicial
royal mistress; she also became France’s arbiter of taste and fashion. But
the Madame had political ambitions as well, and she eventually emerged
as the countxy’s unofficial piime minister——it was she, not Louis, who
wielded hiring~and-firing power over France’s most important ministers.
As he grew older Louis only needed more diversion. On the grounds
of Versailles he built a brothel, Pare aux Cerfs, which housed some of the
prettiest young girls of France. Underground passages and hidden stair-
cases gave Louis access at all hours. After Madame de Pompadour died, in
1764, she was succeeded as royal mistress by Madame du Bariy, who soon
came to dominate the court, and who, like de Pompadour before her,
began to meddle in affairs of state. If a minister did not please her he would
find himself fired. All of Europe was aghast when du Barry, the daughter of
a baker, managed to arrange the firing of Etienne de Choiseul, the foreign
minister and France’s most able diplomat. He had shown her too little re-
spect. As time went by, swindlers and Charlatans made their nests in Ver-
sailles, and enticed Louis’s interest in astrology, the occult, and fraudulent
business deals. The young and pampered teenager who had taken over
France years before had only grown worse with age.
The motto that became attached to Louis’s reign was ‘.'Apré.r moi, It
de’lugz"——“After me the flood,” or, Let France rot after I am gone. And in
deed when Louis did go, in 1774, worn out by debauchery, his country and
his own finances were in horrible disarray. His grandson Louis XVI inher-
ited a realm in desperate need of reform and a strong leader. But Louis
XVI was even weaker than his grandfather, and could only watch as the
country descended into revolution. In 1792 the republic introduced by the
French Revolution declared the end of the monarchy, and gave the king a
new name, “Louis the Last” A few months later he kneeled on the guillo-
tine, his about—to—be—severed head stripped of all the radiance and power
that the Sun King had invested in the crown.
Interpretation
From a country that had descended into civil war in the late 1640s, Louis
XIV forged the mightiest realm in Europe. Great generals would tremble
in his presence. A cook once made a mistake in prepaiing a dish and com-
mitted suicide rather than face the king’5 wrath. Louis XIV had many mis—
tresses, but their power ended in the bedroom. He filled his court with the
most brilliant minds of the age. The symbol of his power was Versailles:
Refusing to accept the palace of his forefathers, the Louvre, he built his
own palace in what was then the middle of nowhere, symbolizing that this
was a. new order he had founded, one without precedent He made Ver-
sailles the centerpiece of his reign, a place that all the powerful of Europe
envied and visited with a sense of awe. In essence, Louis took a great
void—the decaying monarchy of France—-and filled it with his own sym~
hols and radiant power.
Louis XV, on the other hand, symbolizes the fate of all those who in»
herit something large or who follow in a great man’s footsteps. It would
seem easy for a son or successor to build on the grand foundation lefi for
them, but in the realm of power the opposite is true. The pampered, in-
dulged son almost always squanders the inheritance, for he does not start
with the father’s need to fill a void. As Machiavelli states, necessity is what
impels men to take action, and once the necessity is gone, only rot and
decay are left. Having no need to increase his store of power, Louis XV in—
evitably succumbed to inertia. Under him, Versailles, the symbol of the
Sun K.ing’s authority, became a pleasure palace of incomparable banality,
a kind of Las Vegas of the Bourbon monarchy. It came to represent all that
the oppressed peasantry of France hated about their king, and during the
Revolution they looted it with glee.
Louis XV had only one way out of the trap awaiting the son or succes-
sor of a man like the Sun King: to psychologically begin from nothing, to
l.ll-‘F. OF l‘F,R|(.l.F.:~,
As :4 young man Pen‘-
cles was inclined to
Shrink from faring the
people. One reason for
Ihlr was that he was
consirlered to hear n
distinct resernblance to
the tyrant Pisiszrmus,
and when men who
were well on in years-
remarked on the charm
of Pericles’ voice and
Ike .wnoolhne.rs and
fluency of his speech.
they were astonished at
the rescmblanre
between the two. The
fact that he was rich
and that he came oft:
dirzingxrisimd family
and possessed exceed»
ingly powerfulfriends
made the fear of
asrrucixm very real to
him, and at the begin-
ning oflulr career he
took no part in palilics
bu! devoted himself to
soldiermg, in which he
showed great daring
and enzerprise.
However, the time Came
when Aristides was
dead, Themislocles in
exile, Amd Cimon
frequently absent on
distant campaigns.
Then at last }’erlcfes‘
decided to attach
himself :0 the peoples
party and to take up
the cause of the poor
and the many instead
ofrhat ofllze rich and
the few, in spite ofihe
fact that this was quite
contrary to his own
temperament, which
was thoroughly aristo-
rratic. He was afraid,
appammly, of being
suspected ofaiming at
a rlictamrslxip; so rlmt
when he saw that
LAW 41
349
Cimun is .\"vm/mIhie’.\'
were strongly Wllll llw
nobles and Ilzat Cimnn
was thr idol oftlw aris-
mrmtir: party, I’Wlcl(!.\'
lwgan to ingratmlo
l1lIY1.S‘€l/M'IIll the pcoplé‘.
partly for self-preserva-
lion and partly by wuy
r»]'.\'e><'izrir1g power
against his rival.
He now mterml upon
or new mode lrflifr.
He was mm’:/r to be
.w,':>t1 walking in any
.\'m>et exrapi the mu’
which led to the
market-plarr and yhr’
council chtImbL'I‘.
Tm, LIFE or |'ERl<‘l.I-,3.
Pi lJ'lAR(‘Il,
(‘.A.D.4(1—l20
IIIIC
I ll I2 HI" |‘l|"['Ri)
Pl{l{l‘il|'\(). |‘\|'\'I‘|’,|(
1
l—l7:[7—l'»2ll
How lJ::ne]ii:ial poverty
may wmezinzes be to
those with tulcm, and
how ii may serve as a
powerful guru! to muku
them perferl or excel-
lml in whale ver uu‘u'
pamm //my mighl
(flit):/S6, can be .\‘€(,’Il
wry Clrurly in the
actions of Pierrn
Pemgino. Wishing by
means u,/his ability to
attain some I‘(3S])(!t'lfll)ll’
rank. (1/[(.’!’ leaving
1liS‘(1SIl'(1NS cu/alnilies
behind in Perugia «ml
Cuming lu Flurmce, he
remained Ahere many
mnmhs in poverty,
sleeping in u ('h(€.\‘l»
simte he had no other
bed; he tumerl nigh!
into (luv. and with the
greawrl zeal cominuv
ally applied himself to
350
LAW 41
denigrate the past and his inheritance, and to move in a totally new direct»
tion, creating his own world. Assuming you have the choice, it would be
better to avoid the situation altogether, to place yourself where there is a
vacuum of power, where you can be the one to bring order out of chaos
without having to compete with another star in the sky. Power depends on
appearing larger than other people, and when you are lost in the shadow of
the father, the king, the great predecessor, you cannot possibly project such
a presence.
But when thzy began to make sovereignty hewditary, the children quickly
degeneratedfrom theirfathers; and, sofarfrom trying to equal theirfathefs
virtues, they considered that a prince had nothing else to do than to excel
all the rest in idleness, indulgence, and every other variety ofplmmre.
Nicwlfr llv1(l(’/ll(l‘U!.‘ll2, 1469 I 527
OBSERVANCF. OF THE LAW
Alexander the Great had a dominant passion as a young man—~an intense
dislike for his father, King Philip of Macedonia. He hated Philip’s cunning,
cautious style of ruling, his bombastic speeches, his drinking and whoring,
and his love of wrestling and of other wastes of time. Alexander knew he
had to make himself the very opposite of his domineering father: He would
force himself to be bold and reckless, he would control his tongue and be a
man of few words, and he would not lose precious time in pursuit of plea-
sures that brought no glory. Alexander also resented the fact that Philip
had conquered most of Greece: “My father will go on conquering till there
is nothing extraonhnary left for me to do,” he once complained. Vllhile
other sons of powerful men were content to inherit wealth and live a life of
leisure, Alexander wanted only to outdo his father, to obliterate Philip’s
name from history by surpassing his accomplishments.
Alexander itched to show others how superior he was to his father. A
Thessalian h0rse»dealer once brought a prize horse named Bucephalus to
sell to Philip. None of the king’s grooms could get near the horse—it was
far too savage——a.nd Philip berated the merchant for bringing him such a
useless beast. Watching the whole affair, Alexander scowled and com-
mented, “What a horse they are losing for want of skill and spirit to man‘
age him!” When he had said this several times, Philip had finally had
enough, and challenged him to take on the horse. He called the merchant
back, secretly hoping his son would have a nasty fa.ll and learn a bitter les-
son. But Alexander was the one to teach the lesson: Not only did he mount
Bucephalus, he managed to ride him at full gallop, taming the horse that
would later carry him all the way to India. The courtiers applauded wildly,
but Philip seethed inside, seeing not a son but a rival to his power.
Alexander’s defiance of his father grew bolder. One day the two men
had a heated argument before the entire court, and Philip drew his sword
as if to strike his son; having drunk too much wine, however, the king
stumbled. Alexander pointed at his father and jeered, “Men of Macedonia,
see there the man who is preparing to pass from Europe to Asia. He cannot
pass from one table to another without falling.”
When Alexander
was eighteen,
a disgruntled
courtier murdered
Philip. As word of the regicide spread through Greece, city after city rose
up in rebellion against their Macedonian rulers. Philip’s advisers counseled
Alexander, now the king, to proceed cautiously, to do as Philip had done
and conquer through cunning. But Alexander would do things his way: He
marched to the furthest reaches of the kingdom, suppressed the rebellious
towns, and reunited the empire with brutal efficiency.
As
a young rebel grows older, his struggle against the father often
wanes, and he gradually comes to resemble the very man he had wanted to
defy. But Alexandefs loathing of his father did not end with Phi.lip’s death.
Once he had consolidated Greece, he set his eyes on Persia, the prize that
had eluded his father, who had dreamed of conquering Asia. If he defeated
the Persians, Alexander would finally surpass Philip in glory and fame.
Alexander crossed into Asia with an army of 35,000 to face 3. Persian
force numbering over a million. Before engaging the Persians in battle he
passed through the town of Gordium. Here, in the town’s main temple,
there stood an ancient chariot tied with cords made of the rind of the cor-
nel tree. Legend had it that any man who could undo these cords——the
Gordian knot—~would rule the world. Many had tried to untie the enor
mous and intricate knot, but none had succeeded. Alexander, seeing he
could not possibly untie the knot with his bare hands, took out his sword
and with one slash cut it in half. This symbolic gesture showed the world
that he would not do as others, but would blaze his own path.
Against astounding odds, Alexander conquered the Persians. Most ex-
pected him to stop there--it was a great triumph, enough to secure his
fame for eternity. But Alexander had the same relationship to his own
deeds as he had to his father: His conquest of Persia represented the past,
and he wanted never to rest on past triumphs, or to allow the past to out-
shine the present. He moved on to India, extending his empire beyond all
known limits. Only his disgruntled and weary soldiers prevented him from
going farther.
Interpretation
Alexander represents an extremely uncommon type in history: the son of
a famous and successful man who manages to surpass the father in glory
and power. The reason this type is uncommon is simple: The father most
often manages to amass his fortune, his kingdom, because he begins with
little or nothing. A desperate urge irnpels him to succeed»-he has nothing
to lose by cunning and impetuousness, and has no famous father of his
own to compete against. This kind of man has
reason to believe in
himself-—-to believe that his way of doing things is the best, because, after
all, it worked for him.
When a man like this has a son, he becomes domineering and oppres
sive, imposing his lessons on the son, who is starting off life in circums
stances totally different from those in which the father himself began.
the szzttly (>Hzz.s','zrnfe.s'~
slim. /l_fn’r painzlrxg hart’
})t?{'()I)'l€ SL’l't')IId mfiure
to him. Pietro ls’ mil)’
plcmitre was alway.s' to
be working in his craft
and c(m,_s'IunIl_v to bl"
painting. Ana’ he’r:4m.nv
he always‘ had the
drmzl nfpuvt’r1y before
his eym, he did things
to make money wlziclr
he probably would not
have bolhered 10 do
had he not been fora/4/
to support himself.
Perhaps wealth would
have closed to him and
his Iulem the path to
arcellencc }'u.\'t as
poverty luzcl opener! it
up to him. but need
.5p£lt’((:’l.l I/rirn on since he
rlesireu’ 10 rise from
such :1 rrziscmblc and
lowly posit.imt— if/1m‘
pcrlzaps to the summit
and .s'uprr'nu* iwiglsx of
ex(cllcnu', than at least
to L! point where he
could have (,‘f1()u,I,'l2 to
live on. For this train»,
he look no rmlirre of
Cold. hunger, dist ‘(N11-
fnrt, im'mzvmir'r:rz>, rail
or rhamv iflw could
only live our zlny in
rzaxr-. and repose; and he
would (1lways.s'(1y—-um]
as if it were a pmwrb—
that after bad weather.
good weather must
follow, and that (luring
the good weculrer
houses muxl be built for
shelter in times ofnccd.
Ll‘/!—,S or THE 4R't‘!S‘l.\'.
Glt)R(}lO Vas.
RE.
l5! l—l574
LAW 41
351
I'll}. l’R()l£|,l-I\I {W
|’.\| l, \1URl'l|V
The xlightesz (I(.'I]£laiIt-
twice with c
.S‘I1(>w'.\‘
one that it is a play
rubstttutc for tho art uf
war and indeed it has
been a fmmrite recto-
ation ofxome ofthe
grerztest ntilitnry [mt]-
ers, from Wt'Iliam the
Cfnnqmrror to
Napoleon.
In the crmte.\‘1 hem-teen
the opposing txrmius‘
the samv prinripltzv of
bat}: strategy and Mexico‘
are </is/7la_‘\=s'r1 as in.
actual war, the sutitc
foresiglzt and powers of
miculutimz are necc»:s~
sary. the same capacity
/or rlivi/iirtg the _1)lart.s'
of the apprme-nt, and
the rigor with which
rferixiriris arr followetl
by their Ct)/1.$'t.’ql4L’l1C(.’S
is, if'(trt_vthin;:. Wm
more ruthless: More
(him that, is it plain that
the unconsciotts motive
actuating the p[(lyk'r.)‘ is
not the mere love of
pugtzaciry t‘Iramcteris‘tic
of all C0f7lpx'.‘f$l1W’
games, but Ihr grirrtmer
tme ofl'uthcr—murder.
It is mic that the origi-
nal goal ofcapturing
the king Imr been given
up, butfrmn the (min!
of vmw of motive thaw,’
is, except in respect of
cmdity, not 0[J])f(’Ci((ll’l’
change in the pV€St’t11
goal of stertlizing him
in immobility,
..
.
“Checkmate
"
I7(€[i'I!.\'
Iircm/ty "tho king is
(lead.
”
.
.
. Om krzrwlvdge of
the uru'rm.<cim1.s' moti-
vation oft:/1r>.v.v-7:1/tytrtgg
tells‘ us that what it
rupt'e,\'m1Iv(l could only
have been the wish to
uw'rx:mm the falher in
an zlcceptctblt’ wuy.
.
.
.
[I is no drmht signifi-
352
LAW 41
Instead of allowing the son to go in a new direction, the father will try to
put him in his own shoes, perhaps secretly wishing the boy will fail, as
Philip half wanted to see Alexander thrown from Bucephalus. Fathers envy
their sons’ youth and vigor, after all, and their desire is to control and dom-
inate. The sons of such men tend to become cowed and cautious, terrified
of losing what their fathers have gained.
The son will never step out of his father’s shadow unless he adopts the
ruthless strategy of Alexander: disparage the past, create your own king-
dom, put the father in the shadows instead of letting him do the same to
you. If you cannot materially start from ground zero—--it would be foolish
to renounce an inheritance-—you can at least begin from ground zero psy-
chologically, by throwing off the weight of the past and charting a new di—
rection. Alexander instinctively recognized that privileges of birth
are
impediments to power. Be merciless with the past, then——not only with
your father and his father but with your own earlier achievements. Only
the weak rest on their laurels and dote on past triumphs; in the game of
power there is never time to rest
KEYS TO POWER
In many ancient kingdoms, for example Bengal and Sumatra, after the
king had ruled for several years his subjects would execute him. This was
done partly as a ritual of renewal, but also to prevent him from growing too
powerful—for the king would generally try to establish a permanent order,
at the expense of other families and of his own sons. Instead of protecting
the tribe and leading it in times of war, he would attempt to dominate it.
And so he would be beaten to death, or executed in an elaborate ritual.
Now that he was no longer around for his h0l101‘S to go to his head, he
could be worshipped as a god. Meanwhile the field had been cleared for a
new and youthful order to establish itself.
The ambivalent, hostile attitude towards the king or father figure also
finds expression in legends of heroes who do not know their father. Moses,
the archetypal man of power, was found abandoned among the bulrushes
and never knew his parents; without a. father to compete with him or limit
him, he could attain the heights of power. Hercules had no earthly father——
he was the son of the god Zeus. Later in his life Alexander the Great spread
the story that the god Jupiter Ammon had sired him, not Philip of Mace-
don. Legends and rituals like these eliminate the human father because he
symbolizes the destructive power of the past.
The past prevents the young hero from creating his own world--he
must do as his father did, even after that father is dead or powerless. The
hero must how and scrape before his predecessor and yield to tradition
and precedent. What had success in the past must be carried over to the
present, even though circumstances have greatly changed. The past also
weighs the hero down with an inheritance that he is terrified of losing,
making him timid and cautious.
Power depends on the ability to fill a void, to occupy a field that has
been cleared of the dead weight of the past. Only after the father figure has
been properly done away with will you have the necessary space to create
and establish a new order. There are several strategies you can adopt to ac-
complish this—-——varia!ions on the execution of the king that disguise the vio~
lence of the impulse by channeling it in socially acceptable forms.
Perhaps the simplest way to escape the shadow of the past is simply to
belittle it, playing on the timeless antagonism between the generations, stir—
ring up the young against the old. For this you need a convenient older fig-
ute to pillory. Mao Tse—tung, confronting a culture that fiercely resisted
change, played on the suppressed resentment against the overbearing pres-
ence of the venerable Confucius in Chinese culture. john F. Kennedy
knew the dangers of getting lost in the past; he radically distinguished his
presidency from that of his predecessor, Dwight D. Eisenhower, and also
from the preceding decade, the 19505, which Eisenhower personified.
Kennedy, for instance, would not play the dull and fatherly game of golf——
a symbol of retirement and privilege, and Eisenhowefs passion. Instead he
played football on the White House lawn. In every aspect his administra-
tion represented vigor and youth, as opposed to the stodgy Eisenhower.
Kennedy had discovered an old truth: The young are easily set against the
old, since they yearn to make their own place in the world and resent the
shadow of their fathers.
The distance you establish from your predecessor often demands
some symbolism, a way of advertising itselfpublicly. Louis XIV, for exam-
ple, created such symbolism when he rejected the traditional palace of the
French kings and built his own palace of Versailles. King Philip II of Spain
did the same when he created his center of power, the palace of El Esco-
rial, in what was then the middle of nowhere. But Louis carried the game
further: He would not be
a king like his father or earlier ancestors, he
would not wear a crown or carry a scepter or sit on a throne, he would es-
tablish a new kind of imposing authority with symbols and rituals of its
own. Louis made his ancestors’ rituals into laughable relics of the past. Fol-
low his example: Never let yourself be seen as following your predeces-
sor’s path. If you do you will never surpass him. You must physically
demonstrate your difference, by establishing a style and symbolism that
sets you apart.
The Roman emperor Augustus, successor toJulius Caesar, understood
this thoroughly. Caesar had been a great general, a theatrical figure whose
spectacles kept the Romans entertained, an international emissary seduced
by the charms of Cleopat:ra~a largerlhanalife figure. So Augustus, despite
his own theatrical tendencies, competed with Caesar not by trying to outdo
him but by differentiating himself from him: He based his power on a re-
turn to Roman simplicity, an austerity of both style and substance. Against
the memory of Caesars sweeping presence Augustus posed a quiet and
manly dignity.
The problem with the overbearing predecessor is that he fills the vistas
before you with symbols of the past. You have no room to create your own
name. To deal with this situation you need to hunt out the vacuums»-wthose
cant 351:2! {nineteenth-
cerimry dress rlzarru
pron Paul] i’l'Iurphy’r
soaring odyssey into
the higher realms of
chess begun just (1)7807
after the unexpectedly
sudden dearh 0f his
falhcr, whirl: had been
a great rlzock Io him,
and we may .sumu's'e
that his brilliant effort
nfsublimation wa r. like
Shakespeare it Hamlet
and Freudfr The Inter-
pretation of Dreams. a
rmrglion to this critical
event...
Something should now
be said about the recep-
zmn Mnrphylr
szrccesmr met with, for
they were ofsucl: I:
kind as to rizise lire
qniesliorr whether his
subsequent collapse
may no! ltrrve lzemz
influenced through his
perhaps beionging to
the type that Freud has
described under the
IUIIHI? of Die am
Erfolgc schoiiem
(
“ Those wrecked by
.ruczte.rs").
.
.
. Coached
in more psychological
language. was Morphy
affrighted at his own
prcsmnpruousnms
when the light of
publicity was thrown
on [l!l.S' great rurce.rs?/
Freud has pointed out
(ha! thepeople who
break under the strain
of too great .mcre.vs do
so because they can
endure it only in imagi-
mzzion. no! in reality. To
castrate the father in :2
dream is :1 very differ»
em‘ mrrtierfrorn doing
it in reality. The real
situation provokes: the
(AnC0n.'~‘lTi0!LS guilt in its
full force. and the
/zemzlzy may bn menial
collapse.
Tllf, PRURl_F'Vl OF PAH!
MURPHY,
ER.NES'l‘ Jorcrs.
I951
LAW 41
35.?
354
LAW 41
areas in culture that have been left vacant and in which you can become
the first and principal figure to shine.
When Pericles of Athens was about to launch a career as a statesman,
he looked for the one thing that was missing in Athenian politics. Most of
the great politicians of his time had allied themselves with the aristocracy;
indeed Pericles himself had aristocratic tendencies. Yet he decided to throw
in his hat with the city’s democratic elements. The choice had nothing to
do with his personal beliefs, but it launched him on a brilliant career. Out
of necessity he became a man of the people. Instead of compefing in an
arena filled with great leaders both past and present, he would make a
name for himself where no shadows could obscure his presence.
When the painter Diego de Velazquez began his career, he knew he
could not compete in refinement and technique with the great Renaissance
painters who had come before him. Instead he chose to work in a style that
by the standards of the time seemed coarse and rough, in a way that had
never been seen before. And in this style he excelled. There were mem-
bers of the Spanish court who wanted to demonstrate their own break with
the past; the newness of Velé.zquez’s style thrilled them. Most people are
afraid to break so boldly with tradition, but they secretly admire those who
can break up the old forms and reinvigorate the culture. This is why there
is so much power to be gained from entering vacuums and voids.
There is a kind of stubborn stupidity that recurs throughout history,
and is a strong impediment to power: The superstitious belief that if the
person before you succeeded by doing A, B, and C, you can re-create their
success by doing the same thing. This cookie-cutter approach will seduce
the uncreative, for it is easy, and appeals to their timidity and their laziness.
But circumstances never repeat themselves exactly.
When General Douglas MacArthur assumed command of American
forces in the Philippines during World War II, an assistant handed him a
book containing the various precedents established by the commanders
before him, the methods that had been successful for them. MacArthur
asked the assistant how many copies there were of this book. Six, the assis-
tant answered. “Well,” the general replied, “you get all those six copies to-
gether
and
burn them—-every
one
of them.
I’ll
not
be ‘bound by
precedents. Any time
a problem
comes up, I’ll make the decision at
once—immediately.” Adopt this ruthless strategy toward the past: Bum all
the books, and train yourself to react to circumstances as they happen.
You may believe that you have separated yourself from the predeces
sor or father figure, but as you grow older you must be eternally vigilant
lest you become the father you had rebelled against. As a young man, Mao
Tse-tung disliked his father and in the struggle against him found his own
identity and a new set of values. But as he aged, his father’s ways crept back
in. Mao’s father had valued manual work over intellect; Mao had scoffed at
this as a young man, but as he grew older he unconsciously returned to his
father’s views and echoed such outdated ideas by forcing a whole genera.»
tion of Chinese intellectuals into manual labor, a nightmarish mistake that
cost his regime dearly. Remember: You are your own father. Do not let
yourself spend years creating yourself only to let your guard down and
allow the ghost of the past—father, habit, history—to sneak back in.
Finally, as noted in the story of Louis XV, plenitude and prosperity
tend to make us lazy and inactive: When our power is secure we have no
need to act. This is a serious danger, especially for those who achieve suc-
cess and power at an early age. The playwright Tennessee Williams, for in-
stance, found himself skyrocketed from obscurity to fame by the success of
The Glass Menagerie. “The sort of life which I had had previous to this popuv
lar success,” he later wrote, “was one that required endurance, a life of
clawing and scratching, but it was a good life because it was the sort of life
for which the human organism is created. I was not aware of how much
vital energy had gone into this struggle until the struggle was removed.
This was security at last. I sat down and looked about me and was suddenly
very depressed.” Williams had a nervous breakdown, which may in fact
have been necessary for him: Pushed to the psychological edge, he could
start writing with the old vitality again, and he produced A Streetcar Named
Desire. Fyodor Dostoyevsky, similarly, whenever he wrote
a successful
novel, would feel that the financial security he had gained made the act of
creation unnecessary. He would take his entire savings to the casino and
would not leave until he had gambled away his last penny. Once reduced
to poverty he could write again.
It is not necessary to go to such extremes, but you must be prepared to
return to square one psychologically rather than growing fat and lazy with
prosperity. Pablo Picasso could deal with success, but only by constantly
changing the style of his painting, often breaking completely with what
had made him successful before. How often our early triumphs turn us
into a kind of caricature of ourselves. Powerful people recognize these
traps; like Alexander the Great, they struggle constantly to re—create them-
selves. The father must. not be allowed to return; he must be slain at every
step of the way.
Image: The Father. He casts a
giant shadow over his children,
keeping
them
in
thrall long
after he is gone by tying them
to
the
past,
squashing
their
youthful
spirit,
and
forcing
them down the same tired path
he followed himself. His tricks
are many. At every
cross-
roads you must slay the father
and step out of his shadow.
LAW 41
355
3.56
LAW 4!
Authority: Beware of stepping into a
great maifs shoes—-you will have to
accomplish twice as much to surpass
him. Those who follow are taken for
imitators. No matter how much they
sweat, they will never shed that bur—
den. It is an uncommon skill to find a
new path for excellence,
a modern
route to celebrity. There are many
roads to singularity, not all of them
well traveled. The newest ones can be
arduous, but they are often shortcuts to
greatness. (Baltasar Gracian, 1601-1658)
REVE RSAL
The shadow of a great predecessor could be used to advantage if it is cho-
sen as a trick, a tactic that can be discarded once it has brought you power
Napoleon III used the name and legend of his illustrious grand-uncle
Napoleon Bonaparte to help him become first president and then emperor
of France. Once on the throne, however, he did not stay tied to the past’, he
quickly showed how different his reign would be, and was careful to keep
the public from expecting him to attain the heights that Bonaparte had at-
tained.
The past often has elements worth appropriating, qualities that would
be foolish to reject out of a need to distinguish yourself. Even Alexander
the Great recognized and was influenced by his father’s skill in organizing
an army. Making a display of doing things differently from your predeces-
sor can make you seem childish and in fact out of control, unless your ac-
tions have a logic of their own.
Joseph II, son of the Austrian empress Maria Theresa, made a show of
doing the exact opposite of his mother—dressing like an ordinary citizen,
staying in inns instead of palaces, appearing as the “people’s emperor”
Maria Theresa, on the other hand, had been regal and aristocratic. The
problem was that she had also been beloved, an empress who ruled wisely
after years of learning the hard way. If you have the kind of intelligence
and instinct that will point you in the right direction, playing the rebel will
not be dangerous. But if you are mediocre, as_]0sepl’1 II was in comparison
to his mother, you are better oi? learning from your predecessor’s knowl-
edge and experience, which are based on something real.
Finally, it is often wise to keep an eye on the young, your future rivals
in power. just as you try to rid yourself of your father, they will soon play
the same trick on you, clenigrating everything you have accornplished._]ust
as you rise by rebelling against the past, keep an eye on those rising from
below, and never give them the chance to do the same to you.
The great Baroque artist and architect Pietro Bemini was a master at
sniffing out younger potential rivals and keeping them in his shadow. One
day a young stonemason named Francesco Boiromini showed Bernini his
architectural sketches. Recognizing his talent immediately, Bernini in-
stantly hired Borromini as his assistant, which delighted the young man but
was actually only a tactic to keep him close at hand, so that he could play
psychological games on him and create in him a kind of inferiority com~
plex. And indeed, despite Borromini’s brilliance, Bernini has the greater
fame. His strategy with Boirornini he made a lifelong practice: Fearing that
the great sculptor Alessandro Algardi, for example, would eclipse him in
fame, he arranged it so that Algardi could only find work as his assistant.
And any assistant who rebelled against Bernini and tried to strike out on
his own would find his career ruined.
LAW «ll
V
357
LAW
42
STRIKE THE SHEPHERD
AND THE SHEEP
WILL SCATTER
J U D G ME NT
Tmuble can often be traced to a single stnmg individ-
u.al———z}te stirm; the mmgcmt undenfing the jaoistmer of
gvmfwill. 17you allow such people room to ogberaie, others
will succumb to their influence. D0 not wzzitfarr the mm»
bles they cause to multiply, do not try to negotiate with
them--they are tmdeemable. Nmtralize their influence
by isolating or banishing them. Strike at the source of the
trouble and tlua shes]: will scatter
358
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW I
Near the end of the sixth century B.C., the city-state of Athens overthrew
the series of petty tyrants who had dominated its politics for decades. It es-
tablished instead a democracy that was to last over a century, a dernoc»
racy that became the source of its power and its proudest achievement.
But as the democracy evolved, so did a problem the Athenians had never
faced: How to deal with those who did not concern themselves with the
cohesion of a small city surrounded by enemies, who did not work for its
greater glory, but thought of only themselves and their own ambitions and
petty intrigues? The Athenians understood that these people, if left alone,
would sow dissension, divide the city into factions, and stir up anxieties,
all of which could lead to the ruin of their democracy.
Violent punishment no longer suited the new, civilized order that
Athens had created. Instead the citizens found another, more satisfying,
and less brutal way to deal with the chronically selfish: Every year they
would gather in the marketplace and write on a piece of earthenware, an
astralcon, the name of an individual they wanted to see banished from the
city for ten years. If a particular name appeared on six thousand ballots,
that person would instantly be exiled. If no one received six thousand
votes, the person with the most artmka recording his name would suffer
the ten-year “ostracism.” This ritual expulsion became a kind of festival—-
what a joy to be able to banish those irritating, anxie
~inducing individu-
als who wanted to rise above the group they should have served.
In 490 8.0, Aristides, one of the great generals of Athenian history,
helped defeat the Persians at the battle of Marathon. Meanwhile, off the
battlefield, his fairness
as a judge had earned him the nickname “The
just.” But as the years went by the Athenians came to dislike him. He
made such a Show of his righteousness, and this, they believed, disguised
his feelings of superiority and scorn for the common folk. His omnipres-
ence in Athenian politics became obnoxious; the citizens grew tired of
hearing him called “The just.” They feared that this was just the type of
man——judgmental, haughty—who would eventually stir up fierce divi-
sions among them, In 482 B.C., despite Aristides’ invaluable expertise in
‘ the continuing war with the Persians, they collected the ostraka and had
him banished.
After Aristides’ ostracism, the great general Themistocles emerged as
the city’s premier leader. But his many honors and victories went to his
head, and he too became arrogant and overbearing, constantly reminding
the Athenians of his triumphs in battle, the temples he had built, the dan-
gers he had fended oil. He seemed to be saying that without him the city
would come to ruin. And so, in 472 B.C., Thernistocles’ name was filled in
on the ostra/ca and the city was rid of his poisonous presence.
The greatest political figure in fifth-century Athens was undoubtedly
Pericles. Although several times threatened with ostranism, he avoided
that fate by maintaining close ties with the people. Perhaps he had learned
a lesson as a child from his favorite tutor, the incomparable Damon, who
THIV, f.()\Ql'IC\T Hi‘ l‘l".Iil
Tlw struggle new
bccunm fiercur than
over anmml the royai
liner /ofA1ahuulpa,
king nj’/he Inca»
empire]. I1 reeled more
and mom, am! at
length, sewrexl of the
nobles who supported
it having been slain. it
mix‘ ovrcrmmcd. and
the Indian prince
would have (1)7213 with
violence to the groumi.
had nor his fall been
broken by the efforts of
Pizarro and some other
oflhe cu vultrtm“, who
mughrlzim in their
arm; The imperial
horia was insmnfly
srmrchezl from his
temples by a soldier,
and the unhappy
mnrzarcli. strongly
secured, was removed
to a neighboring bm’ld~
ing where he was care-
fully guarded.
All attcmpr at r:’5is—
twice now ceased, The
fare oftlic Inca
[/lrainmilmi sorm
.\'[)N,‘l!Il over town and
mumry. The Lharm
that might have held
thr Peruvinnr together
way d:’.r.r(1h-«art. Every
man Ilirmghz only of
his own xufety. Even
the [mean] soldier)’
encamped an the ad/'av
Cemfields took the
nlrrrm, wad, learning the
fatal Iitlingr, were seen
/lying in rwrv rlirec1i()n
before their _pur.m(er.v,
who in me hm! of
triumph showed no
much Gfi-"1l'l’4"}’. At
length night, more pi/iv
/‘ul than man, threw her
frizwdly mtmrle over
the fugitives, and (hr
LAW 42
359
cumered troops of
Pizarro rallied once‘
more at the mum! of
the trumpe! in
the blrizitly square of
Cajrmxorca.
.
.
.
/Alalzuzzlpa,’ was reverv
enrerl us more than a
human. He was not
merely the head of the
mite, but the [mint to
which ail its Ert5fiIl1£§0!LV
can verged as to a
common cr.'n1z*r—zIz(e
/((€}'.S‘l(Jfl€ of!/ze politi-
cal fabric whiclz must
flail! [0 pieces‘ by its own
weight when rho! was
withdrawn. So it fared
on the [execution] of
Amhuulpa. flis death
not only left the throne
vacam. without any
certain soon-xsor, bu:
the mzmner ofir
announcer! Io the
Peruvian meople that
It hand stronger than
that of their Incas hurl
now seized the .w:ep:‘£'n",
and that the dynasty
o/"the Children o/‘the
Sun had passed
away forever.
me COh'(‘)Uk;S'I' or PERU.
WILLIAM ll. PR1-_’S(‘0‘I'T,
l 847
360
LAW 42
excelled above all other Athenians in his intelligence, his musical skills,
and his rhetorical abilities, It was Damon who had trained Pericles in the
arts of ruling. But he, too, suffered ostracism, for his superior airs and his
insulting manner toward the commoners stirred up too much resentment.
Toward the end of the century there lived a man named Hyperbolus.
Most writers of the time describe him as the city’s most worthless citizen:
He did not care what anyone thought of him, and slandered whomever he
disliked. He amused some, but irritated many more. In 417 B.C., Hyperbo-
lus saw an opportunity to stir up auger against the two leading politicians
of the time, Alcibiades and Nicias. He hoped that one of the two would be
ostracized and that he would rise in that man’s place. His campaign
seemed likely to succeed: The Athenians disliked Alcibiades’ flamboyant
and carefree lifestyle, and were wary of Nicias’ wealth and aloofness.
They seemed certain to ostracize one or the other. But Alcibiades and
Nicias, although they were otherwise enemies, pooled their resources and
managed to turn the ostracism on Hyperbolus instead. His obnoxious-
ness, they argued, could only be terminated by banishment.
Earlier sufferers of ostracism had been formidable, powerful men.
Hyperbolus, however, was a low buffoon, and with his banishment the
Athenians felt that ostracism had been degraded. And so they ended the
practice that for nearly a hundred years had been one of the keys to keep-
ing the peace within Athens.
Interpretation
The ancient Athenians had social instincts unknown toclay—the passage
of centuries has blunted them. Citizens in the true sense of the word, the
Athenians sensed the dangers posed by asocial behavior, and saw how
such behavior often disguises itself in other forms: the holier-tharythou at-
titude that silently seeks to impose its standards on others; overweening
ambition at the expense of the common good; the flaunting of superiority;
quiet scheming; terminal obnoxiousness. Some of these behaviors would
eat away at the city’s cohesion by creating factions and sowing dissension,
others would ruin the democratic spirit by making the common citizen
feel inferior and envious. The Athenians did not try to reeducate people
who acted in these ways, or to absorb them somehow into the group, or to
impose a violent punishment that would only create other problems. The
solution was quick and effective: Get rid of them.
Within any group, trouble can most often be traced to a single source,
the unhappy, chronically dissatisfied one who will always stir up dissen-
sion and infect the group with his or her ill ease. Before you know what hit
you the dissatisfaction spreads. Act before it becomes impossible to disen-
tangle one strand of misery from another, or to see how the whole thing
started. First, recognize troublemakers by their overbearing presence, or
by their complaining nature. Once you spot them do not try to reform
them or appease them-—that will only make things worse. Do not attack
them, whether directly or indirectly, for they are poisonous in nature and
will work underground to destroy you. Do as the Athenians did: Banish
them before it is too late. Separate them from the group before they be-
come the eye of a whirlpool. Do not give them time to stir up anxieties
and sew discontent; do not give them room to move. Let one person suf-
fer so that the rest can live in peace.
When the tree‘/"alts, the monkeys scatter.
Chinese saying
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW II
In 1296 the cardinals of the Catholic Church met in Rome to select a new
pope. They chose Cardinal Gaetani, for he was incomparably shrewd;
such a man would make the Vatican a great power. Taking the name Boni~
face VIII, Gaetani soon proved he deserved the cardinals’ high opinion of
him: He plotted his moves carefully in advance, and stopped at nothing to
get his way. Once in power, Boniface quickly crushed his rivals and uni-
fied the Papal States. The European powers began to fear him, and sent
delegates to negotiate with him. The German King Albrecht of Austria
even yielded some territory to Boniface. All was proceeding according to
the pope’s plan.
One piece did not fall into place, however, and that was Tuscany, the
richest part of Italy. If Boniface could conquer Florence, Tuscany’s most
powerful city, the region would be his. But Florence was a proud republic,
and would be hard to defeat. The pope had to play his cards skillfully.
Florence was divided by two rival factions, the Blacks and the Whites.
The Whites were the merchant families that had recently and quickly
risen to power and wealth; the Blacks were the older money. Because of
their popularity with the people, the Whites retained control of the city, to
the Blacks’ increasing resentment. The feud between the two grew steadily
more bitter.
Here Boniface saw his chance: He would plot to help the Blacks take
over the city, and Florence would be in his pocket. And as he studied the
situation he began to focus on one man, Dante Alighieri, the celebrated
writer, poet, and ardent supporter of the Whites. Dante had always been
interested in politics. He believed passionately in the republic, and often
chastised his fellow citizens for their lack of spine. He also happened to be
the city’s most eloquent public speaker. In 1300, the year Boniface began
plotting to take over Tuscany, Dante’s fellow citizens had voted him in to
Florence’s highest elected position, making him one of the city’s six pri-
ors. During his six-month term in the post, he had stood firmly against the
Blacks and against all of the pope’s attempts to sow disorder.
By 1301, however, Boniface had a new plan: He called in Charles de
Valois, powerful brother of the king of France, to help bring order to Tus»
cany. As Charles marched through northern Italy, and Florence seethed
with anxiety and fear, Dante quickly emerged as the man who could rally
THE \V(lL\'l:‘.‘s‘ \\4‘l)
Ull’. .<lIF.l£l’
Once upon (1 lime, the
wolves sent an embassy
10 the sheep. (lesiring
that there might be
peace between them for
the lime to come.
“Why." said they.
“should we be for ever
waging this deudlv
strife? Those wicked
dogs are the cause of
all; they are irtcersixnrly
barking at us, and
provoking us. Send
them away, and there
will be no longer any
obstacle to our etemul
friendship and peace.
"
The silly sheep listerml,
the dogs were
dlSmiSSt’d, and the
flock, thus deprived of
their best prmectors,
became an easy prey to
their treacherous
enemy.
FABLES.
A5501‘.
SIXTH CENTURY ac.
LAW 42
361
Tlli. l.l|"l' 1)!
l'lll€\.llST()( Ll-ZS
I ’l‘h.vnzz'.czm:le:\- Iv]fellow
r.itizcns reached the
point at which their
jealousy nzade them
listen ro any slander at
his ¢’xp¢ws('. and so
/he] was forced to
remiml the unsemffly of
his tzvhievet-rtents mm‘!
I/zey could bear this no
longer. Hr: once mid to
those who were
cornplnirting ofhim:
“Why are you tired of
receiving benefits so
often from the same
mm?
" Besides this he
gave offense to the
people when he built
the temple 0fArtemir.
for not only did he
style lht‘ goddms
A rtemis Aristmboule, or
Artemis wisest in coun-
.s‘eI~—wz't}t the hint thm
it was he who had
givmz the best counsel
to the Athcntulzs and
the Greekx—1mrhe
chose a me for it nmr
his own house at
Melite.
.
.
. S0 at last the
A rhemkzrts bamlwlwrl
him. Titty made use of
the 0.$'fr£irIi.S‘I1I to
Izurnble his great repu-
tation am! his (tut/1or~
fly, as Indeed was their
habit with any wlwre
power they regarded as
opprtvssive. or who had
risen to an eminencr
which they mttsidert-d
out of keeping with the
equality Ufa
zlemncravy.
run urr or
rt~mMts‘I'oct,t:s.
P! l.‘ l‘2\R(‘H.
C. .-Ll). 46—l2O
362
LAW 42
the people, arguing vehemently against appeasement and working desper-
ately to arm the citizens and to organize resistance against the pope and
his puppet French prince. By hook or by crook, Boniface had to neutralize
Dante. And so, even as on the one hand he threatened Florence with
Charles de Valois, on the other he held out the olive branch, the possibil-
ity of negotiations, hoping Dante would take the bait. And indeed the Flov
rentines decided to send a delegation to Rome and try to negotiate
a
peace. To head the mission, predictably, they chose Dante.
Some warned the poet that the wily pope was setting up a trap to lure
him away, but Dante went to Rome anyway, arriving as the French army
stood before the gates of Florence. He felt sure that his eloquence and ma»
son would win the pope over and save the city. Yet when the pope met the
poet and the Florentine delegates, he instantly intimidated them, as he did
so many. “Fall on your knees before me!” he bellowed at their first meet-
ing. “Submit to me! I tell you that in all truth I have nothing in my heart
but to promote your peace.” Succumbing to his powerful presence, the
Florentines listened as the pope promised to look after their interests. He
then advised them to return home, leaving one of their members behind
to continue the talks. Boniface signaled that the man to stay was to be
Dante. He spoke with the utmost politeness, but in essence it was an order.
And so Dante remained in Rome. And while he and the pope contin-
ued their dialogue, Florence fell apart. With no one to rally the Whites,
and with Charles de Valois using the pope’s money to bribe and sow dis-
sension, the Whites disintegrated, some arguing for negotiations, others
switching sides. Facing an enemy now divided and unsure of itself, the
Blacks easily destroyed them within weeks, exacting violent revenge on
them. And once the Blacks stood firmly in power, the pope finally dis-
missed Dante from Rome.
The Blacks ordered Dante to return home to face accusations and
stand trial. When the poet refused, the Blacks condemned him to be
burned to death if he ever set foot in Florence again. And so Dante began
a miserable life of exile, wandering through Italy, disgraced in the city that
he loved, never to return to Florence, even after his death.
Interpretation
Boniface knew that if he only had a. pretext to lure Dante away, Florence
would crumble. He played the oldest card in the book—threatenix1g with
one hand while holding out the olive branch with the other»~—-and Dante
fell for it. Once the poet was in Rome, the pope kept him there for as long
as it took. For Boniface understood one of the principal precepts in the
game of power: One resolute person, one clisobedient spirit, can tum a
flock of sheep into a den of lions. So be isolated the troublemaker. With-
out the backbone of the city to keep them together, the sheep quickly
scattered.
Learn the lesson: Do not waste your time lashing out in all directions
at what seems to be a many-headed enemy. Find the one head that mat-
ters——t.he person with willpower, or smarts, or, most important of all,
charisma. Whatever it costs you, lure this person away, for once he is ab-
sent his powers will lose their effect. His isolation can be physical (banish-
ment or absence from the court), political (narrowing his base of support),
or psychological (alienating him from the group through slander and in-
sinuatiun). Cancer begins with a single cell; excise it before it spreads be-
yond cure.
KEYS TO POWER
In the past, an entire nation would be ruled by a king and his handful of
ministers. Only the elite had any power to play with. Over the centuries,
power has gradually become more and more diffused and democratized.
This has created, however,
a common misperception that groups
no
longer have centers of power——-that power is spread out and scattered
among many people. Actually, however, power has changed in its num-
bers but not in its essence. There may be fewer mighty tyrants command
ing the power of life and death over millions, but there remain thousands
of petty tyrants ruling smaller realms, and enforcing their will through in-
direct power games, charisma, and so on. In every group, power is con-
centrated in the hands of one or two people, for this is one area in which
human nature will never change: People will congregate around a single
strong personality like planets orbiting a sun.
To labor under the illusion that this kind of power center no longer
exists is to make endless mistakes, waste energy and time, and never hit
the target. Powerful people never waste time. Outwardly they may play
along with the game-—pretending that power is shared among manymbut
inwardly they keep their eyes on the inevitable few in the group who hold
the cards. These are the ones they work on, When troubles arise, they
look for the underlying cause, the single strong character who started the
stirring and whose isolation or banishment will settle the waters again.
In his fami1y~therapy practice, Dr. Milton H. Erickson found that if
the family dynamic was unsettled and dysfunctional there was inevitably
one person who was the stirrer, the troublemaker. In his sessions he would
symbolically isolate this rotten apple by seating him or her apart from the
others, if only by a few feet. Slowly the other family members would see
the physically separate person as the source of their difficulty. Once you
recognize who the stirrer is, pointing it out to other people will accomplish
a great deal. Understanding who controls the group dynamic is a critical
realization. Remember: Stirrers thrive by hiding in the group, disguising
their actions among the reactions of others. Render their actions visible
and they lose their power to upset.
A key element in games of strategy is isolating the enemy’s power. In
chess you try to comer the king. In the Chinese game of go you try to iso~
late the enemy’s forces in small pockets, rendering them immobile and in-
effectual. It is often better to isolate your
enemies than
to destroy
LAW 42
363
364
2
LAW 49
them——you seem less brutal. The result, though, is the same, for in the
game of power, isolation spells death.
The most effective form of isolation is somehow to separate your vic-
tims from their power base. When Mao Tse—tung wanted to eliminate an
enemy in the ruling elite, he did not confront the person directly; be
silently and stealthily worked to isolate the man, divide his allies and turn
them away from him, shrink his support. Soon the man would vanish on
his own.
Presence and appearance have great import in the game of power. To
seduce, particularly in the beginning stages, you need to be constantly
present, or create the feeling that you are; if you are often out of sight, the
charm will wear oil”. Queen Ellzabeth’s prime minister, Robert Cecil,
had two main rivals: the queen’s favorite, the Earl of Essex, and her for-
mer favorite, Sir Walter Raleigh. He contrived to send them both on a
mission against Spain; with them away from the court he managed to
wrap his tentacles around the queen, secure his position as her top ad~
viser and weaken her affection for Raleigh and the earl. The lesson here
is twofold: First, your absence from the court spells danger for you, and
you should never leave the scene in a time of turmoil, for your absence
can both symbolize and induce a loss of power; second, and on the other
hand, luring your enemies away from the court at critical moments is a
great ploy.
Isolation has other strategic uses. When trying to seduce people, it is
often wise to isolate them from their usual social context. Once isolated
they are vulnerable to you, and your presence becomes magnified. Simi-
larly, con artists often look for ways to isolate their marks from their nor
mal social milieux, steering them into new environments in which they
are no longer comfortable. Here they feel weak, and succumb to decep~
tion more easily. Isolation, then, can prove a powerful way of bringing
people under your spell to seduce or swindle them.
You will often find powerful people who have alienated themselves
from the group. Perhaps their power has gone to their heads, and they
consider themselves superior; perhaps they have lost the knack of com-
municating with ordinary folk. Remember: This makes them vulnerable.
Powerful though they be, people like this can be turned to use.
The monk Rasputin gained his power over Czar Nicholas and Czar-
ina Alexandra of Russia through their tremendous isolation from the peo-
ple. Alexandra in particular was
a foreigner, and especially alienated
from everyday Russians; Rasputin used his peasant origins to insinuate
himself into her good graces, for she desperately wanted to communicate
with her subjects. Once in the court’s inner circle, Rasputin made himself
indispensable and attained great power. Heading straight for the center,
he aimed for the one figure in Russia who commanded power (the czarina
dominated her husband), and found he had no need to isolate her for the
work was already done. The Rasputin strategy can bring you great power:
Always search out people who hold high positions yet who find them-
selves isolated on the board‘ They are like apples falling into your lap,
easily seduced, and able to catapult you into power yourself.
Finally, the reason you strike at the shepherd is because such an ac-
tion will djshearten the sheep beyond any rational measure. When Het-
nando Cortes and Francisco Pizarro led their tiny forces against the Aztec
and Incan empires, they did not make the mistake of fighting on several
fronts, nor were they intimidated by the numbers arrayed against them;
they captured the kings, Moctezuma and Atahualpa. Vast empires fell
into their hands. With the leader gone the center of gravity is gone; there
is nothing to revolve around and everything falls apart. Aim at the lead-
ers, bring them down, and look for the endless opportunities in the confu-
sion that will ensue.
Image: A Flock of Fatted
Sheep.
Do
not
waste precious
time trying to steal a sheep or two; do
not risk life and limb by setting upon
the dogs that guard the flock. Aim at the
shepherd.
Lure
him
away
and the dogs
will follow. Strike him down and the flock will
scatter—you can pick them off one by
one.
Authority: If you draw
a bow, draw the
strongest. If you use
an arrow, use the long~
est. To shoot a rider, first shoot his horse.
To
Catch
a gang of bandits, first capture
its leader. just
as
a country has its
border,
so the killing of men has its limits. If
the cnemy‘s attack can be stopped [with a
blow to the head], why have any more dead
and
wounded
than necessary?
(Chinese
poet Tu Fu, Tang dynasty, eighth century)
LAW 42
365
366
LAW 42
REVERSAL
“Any harm you do to a man should be done in such a way that you need
not fear his revenge,” writes Machiavelli. If you act to isolate your enemy,
make sure he lacks the means to repay the favor. If you apply this Law, in
other words, apply it from a position of superiority, so that you have noth-
ing to fear from his resentment.
Andrew Johnson, Abraham Lincoln’s
successor
as U.S. president,
saw Ulysses S. Grant as a troublesome member of his government. So he
isolated Grant,
as a prelude to forcing him out. This only enraged the
great general, however, who responded by forming a support base in the
Republican party and going on to become the next president. It would
have been far wiser to keep a man like Grant in the fold, where he could
do less harm, than to make him revengeful. And so you may often find it
better to keep people on your side, where you can watch them, than to
risk creating an angry enemy. Keeping them close, you can secretly whit-
tle away at their support base, so that when the time comes to cut them
loose they will fall fast and hard without knowing what hit them.
43
VVC)Rl(()D$TT{EZ}IEAURTS
4APJ[)DAIT€I)S C)F CTTIIEI{S
jUDGMENT
Coercion cmates
a reunion that will eventually work
against you.
You must seduce others into wanting to
move in your Ilirectimt. A person you have seduced be-
comes your loyal pawn. And the way to seduce others is to
operate on their individual psychologies and weaknesses.
Soflen up the resistant by working on their emotions,
playing on what they hold dear and what they fear. Ig~
mne the heads and minds ofothers and they will grow to
hate you.
367
LYRI S ‘x’ Ill SI:
Thinking ofthc means
by which he could
nwsl effmrlively
pemmadv the Persians
to revolr, /Cyrus’s/
delihcemtionx led him to
adopt the following
plan, which he found
best suited to his
purpose. He wrote on a
roll ofparchmem‘ that
Axrya-gee had
appointed him ('0
coimnand (he Persian
army; (her: he
summoned an :zx.sern-
My ofllze Persiarrs‘.
opened (he roll m their
presence and read mu
what he had written.
"And now, he added,
I have an order for
you: every man is to
appear on parade will:
a billimok.
.
. X‘
The order was obeyed.
All the men assembled
with their bilihooks,
and Cyrus
maxi
comtnarzd was {hall
before Ike day was out
they should rlear a
Certain piece of mag}:
lam)’ full of them»
bushes, about eighleen
or twenty furlongs
Square. This too was
done, whereupon Cymx
zssued the further order
that they should
present themselves
again on the following
day, after having taken
a bath. Meanwhile,
Cyrus collected and
slaughtered all his
father's goals‘, sheep,
and oxen in preparation
for eliteztairtiug the
whole I’erxiun army at
a banquet, together
with the best wine and
bread he could procnm.
The next day (he guests
assemhled, and were
368
LAW 43
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
Near the end of the reign of Louis XV, all of France seemed desperate for
change. When the king’s grandson and chosen successor, the future Louis
XVI, married the fifteen-year-old daughter of the empress of Austria, the
French caught a glimpse of the future that seemed hopeful. The young
bride, Ma.rie~Antoinette,
was beautiful and full of life.
She instantly
changed the mood of the court, which was rank with Louis XV’s dc»
baucheries; even the common people, who had yet to see her, talked excit-
edly of Marie-Antoinette. The French had grown disgusted with the series
of mistresses who had dominated Louis XV, and they looked forward to
sewing their new queen. In 1773, when Marie-Antoinette publicly rode
through the streets of Paris for the first time, applauding crowds swarmed
around her carriage. “How fortunate,” she wrote her mother, “to be in a
position in which one can gain widespread affection at so little cost.”
In 1774 Louis XV died and Louis XVI took the throne. As soon as
Maxie-Antninette became queen she abandoned herself to the pleasures
she loved the most—-ordering and wearing the most expensive gowns and
jewelry in the realm; sporting the most elaborate hair in history, her
sculpted coiffures rising as much as three feet above her head; and throwing
a constant succession of masked balls and fétes. All of these whims she paid
for on credit, never concerning herself with the cost or who paid the bills.
Marie~Antoinette’s greatest pleasure was the creation and designing of
a private Garden of Eden at the Petit Trianon, a chéteau on the grounds of
Versailles with its own woods. The gardens at the Petit Trianon were to be
as “natural” as possible, including moss applied by hand to the trees and
rocks. To heighten the pastoral effect, the queen employed peasant milk-
maids to milk the finestlooking cows in the realm; launderers and cheese
makers in special peasant outfits she helped design; shepherds to tend
sheep with silk ribbons around their necks. \'Vhen she inspected the bams,
she would watch her milkmaids squeezing milk into porcelain vases made
at the royal ceramic works. To pass the time, Ma.rie«Antoinette would
gather flowers in the woods around the Petit Trianon, or watch her “good
peasants” doing their “chores.” The place became
a separate world, its
community limited to her chosen favofites.
With each new whim, the cost of maintaining the Petit Trianon soared.
Meanwhile. France itself was deteriorating: There was famine and wide
spread discontent. Even socially insulated courtiers seethed with resent-
ment-—the queen treated them like children. Only her favorites mattered,
and these were becoming fewer and fewer. But Marie~Antoinette did not
concern herself with this. Not once throughout her reign did she read a
minister’s report. Not once did she tour the provinces and rally the people
to her side. Not once did she mingle among the Parisians, or receive a dc}
egation from them. She did none of these things because as queen she felt
the people owed her their affection, and she was not required to love them
in return.
In 1784 the queen became embroiled in a scandal. As part of an elabo-
rate swindle, the most expensive diamond necklace in Europe had been
purchased under her name, and during the swindlers‘ trial her lavish
lifestyle became public: People heard about the money she spent onjewels
and dresses and masked dances. They gave her the nickname “Madame
Deficit,” and from then on she became the focus of the people‘s growing
resentment. When she appeared in her box at the opera the audience
greeted her with hisses. Even the court turned against her. For while she
had been running up her huge ezcpenditures, the country was headed for
rum.
Five years later, in 1789, an unprecedented event took place: the be
ginning of the French Revolution. The queen did not worry—-let the peo-
ple have their little rebellion, she seemed to think; it would soon quiet
down and she would be able to resume her life of pleasure. That year the
people marched on Versailles, forcing the royal family to quit the palace
and take residence in Paris. This was a triumph for the rebels, but it offered
the queen an opportunity to heal the wounds she had opened and establish
contact with the people. The queen, however, had not learned her lesson:
Not once would she leave the palace during her stay in Paris. Her subjects
could rot in hell for all she cared.
In 1792 the royal couple was moved from the palace to a prison, as the
revolution officially declared the end of the monarchy. The following year
Louis XVI was tried, found guilty, and guillotined. As Marie~Autoinette
awaited the same fate, hardly a soul came to her defense-—not one of her
former friends in the court, not one of Europe’s other monarchs (who, as
members of their own countries’ royal families, had all the reason in the
world to show that revolution did not pay), not even her own family in
Austria, including her brother, who now sat on the throne. She had be
come the world’s pariah. In October of 1793, she finally knelt at the guillo-
tine, unrepentant and defiant to the bitter end.
Interpretation
From early on, Marie—Antoinette acquired the most dangerous of attitudes:
As a. young princess in Austria she was endlessly flattered and cajoled. As
the future queen of the French court she was the center of everyone’s atten-
tion. She never learned to charm or please other people, to become at-
tuned to their individual psychologies. She never had to work to get her
way, to use calculafion or cunning or the arts ofpersuasion. And like every-
one who is indulged from an early age, she evolved into a monster of in-
sensitivity.
Marie-Antoinette became the focus of an entire country’s dissatisfac-
tion because it is so infuriating to meet with a person who makes no effort
to seduce you or attempt to persuade you, even if only for the purpose of
deception. And do not imagine that she represents a bygone era, or that
she is even rare. Her type is today more common than ever. Such types live
in their own bubble—they seem to feel they are born kings and queens,
and that attention is owed them. They do not consider anyone else’: na-
ture, but bulldoze over people with the selfirighteous arrogance of a Marie-
Antoinette. Pampered and mdulged as children, as adults they still believe
told to sit down on the
gmis and enjoy
themselves. Afler the
meal Cyrus asked Ihem
which they pn'ferred—
yest:2rday’.s work or
today’; amusement;
and they replied that it
was indeed. a far cry
from the previous day ‘s
misery to their present
pleasures, 'l'hi.s‘ wax the
anywc-r which Cyrus
wtmlecl; he seized upon
it at once and
proceeded to lay bare
what he had in mind.
“Men of Persia," he
said, “listen to me: nhey
my orders, and you will
be able to enjoy a thou~
smtd pleasures as good
as this withum ever
turning your hands [0
menial labor.‘ but, if
you disobey, yester-
day's task will he the
pattern of innumerable
others you will be
fU7‘t‘(’!l to perform. Take
my advice and win
yuurfreedom, lam the
man destined to under-
take your liberation,
and at is my belief that
you are a march for the
Medes in war or in
ltvcrythirzg elm. It is 1/11’
truth I tell you. Do not
delay. but fling off the
yoke ofxhryagcs at
once.
"
The I’ersi¢m.9 had long
resented Iheil‘ subjec-
(ion to the Males. A:
last they hurl {amid a
(earlier, and welcomed
with enthusiasm the
pmspecr of liberty.
.
.
.
On the [JYIESEIII ocrasinn
the Persians under
Cyrux r().\‘(! against the
Males and from then
onwards were rnaslers
ofA:ia.
me; HlS'i'ORlES,
llERUl)0'I‘U.‘i.
FIFTH CENTIZRY B.c..
LAW 4:
369
’H||: (1|';.\H.l. Mi‘:
ill‘ l’|‘.lKhll:\Sll)\
The north wind and the
sun were di.$‘[)lll£Ng
wiricie was the xtrmrger.
am! agreed to
acknowlt,*dg(' as the
victor wlzic 1: war of
them mold .vn‘i;) a
traveler ofhis clothing.
The wind trim!/irsl.
But its violent gum
only made the mar:
hold his rlntlms t/glztly
around him. and when
it blew harder will thr
cum made him so
m2r;ornj'mmbIe that he
pm on an extra wrap.
Evcwtllrz/Iy thr wind
go: rircd afiz and
}’lt1fllIL‘([ him over /0 the
sun. The sun shorwfirrl
wilh a moderate
warmth, wlzicrfz made
the man lake of)“hi.v
mpcuut. Tim: it blazed
/iercely. till, unable
10 slam! the heat.
he Mrippvd and went
offto bathe in a
nearby river:
Persuasion is more
cjfccti ve [hurl force.
i«'.wu~.s.
At~.s<>t'.
sum-1 mm 1 'R‘{ M‘.
370
LAW 43
that everything must come to them; convinced of their own charm, they
make no effort to charm, seduce, or gently persuade.
In the realm of power, such attitudes are disastrous. At all times you
must attend to those around you, gauging their particular psychology, tai—
loxing your words to what you know will entice and seduce them. This re
quires energy and art. The higher your station, the greater the need to
remain attuned to the hearts and minds of those below you, creating a base
of support to maintain you at the pinnacle. Without that base, your power
will teeter, and at the slightest change of fortune those below will gladly as-
sist in your fall from grace.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
in A.D. 225, Chuko Liang, master strategist and chief minister to the ruler
of Shu in ancient China, confronted a dangerous situation. The kingdom of
Wei had mounted an all~out attack on Shu from the north. More dangerous
still, Wei had formed an alliance with the barbarous states to the south of
Shu, led by King Menghuo. Chuko Liang had to deal with this second
menace from the south before he could hope to fend off Wei in the north.
As Chuko Liang prepared to march south against the barbarians, a
wise man in his camp offered him advice. It would be impossible, this man
said, to pacify the region by force. Lizmg would probably beat Menghuo,
but as soon as he headed north again to deal with Wei, Menghuo would
reinvade. “It is better to win hearts," said the wise man, “than cities; better
to battle with hearts than with weapons. I hope you will succeed in winning
the hearts of these people.” “You read my thoughts,” responded Chuko
Liang.
As Liang expected, Menghuo launched a. powerful atm But Liang
laid a trap and managed to capture a large part ofMenghuds army, includ-
ing the king himself. Instead of punishing or executing his prisoners, how-
ever, he separated the soldiers from their king, had their shackles removed,
regaled them with food and wine, and then addressed them. “You are all
upright men,” he said. “I believe you all have parents, wives, and children
waiting for you at home. They are doubtless shedding bitter tears at your
fate. I am going to release you, so that you can return home to your loved
ones and comfort them.” The men thanked Liang with tears in their eyes;
then he sent for Menghuo. “If 1 release you,” asked Liang, “what will you
do?” “I will pull my army together again,” answered the king, “and lead it
against you to a decisive battle. But if you capture me a second time, I will
bow to your superiority.” Not only did Liang order Menghuo released, he
gave him a gift of a horse and saddle. When angry lieutenants wondered
why he did this, Liang told them, “I can capture that man as easily as I can
take something out of my pocket. I am trying to win his heart. When I do,
peace will come of itself here in the south.”
As Menghuo had said he would, he attacked again. But his own offi-
cers, whom Liang had treated so well, rebelled against him, captured him,
and turned him over to Liang, who asked him again the same question as
before. Menghuo replied that he had not been beaten fairly, but merely be-
trayed by his own officers; he would fight again, but if captured a third time
he would bow to Liang’s superiority.
Over the following months Liang outwitted Menghuo again and again,
capturing him a third, a fourth, and a fifth time. On each occasion Meng—
huo’s troops grew more dissatisfied. Liang had treated them with respect;
they had lost their heart for fighting. But every time Chuko Liang asked
Menghuo to yield, the great king would come up with another excuse: You
tricked me, I lost through bad luck, on and on. If you capture me again,
he would promise, I swear I will not betray you. And so Liang would let
him go.
When he captured Menghuo for the sixth time, he asked the king the
same question again. “If you capture me a seventh time,” the king replied,
“I shall give you my loyalty and never rebel again.” “Very well,” said
Liang. “But if I capture you again, I will not release you.”
Now Menghuo and his soldiers fled to a far corner of their kingdom,
the region ofWuge. Defeated so many times, Menghuo had only one hope
left: He would ask the help of King Wutugu of Wuge, who had an immense
and ferocious army. Wutugu’s warriors wore an armor of tightly woven
vines soaked
in oil,
then dried
to
an impenetrable
hardness. With
Menghuo at his side, Wutugu marched this mighty army against Liang, and
this time the great strategist seemed frightened, leading his men in a hur-
ried relreat. But he was merely leading Wutugu into a trap: He cornered
the king’s men in a narrow valley, then lit fires set all around them. When
the fires reached the soldiers Wutugu’s whole army burst into flame-the
oii in their armor, of course, being highly flammable. All of them perished.
Liang had managed to separate Mengliuo and his entourage from the
carnage in the valley, and the king found himself a captive for the seventh
time. After this slaughter Liang could not bear to face his prisoner again.
He sent a messenger to the captured king: “He has commissioned me to re-
lease you. Mobilize another army against him, if you can, and try once
more to defeat him.” Sobbing, the king fell to the ground, crawled to Liang
on his hands and knees, and prostrated himself at his feet. “Oh great minis-
ter,” cried Menghuo, “yours is the majesty of Heaven. We men of the south
will never again olier resistance to your rule.” “Do you now yield?” asked
Liang. “I, my sons, and my grandsons are deeply moved by Your Hon0r’s
boundless, lifegiving mercy. How could we not yield?”
Liang honored Menghuo with a great banquet, reestablished him on
the throne, restored his conquered lands to his rule, then returned north
with his army, leaving no occupying force. Liang never came back—he had
no need to: Menghuo had become his most devoted and unshakable ally.
Interpretation
Chuko Liang had two options: Try to defeat the barbarians in the south
with one crushing blow, or patiently and slowly win them to his side over
time. Most people more powerful than their enemy grab the first option
and never consider the second, but the truly powerful think far ahead: The
The men who have
changed the l.tI1iv(,’rS!'
have newer gotten there
by working on Iecrdery,
but rather by moving
the nza.s‘.ve.s“. Working on
lcartrrs is the method of
intrigue and only lozurlx
to s:t4.':)r111(1r_\1 rmlaltx.
Working on the rrm<r5c'5.
however, is the srroke
ofgenius mm charxges
the fam nfthc world.
NAY()LE().‘*- l3i)NAPAR 31- .
1769
i821
l.lI«‘|7, ill’ Al.lCV \\l)I'.Ii
'l‘ll|~. (.l(l‘.:\'l
This long and pzlirzfizi
[111 mu"I of I)arz'ns—-—for
in rlevm days he
nuzrched 33 htmdrczl
fi4rIurzgx—~l1ura.v.w(l his
xm‘zJ'£cr.\‘ so rim! most of
them were ready‘ to give
it up, L-hicfly for mm!
of water. While they
were in this rimrexzsz it
lmppened that .\‘f)!’I1£’
Macedoniimr who had
fetched Willi?! in skins
upon their mules from
:1 river they had /(mm!
out came about noon
to the phnce where
Alexander wax. and
seeing him almost
irlmkod with Ihirxt.
pmwnily filled zr helmet
(rm! oflered it him.
.
.
.
Then he look the
hzimer mm his hands.
and looking round
about when he saw all
those who were near
him .\'l!(’l€}¢fIzg their
heads out and looking
earnestly after the
drink. he returned it
again wixh (hanks
LAW 43
371
without tax-ting (I
drop ofit.
"For.”.s'ui([ he, “ifl
(1[(}Il(?.S‘HUu/J drink. the
rest will be out of
heurr.
" The .\'oldier.s' no
.mum:r wok notice of
his temperance and
mugmmimny upon this
m:ca.uun, but they one
and «ii (‘I‘i§%d out to him
to lead them fnrmml
lioiciix. and began
wlzipping on their
horses. For whzlvr mm»
hm! such :2 king they
said they Ala/led both
wezirinesx and (I1ir.s‘l.
and lcmkcil upon rherrr
.s'clw.\' to be little less
than Immortal.
‘rm. Lll*l- or
.'\I,l..\A’~:l1l«.R‘|‘lll~Z ouuxl‘.
P1m:z\m'H.
C
A.n. 46-120
372
‘
LAW 43
first option may be quick and easy, but over time it brews ugly emotions in
the hearts of the vanquished. Their resentment turns to hatred; such ani-
mosity keeps you on edge~—you spend your energy protecting what you
have gained, growing paranoid and defensive. The second option, though
more difficult, not only brings you peace of mind, it converts a potential
enemy info a pillar of support.
In all your encounters, cake a step back—-take the time to calculate and
attune yourself to your targets’ emotional makeup and psychological weak-
nesses. Force will only strengthen their resistance. ‘With most people the
heart is the key: They are like children, ruled by their emotions. To soften
them up, alternate harshness with mercy. Play on their basic fears, and also
their loves——freeclom, family, etc. Once you break them down, you will
have a lifelong friend and fiercely loyal ally.
Governments saw men only in mass; but our men, being irregulars, were not
formations, but individuals.
.
.
. Our kingdoms lay in each manis mind.
Scvcn Pillars of Wisdom, T‘. 1;. Lawrence, 1888-1935
KEYS TO POWER
In the game of power, you are surrounded by people who have absolutely
no reason to help you unless it is in their interest to do so. And if you have
nothing to offer their selfiinterest, you are likely to make them hostile, for
they will see in you just one more competitor, one more waster of their
time. Those that overcome this prevailing coldness are the ones who find
the key that unlocks the stra.nger’s head and mind, seducing him into their
corner, if necessary sofiening him up for a punch. But most people never
learn this side of the game. Vlrhen they meet someone new, rather than
stepping back and probing to see what makes this person unique, they talk
about themselves, eager to impose their own willpower and prejudices.
They argue, boast, and make a show of their power. They may not know it
but they are secretly creating an enemy, a resistor, because there is no
more infuriating feeling than having your individuality ignored, your own
psychology unacknowledged. It makes you feel lifeless and resentful.
Remember: The key to persuasion is softening people up and break-
ing them down, gently. Seduce them with a two—pronged approach: Work
on their emotions and play on their intellectual weaknesses. Be alert to
both what separates them from everyone else (their individual psychology)
and what they share with everyone else (their basic emotional responses).
Aim at the primary emotions——love, hate, jealousy. Once you move their
emotions you have reduced their control, making them more vulnerable to
persuasion.
When Chuko Liang wanted to dissuade an important general of a rival
kingdom from entering into an alliance with Ts’ao Ts’ao, Liang’s dreaded
enemy, he did not detail "rm; Ts’ao’s cruelty, or attack him on moral
grounds. Instead Liang suggested that Ts’ao Ts’ao was really after the gen»
eral’s beautiful young wife. This hit the general in the gut, and won him
over. Mao Tse—tung similarly always appealed to popular emotions, and
spoke in the simplest terms. Educated and well—rea.d himself, in his
speeches he used visceral metaphors, voicing the public’s deepest amdelies
and encouraging them to vent their frustrations in public meetings. Rather
than arguing the practical aspects of a. particular program, he would de~
scribe how it would affect them on the most primitive, down—to—earth level.
Do not believe that this approach works only with the illiterate and un-
sch0oled—it works on one and all. All of us are mortal and face the same
dreadful fate, and all of us share the desire for attachment and belonging.
Stir up these emotions and you captivate our hearts.
The best way to do this is with a dramatic jolt, of the kind that Chuko
Liang created when be fed and released prisoners who expected only the
worst from him. Shaking them to the core, he softened their hearts. Play on
contrasts like this: Push people to despair, then give them relief. If they ex~
pect pain and you give them pleasure, you win their hearts. Creating plea-
sure of any kind, in fact, will usually bring you success, as will allaying fears
and providing or promising security.
Symbolic gestures are often enough to win sympathy and goodwill. A
gesture of self—sacri.fice, for example--a show that you suffer
as those
around you do—will make people identify with you, even if your suffering
is symbolic or minor and theirs is real. When you enter a group, make a
gesture of goodwill; soften the group up for the harsher actions that will fol-
low later.
When T. E. Lawrence was fighting the Turks in the deserts of the Mid-
dle East during World War I, he had an epiphany: It seemed to him that
Conventional warfare had lost its value. The old-fashioned soldier was lost
in the enormous amiies of the time, in which he was ordered about like a
lifeless pawn. Lawrence wanted to turn this around. For him, every sol-
dier’s mind was a kingdom he had to conquer. A committed, psychologi-
cally motivated soldier would fight harder and more creatively than
a.
puppet.
Lawrence’s perception is still more true in the world today, where so
many of us feel alienated, anonymous, and suspicious of authority, all of
which makes overt power plays and force even more counterproductive
and dangerous. Instead of manipulating lifeless pawns, make those on your
side convinced and excited by the cause you have enlisted them in; this
will not only make your work easier but it will also give you more leeway
to deceive them later on. And to accomplish this you need to deal with
their individual psychologies. Never clumsily assume that the tactic that
worked on one person will necessarily work on another. To find the key
that will motivate them, first get them to open up. The more they talk, the
more they reveal about their likes and dislikes--the handles and levers to
move them with.
The quickest way to secure people’s minds is by demonstrating, as
simply
as possible, how an action will benefit them. Self—interest is the
LAW 43
‘
3'73
3 7'4
LAW 43
strongest motive of all: A great cause may capture minds, but once the firs:
flush of excitement is over, interest will flag--unless there is something to
be gained. Self-interest is the solider foundation. The causes that work best
use a noble veneer to cover a blatant appeal to self-interest; the cause se-
duces but the self-interest secures the deal.
The people who are best at appealing to people’s minds are often
artists, intellectuals, and those of a more poetic nature. This is because
ideas are most easily communicated through metaphors and imagery. It is
always good policy, then, to have in your pocket at least one artist or intel~
lectual who can appeal concretely to people’s minds. Kings have always
kept a stable of writers in their ham: Frederick the Great had his Voltaire
(until they quaneled and separated), Napoleon won over Goethe. Con-
versely, Napoleon III’s alienation of writers such as Victor Hugo, whom he
exiled from France, contributed to his growing unpopularity and eventual
downfall. It is dangerous, then, to alienate those who have powers of ex»
pression, and useful to pacify and exploit them.
Finally, learn to play the numbers game‘ The wider your support base
the stronger your power. Understanding that one alienated, disaffected
soul can spark a blaze of discontent, Louis XIV made sure to endear him-
self to the lowest members of his staff. You too must constantly win over
more allies on all levels-we time will inevitably come when you will need
them.
lm age :
The Keyhole.
People build
walls to keep you
out;
never
force
your way in
—- you
will find only more
walls within walls.
There
are doors in
these walls, doors to
the heart and mind, and
they have tiny keys
holes Peer through the
keyhole, find the key
that opens the door,
and you have access
to their will with
no ugly signs
of
forced
e n tr y.
Authority: The difiiculties in the way of persuasion he in my kn0w—
ing the heart of the persuaded in order thereby to fit my wording
into it.
.
.
. For this reason, whoever attempts persuasion before
the throne, must carefully observe the sovereigrfs feelings of love
and hate, his secret wishes and fears, before he can conquer
his heart. (Hawfeivtzu, Chinese philosopher, third century BC.)
REVERSAL
There is no possible reversal to this Law.
LAW 43
375
375
44
DISARM AND INFURIATE
WITH THE MIRROR EFFECT
jUDGMENT
The mirror reflects reality, but it is alxo the perfect toalfor
deception: When you minm your enemies, doing exactly
as they do, they cannotfigure out your strategy. The Mir-
1m*Efi"ect mocks and humiliates them, making them over-
react. By holding up a mirmr to thelrpsyches, you seduce
them with the illusion that you share their values; by
holding up a mirror to their actions, you teach them a
lesson. Fm: can resist the power of she MirmrEflecil
MIRROR EFFECTS: Preliminary Typology
Mirrors have the power to disturb us. Gazing at our reflection in the mir~
rot, we most often see what we want to see—the image of ourselves with
which we are most comfortable. We tend not to look too closely, ignoring
the wrinkles and blemishes. But if we do look hard at the reflected image,
we sometimes feel that we are seeing ourselves as others see us, as a person
among other people, an object rather than a subject. That feeling makes us
shudder—we
see ourselves, but from the outside, minus the thoughts,
spirit, and soul that fill our consciousness. We are a thing.
In using Mirror Efiects we symbolically re—create this disturbing power
by mirroring the actions of other people, mimicking their movements to
unsettle and infuriate them. Made to feel mocked, cloned, objectlike, an
image without a soul, they get angry. Or do the same thing slightly differ’
ently and they might feel disarmed—you have perfectly reflected their
wishes and desires. This is the narcissism: power of mirrors. In either case,
the Mirror Efiect unsettles your targets, whether angering or entrancing
them, and in that instant you have the power to manipulate or seduce
them. The Effect contains great power because it operates on the most
primitive emotions.
There are four main Mirror Effects in the realm of power:
The Neutralizing
Eflect. In ancient Greek mythology,
the Gorgon
Medusa had serpents for hair, protruding tongue, massive teeth, and a face
so ugly that anyone who gazed at her was turned into stone, out of fright.
But the hero Perseus managed to slay Medusa by polishing his bronze
shield into a mirror, then using the reflection in the mirror to guide him as
he crept up and cut off her head without looking at her directly. If the
shield in this instance was a mirror, the mirror also was a kind of shield:
Medusa could not see Perseus, she saw only her own reflected actions, and
behind this screen the hero stole up and destroyed her.
This is the essence of the Neutralizing Eifect: Do what your enemies
do, following their actions as best you can, and they cannot see what you
are up to—they are blinded by your mirror. Their strategy for dealing with
you depends on your reacting to them in a way characteristic of you; new
tralize it by playing a game of mimicry with them. The tactic has a mock—
ing, even infuriating effect. Most of us remember the childhood experience
of someone teasing us by repeating our words exactly-—after a while, usu-
ally not long, we wanted to punch them in the face. Working more subtly
as an adult, you can still unsettle your opponents this way; shielding your
own strategy with the mirror, you lay invisible traps, or push your oppo-
nents into the trap they planned for you.
This powerful technique has been used in military strategy since the
days of Sun-tzu; in our own time it often appears in political campaigning.
It is also useful for disguising those situations in which you have no particu-
lar strategy yourself. This is the Wa.rn‘or’s Mirror.
A
reverse version of the Neutralizing Effect is the Shadow: You
T! HE Ml;‘R(1lHl\ X‘ A
I)
ll IS
.\I)
A cermin merclmm
once had a great desire
to make a long journey.
Now in regard /hat he
was not very weal/hy.
“I! Ls‘ rsquisi1e,"sai:1‘ he
to Fzimselfi “that before
my departure 1 should
leave xonzre part afmy
chute in the city, 10 the
and that if I meet with
ill luck in my Iruverls,
I may have wherewithal
to keep me in my
return.
" To this purpose
he delivered a great
number 0/"bars ofiron,
which were a principal
part ofhis wealth, in
trust to one ofhis
friends, desiring him to
keep them during Ins:
absence; and then,
mking his leave, away
he went. Some time
after, having had but lll
luck in his travels, he
remnled lzom«,' and the
firs: thing he did was to
go to his friend, and
demand his iron: but
his friend, who owed
several sums vfmonev,
having sold the iron to
pay his own debts,
made him (ink answer.‘
“Tmly, friend,
" said he,
"'1 put your iron into (1
mom that was (‘last
locked, imagining it
would have been there
(IS S€[.'LiH:‘ 03' WE)’ (7WI1
gold; but an accident
has itappened wlnirh
no one could ha we
suspected, for them was
a rat in the room wlzich
are i1 all up.
”
The merclzam.
pretending zgnorarwe,
replied, "I! is a terrible
misfmnme I0 me
indem';buI1 know of
LAW 44
377
old Illa! rats love in»:
extmm srly; I have
sufferer] lay them many
tirnm hr-fnrv m the mmv
rmmrzer, and !hc'r0j'ore
cam rlw hatter hem my
p rrnwznl affliction.
"
‘fills’ answer extremely
pl£?u.$‘(:(l Ilzr fnenri, who
was glad to hear the
mwclmm so well
irzciizwd to brlicvc rim!
11 mt had eaten his iron;
and In remuw all
suspicions. desired him
to dz’/ui will: him the
next day. The mrrciumt
prcrmised he would, but
in the mvanlime he met
in the middle ufrho City
one oflH'.\' friemfs chil-
:1rm;rhe rhilzi he
carried home. and
iortkml up in 11 mrmz.
The next clay he went to
his frimrl. who secnmzl
to be in great af]Iir:1im1..
which he asked him the
<:ml.\‘t’ of as ifhe fwd
been perfr¢¢rtl_v igrmnmr
of whm /Md lmppeneri.
“O, my dmr frimd,
"
mrswzrml the other, ‘'I
beg you to excuse me. if
you do not set’ me so
cheerful as otherwise
I would be; I have lost
one of my zzlzildrrm;
I have hurl him cried by
.murz(I oftmmprez, but
I know mu what is
l7(’(‘1'IIll£’ ufhim.
"
"0f"mplir,'dIl1zr
rmrclmnl. “I am gricvczl
m lwar thir;_/hr
yesterday in (lav
evmxlrzg, as I pm'n3(l
from henure, I saw an
owl in 1/10 air with a
child in his claws; [Jul
\&'lll(’flt(H‘ it were your.»
1 ("armor It-Ii.
"
"Why, you most foolish
and tIl)b‘llI’£l crwrure."
ntplivrl (hr fricml, "are
you not axlianzed to ml!
such an eg:‘¢»gi0a.s' lie?
An om’. thul weighs in
.777‘?
A
LAW 44
shadow your opponents’ every move without their seeing you. Use the
Shadow to gather information that will neutralize their strategy later on,
when you will be able to thwart their every move. The Shadow is effective
because to follow the movements of others is to gain valuable insights into
their habits and routines. The Shadow is the preeminent device for detec-
tives and spies.
The Narcissus Eflect. Gazing at an image in the waters of a pond, the
Greek youth Narcissus fell in love with it. And when he found out that the
image was his own reflection, and that he therefore could not consummate
his love, he despaired and drowned himself. All of us have a similar prob-
lem: We are profoundly in love with ourselves, but since this love excludes
a love object outside ourselves, it remains continuously unsatisfied and un-
fulfilled. The Narcissus Effect plays on this universal narcissism: You look
deep into the souls of other people; fathom their inmost desires, their val-
ues, their tastes, their spirit; and you reflect it back to them, making your-
self into a kind of mirror image. Your ability to reflect their psyche gives
you great power over them; they may even feel a tinge of love.
This is simply the ability to mimic another person not physically, but
psychologically, and it is immensely powerful because it plays upon the
unsatisfied se1f—love of a child. Normally, people bombard us with their ex-
periences, their tastes. They hardly ever make the effort to
see things
through our eyes. This is annoying, but it also creates great opportunity: If
you can show you understand another person by reflecting their inmost
feelings, they will be entranced and disarmed, all the more so because it
happens so rarely. No one can resist this feeling of being harmoniously re-
flected in the outside world, even though you might well be manufacturing
it for their benefit, and for deceptive purposes of your own.
The Narcissus Effect works wonders in both social life and business; it
gives us both the Seducer’s and the Coum'er’s Mirror.
The Moral Effect. The power of verbal argument is extremely limited,
and often accomplishes the opposite of what is intended. As Gracién re-
marks, “The truth is generally seen, rarely heard.” The Moral Effect is a
perfect way to demonstrate your ideas through action. Quite simply, you
teach others a lesson by giving them a taste of their own medicine.
In the Moral Effect, you mirror what other people have done to you,
and do so in a way that makes them realize you are doing to them exactly
what they did to you. You make them feel that their behavior has been un-
pleasant, as opposed to hearing you complain and whine about it, which
only gets their defenses up. And as they feel the result of their actions mir~
rored back at them, they realize in the profoundest sense how they hurt or
punish others with their unsocial behavior. You objectify the qualifies you
want them to feel ashamed of and create a mirror in which they can gaze at
their follies and learn a lesson about themselves. This technique is often
used by educators, psychologists, and anyone who has to deal with un-
pleasant and unconscious behavior. This is the Teacher’s Mirror. Vifhether
or not there is actually anything wrong with the way people have treated
you, however, it can often be to your advantage to reflect it back to them in
a way that makes them feel guilty about it.
The Hallucinatory Effect. Mirrors are tremendously deceptive, for they
create a sense that you are looking at the real world. Actually, though, you
are only staring at a piece of glass, which, as everyone knows, cannot show
the world exactly as it is: Everything in a mirror is reversed. When Alice
goes through the looking glass in Lewis Ca.rroll’s book, she enters a world
that is back~to—front, and more than just visually.
The Hallucinatory Effect comes from creating a perfect copy of an ob-
ject, a place, a person. This copy acts as a kind of dummy—-people take it
for the real thing, because it has the physical appearance of the real thing.
This is the preeminent technique of con artists, who strategically mimic the
real world to deceive you. It also has applications in any arena that re
quires camouflage. This is the Deceiver’s Mirror.
OBSERVANCES OF MIRROR EFFECTS
Observance I
In February of 1815, the emperor Napoleon escaped from the island of
Elba, where he had been imprisoned by the allied forces of Europe, and re-
turned to Paris in a match that stirred the French nation, rallying troops
and citizens of all classes to his side and chasing his successor, King Louis
XVIII, off the throne‘ By March, however, having reestablished himselfin
power, he had to face the fact that France’s situation had gravely changed.
The country was devastated, he had no allies among the other European
nations, and his most loyal and important ministers had deserted him or
left the country. Only one man remained from the old regin-ie—joseph
Fouché, his former minister of police.
Napoleon had relied on Fouché to do his dirty work throughout his
previous reign, but he had never been able to figure his minister out. He
kept a corps of agents to spy on all of his ministers, so that he would always
have an edge on them, but no one had gotten anything on Fouché. If sus~
pected of some miscleed, the minister would not get angry or take the accu-
sation personally—he would submit, nod, smile,
and change
colors
chameleonlike, adapting to the requirements of the moment. At first this
had seemed somewhat pleasant and charming, but after a while it frus-
trated Napoleon, who felt outdone by this slippery man. At one time or an
other he had fired all of his most important ministers, including Talleyrand,
but he never touched Fouché. And so, in 1815, back in power and in need
of help, he felt he had no choice but to reappoint Fouché as his minister of
police.
Several weeks into his new reign, Napoleorfs spies told him they be-
IVNIAI I101 GPJOVE [H50 97
rhree pow:/ls, can he
curry a buy (hm weighs
above fifty?
"
"Why." replied thy
men;/zant, “do you
make such a wonder m
Ihw? As ifin a rnuntry
|4«"'H’V(‘ Dill? 7/1! (‘(1/1 (‘III II
hundrml tum" weigh]
ofirim, it were such a
wonder for an uwl to
carry :2 child that
weiglix not ovcrjijly‘
pounds in all!" The
frieml, upon this. foam!
that the mnrcimrxt was
no such foot as he took
him to be, begged his
pardon for the client
wlzirh he dtzrigrzed to
have put upon him.
I’€Sl(}I‘e‘d him the value
of his Iran, and iv had
his
‘
11 again.
I'All(,l-ES,
l’l|.l‘.-\Y,
1.~u>m,
mmrm (‘t~‘.N'mRY
Whm yzm have form:
to grips and are striv—
mg together with the
enemy. and you realize
Ihal you mnnot
advance, you “.rm1kin"
and become one with
the erzemy. You can win
by applying a suitable
mtlznique while you
are mutually entangled.
.
.
. You can win u/ken
decisively with the
advantage of knowing
how to "soak
" into the
enemy, whereas‘. were
you to draw apart, you
would {me 11:: cimnce
to win.
A soon or-'1-we RINGS,
MIYAMOTO M1:sAsm,
JAPAN,
SF,‘/FNTF,F.NTH (‘F NTURY
LAW 44
379
TIIIC (“UV /\'\I)
'|HlI filfllik
Um’ day Mr. Fox
(l£’(‘iti(',{I to fmk out
And invite old Mrs.
Stork (ml.
The rliimcr W1.l.\'I1‘!
elaborate-
Beiiig Imbituullv mean,
He tliilrflt go in for
I’lUlliL' l'lll.\‘l-NCT
In fact it crm.s‘iS(:’d of/1
vlmllow plate
Ofrhin gruiri.
Within ii minute
Our jokrr hail lapped
his plate clean:
Meanwhile his J,-ims/.
/ishmg away with
Iwr beak,
Got not 11 morxel in it
To pay him imrrkfnr
this cruel Prai,'Iirai
[aka the Mark invitud
The /‘ox to dinner the
fiillowing wiI(4A‘.
“l xhoulzl be
delighted,"
Hr replied;
“When it t‘rmu'.s‘ In
frimiit I never immi
upon pride‘.
"
Punctztally on my
day he ran
To his ho.s’(ct\‘s'.»' hiiiise
and at once began
I’rai.\‘ing everything."
" What time.’ What chic!
Ami [ht/f4mcl—iImi('
just to (1 mm!"
Then sat down with a
hmrly appetite
(I7o,mv we always‘
ready to (car)
And mvored the deli-
(‘i()ll.Y smelt ofmeat.
It was‘ f1liIlL’€¢ih1L’Iltt,lII(i
St’I‘Vt’ti—iU serve
him right./—
In a i(!rlg-Il€‘.(f’<'.t’[i,
Imrrow-nmtitlxzrd um.
Thu smrk. (,’lL\'ily
xmoping,
Ifnjoyerl hflffi/i
With her long bill:
Hl.V snout, though.
380
LAW 44
lieved Fouché was in secret contact with ministers of foreign countries, in-
cluding Metvernich of Austria. Afraid that his most valuable minister was
betraying him to his enemies, Napoleon had to find out the truth before it
was too late, He could not confront Fouché directly—in person the man
was as slippery as an eel. He needed hard proof.
This seemed to come in April, when the emperor’s private police cap
tured a Viennese gentleman who had come to Paris to pass infonnation on
to Fouché. Ordering the man brought before him, Napoleon threatened to
shoot him then and there unless he confessed; the man broke down and
admitted he had given Fouché a letter from Metternich, written in invisible
ink, arranging for a secret meeting of special agents in Basel. Napoleon ars-
cordingly ordered one of his own agents to infiltrate this meeting. If Fouché
was indeed planning to betray him, he would finally be caught red-handed
and would hang.
Napoleon waited impatiently for the agent’s return, but to his bewil-
derment the agent showed up days later reporting that he had heard noth-
ing that would implicate Fouché in a conspiracy. In fact it seemed that the
other agents present suspected Fouché of double-crossing them, as if he
were working for Napoleon all along. Napoleon did not believe this for an
instant—Fouché had somehow outwitted him again.
The following morning Fouché visited Napoleon, and remarked, “By
the way, sire, I never told you that I had a letter from Metternich a few
days ago; my mind was so full of things of greater moment. Besides, his
emissary omitted to give me the powder needed to make the writing legi-
ble.
.
.
. Here at length is the letter.” Sure that Fouché was toying with him,
Napoleon exploded, “You
are
a traitor, Fouché! I ought to have you
hanged.” He continued to harangue Fouché, but could not fire him without
proof. Fouché only expressed amazement at the emperor’s words, but in-
wardly he smiled, for all along he had been playing a mirroring game.
Interpretation
Fouché had known for years that Napoleon kept on top of those around
him by spying on them day and night. The minister had survived this game
by having his own spies spy on Napoleon’s spies, thus neutralizing any ac-
tion Napoleon might take against him. In the case of the meeting in Basel,
he even turned the tables: Knowing about Napoleorfs double agent, he set
it up so that it would appear as if Fouché were a loyal double agent too.
Fouché gained power and flourished in a period of great tumult by
mirroring those around him. Duning the French Revolution he was a radi-
cal jacobin; after the Terror he became a moderate republican; and under
Napoleon he became a committed imperialist whom Napoleon ennobled
and made the duke of Otranto. If Napoleon took up the weapon of digging
up dirt on people, Fouché made sure he had the dirt on Napoleon, as well
as on everyone else. This also allowed him to predict the emperor’s plans
and desires, so that he could echo his boss’s sentiments before he had even
uttered them. Shielding his actions with a mirror strategy, Fouché could
also plot offensive moves without being caught in the act.
This is the power of mirroring those around you. First, you give people
the feeling that you share their thoughts and goals. Second, if they suspect
you have ulterior motives, the mirror shields you from them, preventing
them from figuring out your strategy. Eventually this will infuriate and un-
settle them. By playing the double, you steal their thunder, suck away their
initiative, make them feel helpless. You also gain the ability to choose when
and how to unsettle them—anot.her avenue to power. And the mirror saves
you mental energy: simply echoing the moves of others gives you the
space you need to develop a strategy of your own.
Observance II
Early on in his career, the ambitious statesman and general Alcibiades of
Athens (450—404 8.0) fashioned a formidable weapon that became the
source of his power. In every encounter with others, he would sense their
moods and tastes, then carefully tailor his words and actions to mirror their
inmost desires. He would seduce them with the idea that their values were
superior to everyone else’s, and that his goal was to model himself on them
or help them realize their dreams. Few could resist his charm.
The first man to fall under his spell was the philosopher Socrates. Al-
cibiades represented the opposite of the Socratic ideal of simplicity and up-
rightness: He lived lavishly and was completely unprincipled. Whenever
he met Socrates, however, he mirrored the older man’s sobriety, eating
simply, accompanying Socrates on long walks, and talking only of philoso-
phy and virtue. Socrates was not completely fooled——he was not unaware
of Alcibiades’ other life. But that only made him vulnerable to a logic that
flattered him: Only in my presence, he felt, does this man submit to a. virtu-
ous influence; only I have such power over him. This feeling intoxicated
Socrates, who became Alcibiades’ fervent admirer and supporter, one day
even risking his own life to rescue the young man in battle.
The Athenians considered Alcibiades their greatest orator, for he had
an uncanny ability to tune in to his audience’s aspirations, and mirror their
desires. He made his greatest speeches in support of the invasion of Sicily,
which he thought would bring great wealth to Athens and limitless glory to
himself. The speeches gave expression to young Athenians’ thirst to com
quer lands for themselves, rather than living off the victories of their a.nces~
tors. But he also tailored his words to reflect older men's nostalgia for the
glory years when Athens led the Greeks against Persia, and then went on to
create an empire. All Athens now dreamed of conquering Sicily; Alcibi-
ades’ plan was approved, and he was made the expedition’s commander.
While Alcibiades was leading the invasion of Sicily, however, certain
Athenians fabricated charges against him of profaning sacred statues. He
knew his enemies would have him executed if he returned home, so at the
last minute he deserted the Athenian fleet and defected to Athens’s bitter
enemy, Sparta. The Spartans welcomed this great man to their side, but
they knew his reputation and were wary of him. Alcibiades loved luxury;
the Spartans were a warrior people who worshipped austerity, and they
were afraid he would corrupt their youth. But much to their relief, the Al~
being me wrong
.i"hup1' and size,
II(' had In return to
his den
Empryalmllietl, tail
dragging. ears
rlrouping,
As rec! in 1/wfacc as a
[at who’: been caught
by a hen.
sri l‘:(.‘TFD F-AHLIL5.
.ll'AN ma LA l"(l\'TAlNf<,
ltfll 46195
Till‘, l’I‘ltl,0lM'J)
l.K'l"l'l»ZH
When I with to find (ml
how wisr, or how
.s‘lup-id, or how good, or
how u/it:/«€11 is (my am’.
or what are his
thzmglzls at the
moment, I /in-lziun the
e.\/Jrc-.s*.si(m ufmyfuce.
as accurately as pu.r.n'-
He, in arcordrzncc with
the e.\:pre.tsion ofiris
am‘! then wait to see
what rlmugkts or semi-
mcms arise in my liilfld
or /wan, as ifto match
or correspond wirh the
ax/Jressiurt.
J:‘o<;».R Ax LAN Pow,
l80‘)~1K4‘)
LAW 44
A
381
1.()Rl~.\‘/.0 llli‘ \l!-ZDIIII
f~l"l)l ill-"h T339" 1’(ll’l~'
l.urwi:u [1l1¢' .’Vl¢3di1'i/
(or! rm up/mrtunily of
im,‘rva.w‘in;: I/Le Il’.\‘pl’(‘l
which Pup? Imxnrwm
now felifm him and of
gaming his friem1.vhip,
z‘j'pu.s:»*ii:Ie his a/]’eczz‘un.
He tank the trouble tr»
Aisuzvtrr 1/11’ Pope iv
tt1Stt’S and nrululgml
(hem uccunlingly. He
rem ham
.
. .u1.sks' of
Izirfuvourirc wine.
.
.
.
Ht: rem him (i0!iF!1?(Ili_\'.
flazterilzg letters in
which hf’ assured him,
when Ihe Pope mm‘ ill,
that he [all his .mj]'er-
ing.\ as lhough they
were }1i.\‘ nwn. in which
he enctoumgvri hull
with .\'m‘h forlzfying
flaremmts as “:1 Pope
is what he willy to be,"
and in which, as
though imvdenmlly, he
im:/mlr*a’ his views on
the proper course of
pupal policies. Innocmt
war gralzfied Ivy
Lqirerzzrfs azleniérlns
and convinced by his
argumenrx
.
.
. So
cmnpleiely, mdeed. did
he (mile to .\‘/tare his
opinions that, as the
dixgnmrlerl F«*rrar«'.w>
mnI)u.\:smlor put it,
“/he Pupw .\'[H*,]1.v with
the eyes nfthe Magnifi-
rem Lorenz:
'
iur. mum:
or‘ ,\Al,-tum.
Us RIM: rum FALL.
CnR|5'H)PuER Hmmzm.
I980
38.?
LAW 44
cibiacles who arrived in Sparta was not at all what they expected: He wore
his hair untfimmed (as they did), took cold baths, ate coarse bread and
black broth, and wore simple clothes. To the Spartans this signified that he
had come to see their way of life as superior to the Athenian; greater than
they were, he had chosen to be a Spartan rather than being born one, and
should thus be honored above all others. They fell under his spell and
gave him great powers. Unfortunately Alcibiades rarely knew how to
rein in his cha.rm—he managed to seduce the king of Spaxtafs wife and
make her pregnant. When this became public he once more had to flee
for his life.
This time Alcibiades defected to Persia, where he suddenly went from
Spartan simplicity to embracing the lavish Persian lifestyle down to the last
detail. It was of course immensely flattering to the Persians to see a Greek
of Alcibiades’ stature prefer their culture over his own, and they showered
him with honors, land, and power. Once seduced by the mirror, they failed
to notice that behind this shield Alcibiades was playing a double game, se-
cretly helping the Athenians in their war with Sparta and thus reingrafiab
ing himself with the city to which he desperately wanted to remm, and
which welcomed him back with open arms in 408 B.C.
Interpretation
Early in his political career, Alcibiades made a discovery that changed his
whole approach to power: He had a colorful and forceful personality, but
when he argued his ideas strongly with other people he would win over a
few while at the same time alienating many more. The secret to gaining as»
cendancy over large numbers, he came to believe, was not to impose his
colors but to absorb the colors of those around him, like a chameleon.
Once people fell for the trick, the decepfions he went on to practice would
be invisible to them.
Understand: Everyone is wrapped up in their own narcissistic shell.
When you try to impose your own ego on them, a wall goes up, resistance
is increased. By mirroring them, however, you seduce them into a kind of
narcissistic rapture: They are gazing at a double of their own soul. This
double is actually manufactured in its entirety by you. Once you have used
the mirror to seduce them, you have great power over them.
It is worth noting, however, the dangers in the promiscuous use of the
mirror. In Alcibiades’ presence people felt larger, as if their egos had been
doubled. But once he left, they felt empty and diminished, and when they
saw him mirroring completely different people as totally as he had mir-
rored them, they felt notjust diminished but betrayed. Alcibiades’ overuse
of the Mirror Effect made whole peoples feel used, so that he constantly
had to flee from one place to another. indeed Alcibiades so angered the
Spartans that they finally had him murdered. He had gone Loo far. The Se-
ducer’s Mirror must be used with caution and discrimination.
Observance III
In 1652 the recently widowed Baroness Mancini moved her family from
Rome to Paris, where she could count on the influence and protection of
her
brother
Cardinal Mazatin,
the
French prime
minister.
Of
the
baroness’s five daughters, four dazzled the court with their beauty and high
spirits. These infamously charming nieces of Cardinal Mazarin became
known as the Mazarinettes, and soon found themselves invited to all the
most important court functions.
One daughter, Marie Mancini, did not share this good fortune, for she
lacked the beauty and grace of her sisters——who, along with her mother
and even Cardinal Mazarin, eventually came to dislike her, for they felt
she spoiled the family image. They tried to persuade her to enter a. con-
vent, where she would be less of an embarrassment, but she refused. In-
stead
she applied herself to her studies, learning Latin and Greek,
perfecting her French, and practicing her musical skills. On the rare occa-
sions when the family would let her attend court affairs, she trained herself
to be an artful listener, sizing people up for their weaknesses and hidden
desires. And when she finally met the future King Louis XIV, in 1657
(Louis was seventeen years old, Marie eighteen), she decided that to spite
her family and uncle, she would find a way to make this young man fall in
love with her.
This was a seemingly impossible task for such a plainloolcing girl, but
Marie studied the future king closely. She noticed that her sisters’ frivolity
did not please him, and she sensed that he loathed the scheming and petty
politicldng that went on all around him. She saw that he had a romantic na-
ture-——he read adventure novels, insisted on marching at the head of his
armies, and had high ideals and a passion for glory. The court did not feed
these fantasies of his; it was a banal, superficial world that bored him.
The key to Louis’s heart, Marie saw, would be to construct a mirror re-
flecting his fantasies and his youthful yeamings for glory and romance. To
begin with she immersed herself in the romantic novels, poems, and plays
that she knew the young ldng read voraciously. When Louis began to en-
gage her in conversation, to his delight she would talk of the things that
stirred his soul——not this fashion or that piece of gossip, but rather courtly
love, the deeds of great knights, the nobility of past kings and heroes. She
led his thirst for glory by creating an image of an august, superior king
whom he could aspire to become. She stirred his imagination.
As the future Sun King spent more and more time in Matie’s presence,
it eventually became clear that he had fallen in love with the least likely
young woman of the court. To the horror of her sisters and mother, he
showered Marie Mancini with attention. He brought her along on his mili-
taiy campaigns, and made a show of stationing her where she could watch
as he marched into battle. He even promised Marie that he would marry
her and make her queen.
Mazarin, however, would never allow the king to many his niece, a
woman who could bring France no diplomatic or royal alliances. Louis had
to marry a princess of Spain or Austria. In 1658 Louis succumbed to the
pressure and agreed to break off the first romantic involvement of his life.
He did so with much regret, and at the end of his life he acknowledged that
he never loved anyone as much as Marie Mancini.
Wittgcnsteiri had an
ertrmmlim/(iv gift for
tiivinirrg {he Ilmuglnts
of the person with
whom he was cngagra’
in di.rcu.v.siLm While the
other srruggled to put
his thrmg/it imu wurzly,
Vriitge/z.s-rein would
/ierctviw what it was
um1.tIa1c itfar lzim.
Tins power n/Iuls;
which .S'()m(‘!lfi’l('.\'
sacrum umzzzrx/iv, was
inside ;)ossibI<r, I am
xure. by his own
prolonged and murmu-
nus I‘r'.\‘c*arc/16.3‘.
Luowu; Wl‘l“I‘(§liNS'l’HI\:
A Memom.
NORMA): NlAl.(‘()!.M_
1958
The doctor should be
opaque m [1116 /mriemr.
and like a mirror,
slmuid show lftem
nmhing but what is
shrzwrx I0 him.
SIGMUN1) Faun),
l856—l939
LAW 4 4
383
384
LAW 41¢
Interpretation
Marie Mancini played the seducer’s game to perfection. First, she took a
step back, to study her prey. Seduction often fails to get past the first step
because it is too aggressive; the first move must always be a retreat. By
studying the king from a distance Marie saw what distinguished him from
others»-—his high ideals, romantic nature, and snobbish disdain for petty
politics. Marie’s next step was to make a mirror for these hidden yearnings
on Louis’s part, letting him glimpse what he himself could be——-a godlike
king!
This mirror had several functions: Satisfying Louis’s ego by giving him
a double to look at, it also focused on him so exclusively as to give him the
feeling that Marie existed for him alone. Surrounded by a pack of schem~
ing courtiers who only had their own self—interest at heart, he could not fail
to be touched by this devotional focus. Finally Marie-’s mirror set up an
ideal for him to live up to: the noble knight of the medieval court. To a soul
both romantic and ambitious, nothing could be more intoxicating than to
have someone hold up an idealized reflection of him. In effect it was Marie
Mancini who created the image of the Sun King——indeed Louis later ad»
mitted the enormous part she had played in fashioning his radiant self»
image.
This is the power of the Seducefs Mirror: By doubling the tastes and
ideals of the target, it shows your attention to his or her psychology, an at-
tention more charming than any aggressive pursuit. Find out what sets the
other person apart, then hold up the mirror that will reflect it and bring it
out of them. Feed their fantasies of power and greatness by reflecting their
ideals, and they will succumb.
Observance IV
In 1538, with the death of his mother, Helena, the eight-year-old future
czar Ivan IV (or Ivan the Terrible) of Russia became an orphan. For the
next five years he watched as the princely class, the boyars, terrorized the
country. Now and then, to mock the young Ivan, they would make him
wear a crown and scepter and place him on the throne. VVhen the little
boy's feet dangled over the edge of the chair, they would laugh and lift him
off it, handing him from man to man in the air, making him feel his help
lessness compared to them.
When Ivan was thirteen, he boldly murdered the boyar leader and as-
cended to the throne. For the next few decades he struggled to subdue the
boyars’ power, but they continued to defy him. By 1575 his efforts to trans-
form Russia and defeat its enemies had exhausted him. Meanwhile, his
subjects were complaining bitterly about his endless wars, his secret police,
the unvanquished and oppressive boyars. His own ministers began to ques-
tion his moves. Finally he had had enough. In 1564 he had temporarily
abandoned the throne, forcing his subjects to call him back to power. Now
he took the strategy a step further, and abdicated.
To take his place Ivan elevated a general of his, Simeon Bekbulatovich,
to the throne. But although Simeon had recently converted to Christianity,
he was by birth a Tartar, and his enthronement was an insult to Ivan’s sub-
jects, since Russians looked down on the Tartars as inferiors and infidels.
Yet Ivan ordered that all Russians, including the boyars, pledge obedience
to their new ruler. And while Simeon moved into the Kremlin, Ivan lived
in a humble house on Moscow’s outskirts, from which he would sometimes
\n‘sit the palace, bow before the throne, sit among the other boyars, and
humbly petition Simeon for favors.
Over time it became clear that Simeon was a kind of kings double. He
dressed like Ivan, and acted like Ivan, but he had no real power, since no
one would really obey him. The boyars at the court who were old enough
to remember taunting Ivan when he was a boy, by placing him on the
throne, saw the connection: They had made Ivan feel like a weak pre-
tender, so now he mirrored them by placing a weak pretender of his own
on the throne.
For two long years Ivan held the mirror of Simeon up to the Russian
people. The mirror said: Your whining and disobedience have made me a
czar with no real power, so I will reflect back to you a czar with no real
power. You have treated me disrespectfully, so I will do the same to you,
making Russia the laughingstock of the world. In 1577, in the name of the
Russian people, the chastised boyars once again begged Ivan to return to
the throne, which he did. He lived as czar until his death, in 1584, and the
conspiracies, complaining, and second—guessing disappeared along with
Simeon.
Interpretation
In 15 64, after threatening to abdicate, Ivan had been granted absolute pow-
ers. But these powers had slowly been chipped away as every sector of so-
ciety—the boyars, the church, the government—vied for more control.
Foreign wars had exhausted the country, internal bickering had increased,
and Ivan’s attempts to respond had been met with scorn. Russia had turned
into a kind of boisterous classroom in which the pupils laughed openly at
the teacher. If he raised his voice or complained, he only met more resis-
tance. He had to teach them a lesson, give them a taste of their own medi-
cine. Simeon Bekbulatovich was the mirror he used to do so.
After two years in which the throne had been an object of ridicule and
disgust, the Russian people learned their lesson. They wanted their czar
back, conceding to him all the dignity and respect that the position should
always have commanded. For the rest of his reign, Russia and Ivan got
along fine.
Understand: People are locked in their own experiences. When you
whine about some insensitivity on their part, they may seem to understand,
but inwardly they are untouched and even more resistant. The goal of
power is always to lower people’s resistance to you. For this you need
tricks, and one trick is to teach them a lesson.
Instead of haranguing people verbally, then, create a kind of mirror of
their behavior, In doing so you leave them two choices: They can ignore
LAW 44
386
LAW 44
you, or they can start to think about themselves. And even if they ignore
you, you will have planted a seed in their unconscious that will eventually
take root. When you mirror their behavior, incidentally, do not be afraid to
add a touch of caricature and exaggeration, as Ivan did by enthroning a
TaItar—it is the little spice in the soup that will open their eyes and make
them see the ridiculousness in their own actions.
Observance V
Dr. Milton H. Erickson, a pioneer in strategic psychotherapy, would often
educate his patients powerfully but indirectly by creating a kind of mirror
effect. Constructing an analogy to make patients see the truth on their own,
he would bypass their resistance to change. When Dr. Erickson treated
married couples complaining of sexual problems, for instance, he often
found that psychotherapy’s tradition of direct confrontation and problem-
airing only heightened the spouses’ resistance and sharpened their differ-
ences. Instead, he would draw a husband and wife out on other topics,
often banal ones, trying to find an analogy for the sexual conflict.
In
one couple’s first session, the pair were discussing their eating
habits, especially at dinner. The wife preferred the leisurely approach——a
drink before the meal, some appetizers, and then a small main course, all at
a slow, civilized pace. This frustrated the husband-—he wanted to get din-
ner over quickly and to dig right into the main course, the bigger the better.
As the conversation continued, the couple began to catch glimpses of an
analogy to their problems in bed. The moment they made this connection,
however, Dr. Erickson would change the subject, carefully avoiding a dis-
cussion of the real problem.
The couple thought Erickson was just getting to know them and would
deal with the problem directly the next time he saw them. But at the end of
this first session, Dr. Erickson directed them to arrange
a dinner a few
nights away that would combine each person’s desire: The wife would get
the slow meal, including time spent bonding, and the husband would get
the big dishes he wanted to eat. Without realizing they were acting under
the doctor’s gentle guidance, the couple would walk into a mirror of their
problem, and in the mirror they would solve their problems themselves,
ending the evening just as the doctor had h0ped—by mirroring the im-
proved dinner dynamics in bed.
In dealing with more severe problems, such
as the schizophrenids
mirror fantasy world of his or her own construction, Dr. Erickson would al-
ways try to enter the mirror and work within it, He once treated a hospital
inmate who believed he
was Jesus Christ-—draping sheets around his
body, talking in vague parables, and bombarding staff and patients with
endless Christian proselytizing. No therapy or drugs seemed to work, until
one day Dr. Erickson went up to the young man and said, “I understand
you have had experience as a carpenter.” Being Christ, the patient had to
say that he had had such experience, and Erickson immediately put him to
work building bookcases and other useful items, allowing him to wear his
Jesus garb. Over the next weeks, as the patient worked on these projects,
his mind became less occupied with Jesus fantasies and more focused on
his labor. As the carpentry work took precedence, a psychic shift took ef-
fect: The religious fantasies remained, but faded comfortably into the back-
ground, allowing the man to fimction in society.
Interpretation
Communication depends on metaphors and symbols, which are the basis
of language itself. A metaphor is a kind of mirror to the concrete and real,
which it often expresses more clearly and deeply than a literal description
does. When you are dealing with the intractable willpower of other people,
direct communication often only heightens their resistance.
This happens most clearly when you complain about people’s behav-
ior, particularly in sensitive areas such as their lovemaking. You will effect
a. far more lasting change if, like Dr. Erickson, you construct an analogy, a
symbolic mirror of the situation, and guide the other through it. As Christ
himself understood, talking in parables is often the best way to teach a les-
son, for it allows people to realize the truth on their own.
When dealing with people who are lost in the reflections of fantasy
worlds (including a host of people who do not live in mental hospitals),
never try to push them into reality by shattering their mirrors. Instead,
enter their world and operate inside it, under their rules, gently guiding
them out of the hall of mirrors they have entered.
Observance VI
The great sixteenth~century Japanese
tea
master Takeno
Sho~o
once
passed by a house and noticed a. young man watering flowers near his front
gate. Two things caught Sho—o’s attention——first, the graceful] way the man
performed his task; and, second, the stunningly beautiful rose of Sharon
blossoms that bloomed in the garden. He stopped and introduced himself
to the man, whose name was Sen no Rikyu. Sho—o wanted to stay, but he
had a prior engagement and had to hnny off. Before he left, however,
Rikyu invited him to take tea with him the following morning. Sho-o hap-
pily accepted.
When Sho—o opened the garden gate the next day, he was horrified to
see that not a single flower remained. More than anything else, he had
come to see the rose of Sharon blossoms that he had not had the time to ap
preciate the day before; now, disappointed, he started to leave, but at the
gate he stopped himself, and decided to enter Sen no Rikyu’s tea room. Im-
mediately inside, he stopped in his tracks and gazed in astonishment: Be-
fore him a vase hung from the ceiling, and in the vase stood a single rose of
Sharon blossom, the most beautiful in the garden. Somehow Sen no Rikyu
had read his guesfs thoughts, and, with this one eloquent gesture, had
demonstrated that this day guest and host would be in perfect harmony.
Sen no Rikyu went on to become the most famous tea. master of all,
and his trademark was this uncanny ability to harmonize himself with his
guests’ thoughts and to think one step ahead, enchanting them by adapting
to their taste.
One day Rjkyu was invited to tea by Yamashina Hechigwan, an ad-
LAW 44
‘
38
-1
z
358
LAW 44
miter of the tea ceremony but also a man with a vivid sense of humor.
When Rikyu arrived at Hechigwan’s home, he found the garden gate shut,
so he opened it to look for the host. On the other side of the gate he saw
that someone had first dug a ditch, then carefully covered it over with can-
vas and earth. Realizing that Hechigwan had planned a practical joke, he
obligingly walked right into the ditch, muddying his clothes in the process.
Apparently horrified, Hechigwan
came running out, and hurried
Rikyu to a bath that for some inexplicable reason stood already prepared.
Afier bathing, Rikyu joined Hechigwan in the tea ceremony, which both
enjoyed immensely, sharing a laugh about the accident. Later Sen no
Rikyu explained to a friend that he had heard about Hechigwan’s practical
joke beforehand, “But since it should always be one’s aim to conform to
the wishes of one’s host, I fell into the hole knowingly and thus assured the
success of the meeting. Tea is by no means mere obsequiousness, but there
is no tea where the host and guest are not in harmony with one another.”
Hechigwan’s vision of the dignified Sen no Rikyu at the bottom of a ditch
had pleased him endlessly, but Rikyu had gained a pleasure of his own
in complying with his host’s wish and watching him amuse himself in
this way.
Interpretation
Sen no Rikyu was no magician or seer~—-he watched those around him
acutely, plumbing the subtle gestures that revealed a hidden desire, then
producing that desire’s image. Although Sho—o never spoke of being en-
chanted by the rose of Sharon blossoms, Rikyu read it in his eyes. If mir-
roring a person’s desires meant falling into a ditch, so be it. Rikyu’s power
resided in his skillful use of the Courtier’s Mirror, which gave him the ap-
pearance of an unusual ability to see into other people.
Learn to manipulate the Courtier’s Mirror, for it will bring you great
power. Study people’s eyes, follow their gestures—-«surer barometers ofpain
and pleasure than any spoken word. Notice and remember the details-«the
clothing, the choice of friends, the daily habits, the tossed-out remarks-—
that reveal hidden and rarely indulged desires. Soak it all in, find out what
lies under the surface, then make yourself the mirror of their unspoken
selves. That is the key to this power: The other person has not asked for
your consideration, has not mentioned his pleasure in the rose of Sharon,
and when you reflect it back to him his pleasure is heightened because it is
unasked for. Remember: The wordless communication, the indirect com~
pliment, contains the most power. No one can resist the enchantment of the
Courtier’s Mirror.
Observance Vll
Yellow Kid Weil, con artist extraordinaire, used the Deceiver’s Mirror in
his most brilliant cons. Most audacious of all was his recreation of a bank
in Muncie, Indiana. When Weil read one day that the Merchants Bank in
Muncie had moved, he saw an opportunity he could not pass up.
Well rented out the original Merchants building, which still contained
bank furnitnure, complete with teller windows. He bought money bags,
stenciled a bank’s invented name on them, filled them with steel washers,
and arrayed them impressively behind the teller windows, along with bun-
dles of boodlevwreal bills hiding newspaper cut to size. For his banl<’s staff
and customers Weil hired gamblers, bookies, girls from local bawdy
houses, and other assorted confederates. He even had a local thug pose as a
bank dick.
Claiming to be the broker for a certificate investment the bank was of-
fering, Weil would fish the waters and hook the proper wealthy sucker. He
would bring this man to the bank and ask to see the president. An “officer”
of the bank would tell them that they had to wait, which only heightened
the realism of the con-——one always has to wait to see the bank president.
And as they waited the bank would bustle with banklike activity, as call
girls and bookies in disguise floated in and out, making deposits and with»
drawals and tipping their hats to the phony bank dick. Lulled by this per~
feet copy of reality, the sucker would deposit $50,000 into the fake bank
without a worry in the world.
Over the years Weil did the same thing with at deserted yacht club, an
abandoned brokerage office,
a relocated real estate office, and a com»
pletely realistic gambling club.
Interpretation
The mirroring of reality offers immense deceptive powers. The right uni»
form, the perfect accent, the proper props——the deception cannot be deci~
phered because it is enmeshed in a simulation of reality. People have an
intense desire and need to believe, and their first instinct is to trust a. well»
constructed facade, to mistake it for reality. After all, we cannot go around
doubting the reality of everything we seewthat would be too exhausting.
We habitually accept appearances, and this is a credulity you can use.
In this particular game it is the first moment that counts the most. If
your suckers’ suspicions are not raised by their first glance at the mirror’s
reflection, they will stay suppressed. Once they enter your hall of mirrors,
they will be unable to distinguish the real from the fake, and it will become
easier and easier to deceive them. Remember: Study the world’s surfaces
and learn to mirror them in your habits, your manner, your clothes. Like a
carnivorous plant, to unsuspecting insects you will look like all the other
plants in the field.
Authority: The task of :1 military operation is to accord de<:ep~
tively with the intentions of the enemy
.
.
. get to what they want
first, subtly anticipate them. Maintain discipline and adapt to
the enemy.
.
.
. Thus, at first you are like a maiden, so the enemy
opens his door; then you are like
a rabbit on the loose,
so
the enemy cannot keep you out. (Stm—tzu, fourth century B.C.)
LAW 44
,
.‘)’89
390
LAW 44
Image:
The
Shield of Perseus. It is pol-
ished into a reflecting mirror.
Medusa cannot see you, only her
own hideousness reflected back at her.
Behind such a mirror you can de~
ceive, mock, and infuriate. With
one blow you sever Medusa’s
unsuspecting head.
A WARNING: BEWARE OF MIRRORED SITUATIONS
Mirrors contain great power but also dangerous reefs, including the mix»
rored situation--a situation that seems to reflect or closely resemble a pre
vious one, mostly in style and surface appearance. You can often back into
such a situation without fully understanding it, while those around you un-
derstand it quite well, and compare it and you to whatever happened be-
fore. Most often you suffer by the comparison, seeming either weaker than
the previous occupant of your position or else tainted by any unpleasant
associations that person has lefi behind.
In 1864 the composer Richard Wagner moved to Munich at the behest
of Ludwig 11, known variously as the Swan King or the Mad King of
Bavaria. Ludwig was Wagner‘s biggest fan and most generous patron. The
strength of his support turned Wagner’s head»-<mce established in Munich
under the king's protection, he would be able to say and do whatever he
wanted.
Wagner moved into a lavish house, which the king eventually bought
for him. This house was but a stone’s throw from the former home of Lola
Montez, the notorious courtesan who had plunged Ludwig II’s grandfather
into a crisis that had forced him to abclicate. Warned that he could be in-
fected by this association, Wagner only scoffed-——-“I am no Lola Montez,"
he said. Soon enough, however, the citizens of Munich began to resent the
favors and money showered on Wagner, and dubbed him “the second
Lola,” or “Lolotte.” He unconsciously began to tread in Lo1a’s footsteps-
spending money extravagantly, meddling in matters beyond music, even
dabbling in politics and advising the king on cabinet appointments. Mean-
while Ludwigs affection for Wagner seemed intense and undignified for a
l-:ing——just like his grandfather’s love for Lola Montez.
Eventually Ludwig’s ministers wrote him a letter: “Your Majesty now
stands at a fateful parting of the ways: you have to choose between the love
and respect of your faithful people and the ‘friendship’ of Richard Wag-
ner.” In December of 1865, Ludwig politely asked his friend to leave and
never return. Wagner had inadvertently placed himself in Lola Montez’s
reflection. Once there, everything he did reminded the stolicl Bavariams of
that dread woman, and there was nothing he could do about it.
Avoid such association-effects like the plague. In a mirrored situation
you have little or no control over the reflections and recollections that will
be connected to you, and any situation beyond your control is dangerous.
Even if the person or event has positive associations, you will suffer from
not being able to live up to them, since the past generally appears greater
than the present. If you ever notice people associating you with some past
event or person, do everything you can to separate yourself from that
memory and to shatter the reflection.
LAW 44
39 I
45
PR£HkC}iTT{EIVEEHD
F()R,CIiAIJCH3,BIJT
PJE\/EI{I{EFT3I{hd
TT)C)h4LH3fIflEF()DH3E
JUDGMENT
Everyone understands the need for change in the air
stract, but on the day-to-day level people are creatures of
habit. Too much innovation is traumatic, and will head
to revolt. Ifyou an: new to a position ofpower, or an out-
side?" trying to build a power base, make a show of re-
specting the old
way of doing things. If change it
necessary, make it feel like a gentle improvement on the
past.
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
Sometime in the early 1520s, King Henry VIII of England decided to di-
vorce his wife, Catherine of Aragon, because she had failed to beat him a
son, and because he had fallen in love with the young and comely Anne
Boleyn. The pope, Clement VII, opposed the divorce, and threatened the
king with excommunication. The king’s most powerful minister, Cardinal
Wolsey, also saw no need for divorce—-—-and his halfhearted support of the
king cost him his position and soon his life.
One man in Hem-y’s cabinet, Thomas Cromwell, not only supported
him in his desire for a divorce but had an idea for realizing it: a complete
break with the past. He convinced the king that by severing ties with Rome
and making himself the head of a newly formed English church, he could
divorce Catherine and marry Anne. By I531 Henry saw this as the only so-
lution. To reward Cromwell for his simple but brilliant idea, he elevated
this son of a blacksmith to the post of royal councillor.
By 1534 Cromwell had been named the king’s secretary, and as the
power behind the throne he had become the most powerful man in Eng-
land. But for him the break with Rome went beyondthe satisfaction of the
l<ing‘s carnal desires: He envisioned a new Protestant order in England,
with the power of the Catholic Church smashed and its vast wea.lth in the
hands of the king and the government. In that same year he initiated a
complete survey of the churches and monasteries of England. And as it
turned out, the treasures and moneys that the churches had accumulated
over the centuries were far more than he had imagined; his spies and
agents came back with astonishing figures.
To justify his schemes, Cromwell circulated stories about the corrup-
tion in the English monasteries, their abuse of power, their exploitation of
the people they supposedly served. Having won Parliamenfs support for
breaking up the monasteries, he began to seize their holdings and to put
them out of existence one by one. At the same time, he began to impose
Protestantism, introducing reforms in religious ritual and punishing those
who stuck to Catholicism, and who now were called heretics. Virtually
overnight, England was converted to a new official religion.
A terror fell on the country. Some people had suffered under the
Catholic Church, which before the reforms had been immensely powerful,
but most Britons had strong ties to Catholicism and to its comforting ritu-
als. They watched in horror as churches were demolished, images of the
Madonna and saints were broken in pieces, stainedglass windows were
smashed, and the churches’ treasures were confiscated. With monasteries
that had succored the poor suddenly gone, the poor now flooded the
streets. The growing ranks of the beggar class were further swelled by for
mer monks. On top of all this, Cromwell levied high taxes to pay for his ec«
clesiastical reforms.
In 1535 powerful revolts in the North of England threatened to topple
Henry from his throne. By the following year he had suppressed the rebel-
lions, but he had also begun to see the costs of Cromwell’s reforms. The
king himself had never wanted to go this far-—-he had only wanted a di-
\‘€’t|HRF. (IHRH-l'l‘M«\S
(EAR/Iii l’ll0,’vl
Celebrating [he mm of
the year IL!‘ an ancient
custom. The Roman:
celebmled the Summa-
Iia. the festival of
Saturn, god ofzhe
Ixarvesr, between
December I 7 and 23. 11
was the max! clzeerful
festival of lhe year. All
work and comrm'rt;e
str,-ppcd, and the streets
were filled with crowds
and u mmival armor-
phcre. Slaves were
Iemfzonzrily freed, and
the houses were deco-
rated with laurel
branches. People
visited one another,
1)ringirzg gifts of wax
rtnmllas‘ and little clav
figurines.
Long Iwfore the birth
of Clirirt, the Jews r,e=,ls--
bruletl an rig/It-Ila}:
Festillul of Liglm [at
the same .s‘ea.mn/, am? it
is believed that the
(icrmzmic p1€0;')(4r.s‘ held
a gram fexzivezl not only
at /nizlsumnzer but also
at the winter roisrivse,
when they cc! ebmred
the rebirth of the mm
am! hrmoretl the great
frrrzility gods Wotan
and Frey/a. Dnmzr
(Thor) am! Freyr. Even
a‘/icr the Ernperor
Cmzstalltine 1.4.0.
50(>—«337) declared
Ch rimarzity to be
Rome's nffirial impe-
rial religion. (he evoca-
tion zlflig/‘II imrl
fertility as’ an impomzm
<‘0mpon¢'m ofpre-
Chris/far: midwimter
Ct"l€brl1iir)n.£‘ could not
be emirely suppressed.
In 1110 year 274 the
Roman Emperor /lure‘
liar: {A.D. 2I4~275) hml
establixlictl an r)/finial
LAW 45
393
cull of the sun-god
Mithms. declaring his
birthday. December 25,
ll nalionul holiday. The
cult of Mxthras, the
Aryan god 0/‘light, had
spread from Pt,’f’Sl(1
through Asia Minor to
Grenv, Rome, and as
far as the Germanic
lands and Britain.
Numerous ruins ofhis
shrines still testify to
the high regard in
which [his god was
held, especially by the
Roman legions, as a
hringcr offcrtility,
peace, and victory.
So it was a (‘lever rzmve
when. in 1110 year A.[).
354. the Christian
church under Pope
l,ibcrius (352-366) co-
Uplezl the hirlhday of
Mithras and declared
December 25 to be
the bmhriay
oflesus Christ.
NE!!!-; zuucnmz
7::
mm.
ANNE,-S1
/\N\‘li
RIs<'1-mi-1.
DF.<‘E£MBl:R 25. 1983
394
LAW 45
vorce. It was now Cromwell’s turn to watch uneasily as the king began
slowly to undo his reforms, reinstating Catholic sacraments and other ritu-
als that Cromwell had outlawed.
Sensing his fall from grace, in
1540 Cromwell decided to regain
Henry’s favor with one throw of the dice: He would End the king a new
wife. Henry’s third wife, Jane Seymour, had died a few years before, and
he had been pining for a new young queen. It was Cromwell who found
him
one: Anne of Cleves,
a German princess and, most important to
Cromwell, a Protestant. On Crornwell’s commission, the painter Holbein
produced a flattering portrait of Anne; when Henry saw it, he fell in love,
and agreed to marry her. Cromwell seemed back in favor.
Unfortunately, however, Holbein’s painting was highly idealized, and
when the king finally met the princess she did not please him in the least.
His anger against Cromwell—f1rst for the ill~conceived reforms, now for
saddling him with an unattractive and Protestant wife-—could no longer be
contained. InJune of that year, Cromwell was arrested, charged as a Protes-
tant extremist and a heretic, and sent to the Tower. Six weeks later, before a
large and enthusiastic crowd, the public executioner cut off his head.
Interpretation
Thomas Cromwell had a simple idea: He would break up the power and
wealth of the Church and lay the foundation for Protestantism in England.
And he would do this in a. mercilessly short time. He knew his speedy re-
forms would cause pain and resentment, but he thought these feelings
would fade in a few years. More important, by identifying himself with
change, he would become the leader of the new order, making the king de
pendent on him. But there was a problem in his strategy: Like a billiard
ball hit too hard against the cushion, his reforms had reactions and caroms
he did not envision and could not control.
The man who initiates strong reforms often becomes the scapegoat for
any kind of dissatisfaction. And eventually the reaction to his reforms may
consume him, for change is upsetting to the human animal, even when it is
for the good. Because the world is and always has been full of insecurity
and threat, we latch on to familiar faces and create habits and rituals to
make the world more comfortable. Change can be pleasant and even
sometimes desirable in the abstract, but too much of it creates an anxiety
that will stir and boil beneath the surface and then eventually erupt.
Never underestimate the hidden conservatism of those around you. It
is powerful and entrenched. Never let the seductive charm of an idea cloud
your reason: just as you cannot make people see the world your way, you
cannot wrench them into the future with painful changes. They will rebel.
If reform is necessary, anticipate the reaction against it and find ways to
disguise the change and sweeten the poison.
OBSERVANCE. OF THE LAW
As a young Communist in the 19203, Mao Tsetung understood better than
any of his colleagues the incredible odds against a Communist victory in
China. With their small numbers, limited funds, lack of military experi-
ence, and small arsenal of weapons, the Party had no hope of success un-
less it won over China’s immense peasant population. But who in the
world was more conservative, more rooted in tradition, than the Chinese
peasantry? The oldest civilization on the planet had a history that would
never loosen its power, no matter how violent the revolution. The ideas of
Confucius remained as alive in the 19203 as they had been in the sixth cen-
tury B.C., when the philosopher was alive, Despite the oppressions of the
current system, would the peasantry ever give up the deep~rooted values of
the past for the great unknown of Communism?
The solution, as Mao saw it, involved a simple deception: Cloak the
revolution in the clothing of the past, making it comforting and legitimate
in people’s eyes. One of Mao’s favorite books was the very popular me
dieval Chinese novel 77:: Water Margin, which recounts the exploits of a
Chinese Robin Hood and his robber band as they struggle against a cor-
rupt and evil monarch. In China in Mao’s time, family ties dominated over
any other kind, for the Confucian hierarchy of father and oldest son re-
mained firmly in place; but The Witter Margin preached a superior value-
the fraternal ties of the band of robbers, the nobility of the cause that unites
people beyond blood. The novel had great emotional resonance for Chi~
nese people, who love to root for the underdog. Time and again, then,
Mao would present his revolutionary army as an extension of the robber
band in The I'V1terMargz'n, likening his struggle to the timeless conflict be-
tween the oppressed peasantry and an evil emperor. He made the past
seem to envelop and legitimize the Communist cause; the peasantry could
feel comfortable with and even support a group with such roots in the past.
Even once the Party came to power, Mao continued to associate it with
the past. He presented himself to the masses not as a Chinese Lenin but as
a. modem Chuko Liang, the real»life third-century strategist who figures
prominently in the popular historical novel The Romance of the Wtree King~
dams. Liang was more than a great general—he was a poet, a philosopher,
and a figure of stem moral rectitude. So Mao represented himself as a poet-
wanior like Liang,
a
man who mixed strategy with philosophy and
preached a new ethics. He made himself appear like a hero from the great
Chinese tradition of warrior statesmen.
Soon, everything in Mao’s speeches and writings had a reference to an
earlier period in Chinese history. He recalled, for example, the great Em-
peror Ch’in, who had unified the country in the third century B.C. Ch’in
had burned the works of Confucius, consolidated and completed the build-
ing of the Great Wall, and given his name to China, Like Ch’in, Mao also
had brought the country together, and had sought bold reforms against an
oppressive past. Ch’in had traditionally been
seen
as a violent dictator
whose reign was short; the brilliance of Mao’s strategy was to turn this
around, simultaneously reinterpreting Ch’in, justifying his rule in the eyes
of present-day Chinese, and using him to justify the violence of the new
order that Mao himself was creating.
After the failed Cultural Revolution of the late 1960s, a power struggle
LAW 45
395
396
‘
LAW 45
emerged in the Communist Party in which Mao’s main foe was Lin Piao,
once a close friend of his. To make clear to the masses the difference be-
tween his philosophy and Lin’s, Mao once again exploited the past: He
cast his opponent as representing Confucius,
a. philosopher Lin in fact
would constantly quote. And Confucius signified the conservatism of the
past. Mao associated himself, on the other hand, with the ancient philo-
sophical movement known
as Legalism, exemplified by the writings of
Han—fei~tzu. The Legalists disdained Confucian ethics; they believed in the
need for violence to create a new order. They worshiped power. To give
himself weight in the struggle, Mao unleashed a nationwide propaganda
campaign against Confucius, using the issues of Confucianism versus Le-
galism to whip the young into a kind of frenzied revolt against the older
generation. This grand context enveloped a. rather banal power struggle,
and Mao once again won over the masses and triumphed over his enemies.
Interpretation
No people had a more profound attachment to the past than the Chinese.
In the face of this enormous obstacle to reform, Mada strategy was simple:
Instead of struggling against the past he turned it to his advantage, associ~
ating his radical Communists with the romantic figures of Chinese history.
Weaving the story of the War of the Three Kingdoms into the struggle be-
tween the United States, the Soviet Union, and China, be cast himself as
Chuko Liang. As the emperors had, he welcomed the cultlike adoration of
the masses, understanding that the Chinese could not function without
some kind of father figure to admire. And after he made a terrible blunder
with the Great Leap Forward, trying to force modernization on the country
and failing miserably, he never repeated his mistake: From then on, radical
change had to be cloaked in the comfortable clothes of the past.
The lesson is simple: The past is powerful. What has happened before
seems greater; habit and history give any act weight. Use this to your ad-
vantage. When you destroy the fa.milia.r you create a void or vacuum; peo
ple fear the chaos that will flood in to fill it. You must avoid stirring up such
fears at all cost. Borrow the weight and legitimacy from the past, however
remote, to create a comforting and familiar presence. This will give your
actions romantic associations, add to your presence, and cloak the nature
of the changes you are attempting.
It must be considered that there is nothing more difficult to carry out,
no?‘ more doubtful ofsmcers, run more dangerous to handle,
than to initiate a new order ofthings.
Niccolo ;’\/iachiavelli, I~f69«I52 7
KEYS TO POWER
Human psychology contains many dualities, one of them being that even
while people understand the need for change, knowing how important it is
for institutions and individuals to be occasionally renewed, they are also ir-
ritated and upset by changes that affect them personally. They know that
change is necessary, and that novelty provides relief from boredom, but
deep inside they cling to the past. Change in the abstract, or superficial
change, they desire, but a change that upsets core habits and routines is
deeply disturbing to them.
No revolution has gone without a powerful later reaction against it, for
in the long run the void it creates proves too unsettling to the human ani-
mal, who unconsciously associates such voids with death and chaos. The
opportunity for change and renewal seduces people to the side of the revo~
lution, but once their enthusiasm fades, which it will, they are left with a
certain emptiness. Yearning for the past, they create an opening for it to
creep back in.
For Machiavelli, the prophet who preaches and brings change can
only survive by taking up arms: When the masses inevitably yearn for the
past, he must be ready to use force. But the armed prophet. cannot last long
unless he quickly creates a new set of values and rituals to replace the old
ones, and to soothe the anxieties of those who dread change. It is far easier,
and less bloody, to play a kind of con game. Preach change as much as you
like, and even enact your reforms, but give them the comforting appear-
ance of older events and traditions.
Reigning from A.D. 8 to AD. 23, the Chinese emperor Wang Mung
emerged from a period of great historical turbulence in which the people
yearned for order, an order represented for them by Confucius. Some two
hundred years earlier, however, Emperor Ch’in had ordered the writings
of Confucius burned. A few years later, word had spread that certain texts
had miraculously survived, hidden under the scholar’s house. These texts
may not have been genuine, but they gave Wang his opportunity: He first
confiscated them, then had his scribes insert passages into them that
seemed to support the changes he had been imposing on the country.
When he released the texts, it seemed that Confucius sanctioned Wang’s
reforms, and the people felt comforted and accepted them more easily.
Understand: The fact that the past is dead and buried gives you the
freedom to reinterpret it. To support your cause, tinker with the facts. The
past is a text in which you can safely insert your own lines.
A simple gesture like using an old title, or keeping the same number
for a group, will tie you to the past and support you with the authority of
history. As Machiavelli himself observed, the Romans used this device
when they transformed their monarchy into a republic. They may have in
stalled two consuls in place of the king, but since the king had been served
by twelve lictors, they retained the same number to serve under the con-
suls. The king had personally performed an annual sacrifice, in
9. great
spectacle that stirred the public; the republic retained this practice, only
transferring it to a special “chief of the ceremony, whom they called the
King of the sacrifice.” These and similar gestures satisfied the people and
kept them from clamoring for the monarchy’s return.
Another strategy to disguise change is to make a loud and public dis~
play of support for the values of the past. Seem to be a zealot for tradition
LAW 45
397
398
LAW 45
and few will notice how unconventional you really are. Renaissance Flo-
rence had a centuries—old republic, and
was suspicious of anyone who
floated its traditions. Cosimo de’ Medici made a Show of enthusiastic sup
port for the republic, while in reality he worked to bring the city under the
control of his wealthy family. In form, the Medicis retained the appearance
of a republic; in substance, they rendered it powerless. They quietly en~
acted a radical change, while appearing to safeguard tradition.
Science claims a search for truth that would seem to protect it from
conservatism and the irrationality of habit: It is a culture of innovation. Yet
when Charles Darwin published his ideas of evolution, he faced fiercer ope
position from his fellow scientists than from religious authorities. His theo-
ries challenged too many fixed ideas. Jonas Salk ran into the same wall
with his radical innovations in immunology, as did Max Planck with his
revolutionizing of physics. Planck later wrote of the scientific opposition he
faced, “A new scientific truth does not triumph by convincing its opponents
and making them see the light. but rather because its opponents eventually
die, and a new generation grows up that is familiar with it.”
The answer to this innate conservatism is to play the courtier’s game.
Galileo did this at the beginning of his scientific career; he laxer became
more confrontational, and paid for it So pay lip service to tradition. Idem»
tify the elements in your revolution that can be made to seem to build on
the past. Say the right things, make a show of conformity, and meanwhile
let your theories do their radical work. Play with appearances and respect
past protocol. This is true in every arenae-science being no exception.
Finally, powerful people pay attention to the zeitgeist If their reform is
too far ahead of its time, few will understand it, and it will stir up anxiety
and be hopelessly misinterpreted. The changes you make must seem less
innovative than they are. England did eventually become a Protestant na~
tion, as Cromwell wished, but it took over a century of gradual evolution.
Watch the zeitgeist. If you work in a tumultuous time, there is power to
be gained by preaching a return to the past, to comfort, tradition, and rit-
ual. During a period of stagnation, on the other hand, play the card of re-
form and revo1ution—but beware of what you stir up. Those who finish a
revolution are rarely those who start it. You will not succeed at this danger-
ous game unless you are willing to forestall the inevitable reaction against it
by playing with appearances and building on the past.
Authority: He who desires or attempts to reform the government of a
stale, and wishes to have it accepted, must at least retain the semblance of
the old forms; so that it may seem to the people that there has been no
change in the institutions, even though in fact they are entirely different
from the old ones. For the great majority of mankind are satisfied with ap-
pearances, as though they were realities. (Niccolo Machiavelli, 1469-1527)
Image:
The
Cat.
Creature of habit, it loves the
warmth of the familiar. Upset its
routines, disrupt its space, and it will
grow unmanageable and psychotic.
Placate it by supporting its rituals. If
change is necessary, deceive the cat by
keeping the smell of the past alive;
place objects familiar to it in
strategic locations.
REVERSAL
The past is a corpse to be used as you see fit. If what happened in the re-
cent past was painful and harsh. it is se1f—destructive to associate yourself
with it. When Napoleon came to power, the French Revolution was fresh
in everyone’s minds. If the court that he established had borne any resem-
blance to the lavish court of Louis XVI and Marie-Antoinette, his courtiers
would have spent all their time worrying about their own necks. Instead,
Napoleon established a court remarkable for its sobriety and lack of osten-
tation. It was the court of a man who valued work and military virtues. This
new form seemed appropriate and reassuring.
In other words, pay attention to the times. But understand: If you
make a bold change from the past, you must avoid at all costs the appear-
ance of a void or vacuum, or you will create terror. Even an ugly recent his-
tory will seem preferable to an empty space. Fill that space immediately
with new rituals and forms. Soothing and growing familiar, these will secure
your position among the masses.
Finally, the arts, fashion, and technology would seem to be areas in
which power would come from creating a radical rupture with the past and
appearing cutting edge. Indeed, such a strategy can bring great power, but
it has many dangers. It is inevitable that your innovations will be outdone
by someone else. You have little control—-someone younger and fresher
moves in a sudden new direction, making your bold innovation of yester~
day seem tiresome and tame today. You are forever playing catch-up; your
power is tenuous and short-lived. You want a power built on something
more solid. Using the past, tinkering with tradition, playing with conven-
tion to subvert it will give your creations something more than a momen-
tary appeal. Periods of dizzying change disguise the fact that a yearning for
the past will inevitably creep back in. In the end, using the past for your
own purposes will bring you more power than trying to cut it out com-
p1etely—-a. futile and self-destructive endeavor.
LAW 45
1
399
46
NEVER APPEAR
TOO PERFECT
JUDGMENT
Appearing better than others is always dangerous, but
must dangerous 0,’ all is to apglear to have no faults or
weaknesses. Em/y creates silent enemies. It is smart to ac-
casionally display defects, and admit to hmmless vices,
in wder to deflect envy and appear more human and ap-
proachable. Only gods and the dead can seem perfect
with impunity.
400
l
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
Joe Orton met Kenneth Halliwell at the Royal Academy of Dramatic Arts,
London, in 1953, where both had enrolled as acting students. They soon
became lovers and moved in together. Halliwell, twenty—five at the time,
was seven years older than Orton, and seemed the more confident of the
two; but neither had much talent as actors, and after graduating, having set~
tied down together in a dank London apartment, they decided to give up
acting and collaborate
as writers instead. Halliwell’s inheritance
was
enough to keep them from having to find work for a few years, and in the
beginning, he was also the driving force behind the stories and novels they
wrote; he would dictate to Orton, who would type the manuscripts, occa~
sionally interjecting his own lines and ideas. Their first efforts attracted
some interest from literary agents, but it sputtered. The promise they had
shown was leading nowhere.
Eventually the inheritance money ran out, and the pair had to look for
work. Their collaborations were less enthusiastic and less frequent. The fu~
ture looked bleak.
In 1957 Orton began to write on his own, but it wasn’t until five years
later, when the lovers were jailed for six months for defacing dozens of li-
brary books, that he began to find his voice (perhaps not by chance: This
was the first time he and Halliwell had been separated in nine years). He
came out of prison determined to express his contempt for English society
in the form of theatrical farces. He and Halliwell moved back in together,
but now the roles were reversed: Orton did the writing while Halliwell put
in comments and ideas.
In 1964 joe Orton completed his first full-length play, Entertaining Mr.
Sloane. The play made it to London’s West End, where it received brilliant
reviews: A great new writer had emerged from nowhere. Now success fol-
lowed siccess, at a dizzying pace. In 1966 Orton had a hit with his play
Loot, and his popularity soared. Soon commissions came in from all sides,
including from the Beatles, who paid Orton handsomely to write them a
film script
Everything was pointing upwards, everything except Orton’s relation»
ship with Kenneth Halliwell. The pair still lived together, but as Orton
grew successful, Halliwell began to deteriorate. Watching his lover become
the center of attention, he suffered the humiliation of becoming a kind of
personal assistant to the playwright, his role in what had once been a col-
laboration growing smaller and smaller. In the l950s he had supported
Orton with his inheritance; now Orton supported him. At a party or
among friends, people would naturally gravitate towards Orton-—he was
charming, and his mood was almost always buoyant Unlike the handsome
Orton, Halliwell was bald and awkward; his defensiveness made people
want to avoid him.
With Orton’s success the couple‘s problems only worsened. Halliwell’s
moods made their life together impossible. Orton claimed to want to leave
him, and had numerous affairs, but would always end up returning to his
‘xiii-:m1miu. t)r“ml—;
(§RHliil\' MAN /\\I) THIC
l'I,VVI(JliS M/\l\
A greedy man and an
en viuur [mm met a
king. The king said to
them. “One (Ifyou nmy
ask mmetlxing of me
and I will give It :1)
him, proviriewl I give
twice as much to the
other." The envious
person did not want to
ask first for he Wm:
envious of his campam
ion who would receive
Iwzrrt as much, and Ike
greedy man did not
want 10 ask first since
he wanted everytlzing
that was to be had.
Finally the greedy one
Llresred the envious one
lo be the_lirs‘I to make
the request. 30 the envi-
ous person asked the
king to pluck out one
oflris eyes.
JEWISH PARABLIS.
rm“. SEVFN l)EADl‘r' 53525,
SOLOMON SCKIIMMEL,
1992
An admtrer who feels
that he czmrzot be
lltlppy by surrendering
hitrzself elects to
btrconzc envious of that
wlzicli he uciznirm. So
he spellks tinuilier
languagewilze (long
which he really admire:
is called a stupid.
insipizl and qm>r:r.rr:ri
ofilzing. Admimrion is
happy .s‘elf-Surrender;
envy is unhappy malf-
ass:-rrian.
Sdizeu K1euiu~;uAAiw.
l 81 3-1 855
LAW 45
'
401
It takes great talent and
skill to conceal omes
lalmt and skill.
LA R()(‘l'|l.]“()l.'(TAULD.
16 1 3- l 680
|‘.\\\ 'I'l)|(\lL\ IS
.\(‘.I..t\l N05
The g0ll£l1’S.\‘ Mint'rva
made,’ her way to the
house o/Eiivy,
(1 house
filthy with dark and
noisomc slime. It is
Itidrlzm away in the
depths of the valleys.
whrrr: the sun new/rr
pertetratex, where no
wind blows’ tltrottglz; tl
gloomy dwellirtt:.
permeated by numltihg
chill, evt>r_Iirele.r.s: ever
sltmtulad in thick (lurk-
ntavr. When Minerva
rcaclzrd this spot she
Stopped in from oflhc
lmusc
.
.
. and .\'trm:k
the doors with the tip
nfhrr Spear’, and at the
blow they //ew open
and rcvralwl Envy
within, Imsy at or /m-al
of.rrtakr".s fl(‘.\'ll, tlzo
fowl on which she
nourished her wickc
A
ness. At the sight,
Minerva turned hcr
eyes away. But the
other rnxe ltteavily from
the ground, leaving the
lialf-eaten mrpsm, am]
(ante out with dragging
.rtep.s: When she saw the
gotltlcsx in all the l7l'll-
liance of hm’ beauty, m
lzer_/Iasltiltg armor, rite
groarwd.
.
.
.
Envy ir face was sickly
pale, her whole hotly
lean and waster}, and
402
g
LAW 46
old friend and lover. He tried to help Halliwell launch a career as an artist,
even arranging for a gallery to show his work, but the show was a flop, and
this only heightened Halliwell’s sense of inferiority. In May of 1967, the
pair went on a brief holiday together in Tangier, Morocco. During the trip,
Orton wrote in his diary, “We sat milking of how happy we felt. And how it
couldn’t, surely, last. We’d have to pay for it. Or we’d be struck down from
afar by disaster because we were, perhaps, too happy. To be young, good-
looking, healthy, famous, comparatively rich and happy is surely going
against nature.”
Halliwell outwardly seemed as happy as Orton. Inwardly, though, he
was seething. And two months later, in the early morning of August 10,
1967, just days after helping Orton put the finishing touches to the wicked
fa» ce What the Butler Saw (undoubtedly his masterpiece), Kenneth Halliwell
bludgeoned joe Orton to death with repeated blows of a hammer to the
head. He then took twenty—0ne sleeping pills and died himself, leaving be-
hind a note that read, “If you read Orton’s diary all will be explained.”
Interpretation
Kenneth Halliwell had tried to cast his deterioration as mental illness, but
what joe Orton’s diaries revealed to him was the truth: It was envy, pure
and simple, that lay at the heart of his sickness. The diaries, which Halli-
well read on the sly, recounted the couple’s days as equals and their strug-
gle for recognition. After Orton found
success, the diaries began to
describe Halliwell’s brooding, his rude comments at parties, his growing
sense of inferiority. All of this Orton narrated with a distance that bordered
on contempt.
The diaries made clear Halliwe1l’s bitterness over Orton’s
success.
Eventually the only thing that would have satisfied him would have been
for Orton to have a failure of his own, an unsuccessful play perhaps, so that
they could have commiserated in their failure, as they had done years be
fore. When the opposite happened—as Orton grew only more successful
and popular—Halliwell did the only thing that would make them equals
again: He made them equals in death. With Orton’s murder, he became al-
most as famous as his friend——posthumously.
Joe Orton only partly understood his l0ver’s deterioration. His attempt
to help Halliwell launch a career in art registered for what it was: charity
and guilt Orton basically had two possible solutions to the problem. He
could have downplayed his own success, displaying some faults, deflecting
I-Ialliwell’s envy; or, once he realized the nature of the problem, he could
have fled as if Halliwell were a viper, as in fact he was—a viper of envy.
Once envy eats away at someone, everything you do only makes it grow,
and day by day it festers inside him. Eventually he will attack.
Only a minority can succeed at the game of life, and that minority in-
evitably arouses the envy of those around them. Once success happens
your way, however, the people to fear the most are those in your own ctr»
cle, the friends and acquaintances you have left behind. Feelings of inferi-
ority gnaw at them; the thought of your success only heightens their feel—
ings of stagnation. Envy, which the philosopher Kierkegaard calls “on-
happy admiration,” takes hold. You may not see it but you will feel it
someday—unless, that is, you learn strategies of deflection, little sacrifices
to the gods of success. Either dampen your brilliance occasionally, pur~
posefully revealing a defect, weakness, or anxiety, or attributing your suc~
cess to luck; or simply find yourself new friends. Never underestimate the
power of envy.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
The merchant class and the craft guilds to which medieval Florence owed
its prosperity had created a republic that protected them from oppression
by the nobility. Since high office could only be held for a few months, no
one could gain lasting dominance, and although this meant that the politi
cal factions struggled constantly for control, the system kept out tyrants
and petty dictators. The Medici family lived for several centuries under this
system without making much of a mark. They had modest origins
as
apothecaries, and were typical middle-class citizens. Not until the late four-
teenth century, when Giovanni de’ Medici made a modest fortune in bank
ing, did they emerge as a force to be reckoned with.
Upon Giova.nni’s death, his son Cosimo took over the family business,
and quickly demonstrated his talent for it. The business prospered under
his control and the Medicis emerged as one of the preeminent banking
families of Europe. But they had a rival in Florence: Despite the city’s re—
puhlican system, one family, the Albizzis, had managed over the years to
monopolize control of the government, forging alliances that allowed them
to constantly fill important offices with their own men. Cosimo did not
light this, and in fact gave the Albizzis his tacit support. At the same time,
while the Albizzis were beginning to flaunt their power, Cosimo made a
point of staying in the background.
Eventually, however, the Medici wealth could not be ignored, and in
1433, feeling threatened by the family, the Albizzis used their government
muscle to have Cosimo arrested on charges of conspiring to overthrow the
republic. Some in the Alhizzi faction wanted Cosimo executed, others
feared this would spark a civil war. In the end they exiled him from Flo-
rence. Cosimo did not fight the sentence; he left quietly. Sometimes, he
knew, it is wiser to bide one’s time and keep a low profile.
Over the next year, the Alhizzis began to stir up fears that they were
setting up a dictatorship. Meanwhile, Cosimo, using his wealth to advan-
tage, continued to exert influence on Florentine affairs, even from exile. A
civil war broke out in the city, and in September of 1434 the Albizzis were
toppled from power and sent into exile. Cosimo immediately returned to
Florence, his position restored. But he saw that he now faced a delicate sit»
uation: If he seemed ambitious, as the Albizzis had, he would stir up oppo-
sition and envy that would ultimately threaten his business. If he stayed on
she s¢/Ilium’) horribly;
her 7("l'.1/I went IlL<c'ol-
vied and tlemyell. her
poi.mmm.r lzreuir of 21
g/‘vanish hue, and her
tongue dripped venom.
Only the sight of
suffering could bring a
smile to her 1025‘. Sh!)
never knew the comfort
afslz-e
, but was kept
conslamly awake by
care and anxiety.
looked with rlisrzxay on
men's good forlsme.
um! grew thin at the
siglzl. Gnawirig at
others, and lining
grmwezl, she was herself
her own torment.
Mmrrvu, in spire 0_/‘her
lr)(II/ring, yet addressezl
her briefly: “Instill yrmr
pr.-i,s'r1rz into one of
Cecra/2 ’s daughrerxfi
her name is /lglaums.
’l'hi.r is what I require
of you.
" Without
armllier word she
puxltrtd agaiz/Lt: the
ground with her spear.
Is}? the earrh, and
soared upwards.
From the comer’ ofhcr
eye the ozher watched
the goddess our of
Sight. muttering and
angry that Minerva ‘X
plan should be .\'llC('€.8‘S-
ful. Then she took her
.s'mff all encirclerl with
thorny briam‘. wrapped
herselfin dark clouds,
and set forth. Wherever
she went she tmmplezl
down llieflower}r_IieI1ls,
withered up the grant,
xrtrrerl the Ireetzips, mm‘
with hm bmzth rainied
the pe¢)plr.'.i', their cities‘
and their homes. mm‘!
a! length she came to
Athens‘, the home of Wll
and wealth, peaceful
and proxpemus. She
could scarcely refrain
from weeping when she
Saw no cause for tears.
LAW 45
403
Than mm-ing the
chamber of Cecmp Ix
daughtvr. size carrier]
mu Mimxrva '3‘ cmlers.
Size touched the girl’:
br¢'u.\’l WII/I a Immt’
dipped in Hill”! 4:, filled
l1z»'rh¢'aI( will: spiky
rlmrm. (mil breallzirig
in it black cum’ cw"!
poiwit 1li.s’per.se(! it
through her very bones.
instilling the venom
deep in her heart. Tim!
the reason for her
a‘:sIres.s' might not be
for to trek, she .\(’I
before Aglazzrm’ cyres r:
vi\'i()rl ofhcr mtcr. of
lh41l‘.\‘l.s
r'.3'forIumt1e
marriage /with the god
Merczcry/, and of the
god in all his hour!»
.SL)I!tL’II£‘.\‘.S‘,' um} size
c.tug,i;erule(1 the glory
of H all.
5}: Aglxzumx was
sormrnzmt by such
t!14mgIzt.r, and the jar!»
our anger site
mnurcaled am into her
heart. Day and night
.vI1r:xighctl, lmceaxingly
wretched. and in her
utter nulrerjv wasteii
away in it slow tlflrllllt’.
as when ice is mrzlturl
by !Iu'_/1'tfuI.u,m.
T}1:,'jire that was
iciirrlled within her at
the thought ofiwr
xi.m'r'.r luck and good
fanume was like the
burning of weedi-
which do not bllfsf into
flames, but are rwne the
less crmxunml by
xmoldermgfirz-,.
METAMORP|l(JSl‘S.
Ovio,43 n.c:—c. .«..n, 18
404
LAW 45
the sidelines, on the other hand, he would leave an opening for another
faction to rise up as the Albizzis had, and to punish the Medicis for their
success.
Cosimo solved the problem in two ways: He secretly used his wealth
to buy influence among key citizens, and he placed his own allies, all clev-
erly enlisted from the middle classes to disguise their allegiance to him, in
top government positions. Those who complained of his growing political
clout were taxed into submission, or their properties were bought out from
under them by Cosimo’s banker allies. The republic survived in name
only. Cosimo held the strings.
While he worked behind the scenes to gain control, however, publicly
Cosimo presented another picture. When he walked through the streets of
Florence, he dressed modestly, was attended by no more than one ser-
vant, and bowed deferentially to magistrates and elder citizens. He rode a
mule instead of a horse. He never spoke out on matters of public import,
even though he controlled Florence’s foreign affairs for over thirty years.
He gave money to charities and maintained his ties to Florence’s merchant
class. He financed all ldnds of public buildings that fed the Florentines’
pride in their city. When he built a palace for himself and his family in
nearby Fiesole, he turned down the ornate designs that Brunelleschi
had drawn up for him and instead chose a modest structure designed by
Michelozzo, a man of humble Florentine origins. The palace was a symbol
of Cosimo’s strategy—all simplicity on the outside, all elegance and opu~
lence within.
Cosimo finally died in 1464, after ruling for
years. The citizens
of Florence wanted to build him a great tomb, and to celebrate his memory
with elaborate funeral ceremonies, but on his deathbed he had asked to be
buried without “any pomp or demonstration.” Some sixty years later,
Machiavelli hailed Cosimo as the wisest of all princes, “for he knew how
extraordinary things that are seen and appear every hour make men much
more envied than those that are done in deed and are covered over with
decency.”
Interpretation
A close friend of Cosimo’s, the bookseller Vespasiano da Bisticci, once
wrote of him, “And whenever he wished to achieve something, he saw to it,
in order to escape envy as much as possible, that the initiative appeared to
come from others, and not from h.1'.m.” One of Cosirno’s favorite expres-
sions was, “Envy is a weed that should not be watered.” Understanding the
power envy has in a democratic environment, Cosimo avoided the appear-
ance of greatness. This does not mean that greatness should be suffocated,
or that only the mediocre should survive; only that a game of appearances
must be played. The insidious envy of the masses can actually be deflected
quite easily: Appear as one of them in style and values. Make alliances with
those below you, and elevate them to positions of power to secure their
support in times of need. Never flaunt your wealth, and carefully conceal
the degree to which it has bought influence. Make a display of deferring to
others, as if they were more powerful than you. Cosimo de’ Medici per-
fected this game; he was a consummate con artist of appearances. No one
could gauge the extent of his power———his modest exterior hid the truth.
Never be so foolish as to believe that you are stirring up admiration by
flaunting the qualities that raise you above others. By making others aware
of their inferior position, you are only stirring up “unhappy admiration,” or
envy, which will gnaw away at them until they undermine you in ways you
cannot foresee. The fool dares the gods of envy by flaunting his victories.
The master of power understands that the appearance of superiority over
others is inconsequential next to the reality of it.
Ofzzli the disorders of the soul, envy is the only one no one confesses to.
1’lul(lVt7lt.
1'. AJ). 46-120
KEYS TO POWER
The human animal has a hard time dealing with feelings of inferiority. In
the ‘face of superior skill, talent, or power, we are often disturbed and ill at
ease; this is because most of us have an inflated sense of ourselves, and
when we meet people who surpass us they make it clear to us that we are in
fact mediocre, or at least not as brilliant as we had thought. This discur~
bance in our self-image cannot last long without stirring up ugly emotions.
At first we feel envy: If only we had the quality or skill of the superior per
son, we would be happy. But envy brings us neither comfort not any closer
to equality. Nor can we admit to feeling it, for it is frowned upon socially“
to show envy is to admit to feeling inferior. To close friends, we may con-
fess our secret unrealized desires, but we will never confess to feeling envy.
So it goes underground. We disguise it in many ways, like finding grounds
to criticize the person who makes us feel it: He may be smarter than I am,
we say, but he has no morals or conscience. Or he may have more power,
but that’s because he cheats. If we do not slander him, perhaps we praise
him excessiveIy——-another of envy’s disguises.
There are several strategies for dealing with the insidious, destructive
emotion of envy. First, accept the fact that there will be people who will
surpass you in some way, and also the fact that you may envy them. But
make that feeling a way of pushing yourself to equal or surpass them some-
day. let envy turn inward and it poisons the soul; expel it outward and it
can move you to greater heights.
Second, understand that as you gain power, those below you will feel
envious of you. They may not show it but it is inevitable. Do not naively ac-
cept the facade they show you———read between the lines of their criticisms,
their little sarcastic remarks, the signs of backstabbing, the excessive praise
that is preparing you for a fall, the resentful look in the eye. Half the prob-
lem with envy comes when we do not recognize it until it is too late.
Finally, expect that when people envy you they will work against you
The envious ltirles us
mmfully as rlw .wr'rvr,
lustful slnncr and
beuonws the endless
inventor of mi ks mid
rrraragemr to hide and
nm.vkl1imszaIf.' Thus he
is able to prczeml 10
ignore the superiority
of ollwrs whiclz sum up
his heart, as ifhc did
not see them, nor llfldl
(hem, nor were aware
ofzhcm, I10?/lull ever
heard nfllmm. Ila it a
master xintularar. On
the ulller hand he (rim;
with all his power to
cronmyc and thin
prevent any form of
sirperiorziy from
u;/nearing in any ,vii1m-
n'm1.And if they (In. he
costs on zln,-m obscu-
rity. Ilypc-rcrilicisni.
surcaxrn and calumuy
like (hr mad that spits
poison from its hole.
On the olher lumd he
will raise erullrtrsly
imwgnifiziunt men.
mediocre pmplra am!
even me inkrior in /he
smrze lype uf arc-(r‘vitie.s.
A rm 1 U R
S(‘H()PFNl[AL'FR.
l 7884 800
For not many nmz, [he
prover!) mys, can love a
frieml who forltmt’
prr7,rpws wirlu>utfe:el-
ing envy; and ahour the
mvious brain. cold
poison dings and
(l0llbleSl1l[ll1L‘ pain life
bnngx him. His own
woumlingi‘ he must
nurse, and feels
anrltlwrir glurlnrss
like :1 curse.
AHsr.‘im.IIs.
c. 525456 urn
LAW 46
405
l().sIu|’I>| \'\[) ||l.\‘ (‘.()\I‘
Now Israel loved
Joseph nmre than all
his children. brrattse he
was the $07! of his old
age; and he made him it
com‘ ofnumy colors.
.
.
.
Ana’ his bro!/1er.v
envied him.
.
.
. And
when they saw him afar
off they mnxpirm’
against him to slay
him. And now they said
to one atzotlwr.
“Behold. this drtemmrr
comclh. Come now
therefore, and let its
slay him. and rat! him
iItt17 xotme pit. and Hit’
shall say. mmr: cw!
boast /talh dnrottrml
him,‘ and we‘ shall see
who! WI” become ofhts
dreunts:
"
OLD ‘H-_S[‘AMF.\’I,
(§hNI:SlS 37:3—20
TIN. 'I‘Rt\I.‘I”.lH
HI‘
|'lI|C 'lI)\lH
[When Pope ./ulius first
saw Mtdteltirtgelo it
ilesig/1 ‘Ior his tomb] it
[7fe(l.\'(€(l him so much
that ht’ (H ()!l(,'(’ sent him
(0 Carrara I0 quarry
the nemr.rary marhlfls.
t‘n.rtrm:tt'ng Alamamm
Salviati, 0fFlr7rsIt(‘£', to
pay him a thnuwnrt
duCt11S' for this pttrpou-.
Mich:-,[angrelu staywl in
these mountains more
than eight months with
two worlmten am! his
horse, and wtlhout any
other provi.\‘i()rt except
food.
.
.
. Enough
marbles quarried and
chasm. he took them to
the sea-coast, and left
406
LAW 46
insidiously. They will put obstacles in your path that you will not foresee,
or that you cannot trace to their source. It is hard to defend yourself against
this kind of attack. And by the time you realize that envy is at the root of a
person’s feelings about you, it is often too late: Your excuses, your false hu-
mility, your defensive actions, only exacerbate the problem. Since it is far
easier to avoid creating envy in the first place than to get rid of it once it is
there, you should strategize to forestall it before it grows. It is often your
own actions that stir up envy, your own unawareness. By becoming con-
scious of those actions and qualities that create envy, you can take the teeth
out of it before it nibbles you to death.
Kierkegaard believed that there are types of people who create envy,
and are as guilty when it arises as those who feel it. The most obvious type
we all know: The moment something good happens to them, whether by
luck or design, they crow about it. In fact they get pleasure out of making
people feel inferior. This type is obvious and beyond hope. There are oth
ers, however, who stir up envy in more subtle and unconscious ways, and
are partly to blame for their troubles. Envy is often a problem, for exam-
ple, for people with great natural talent.
Sir Walter Raleigh was one of the most brilliant men at the court of
Queen Elizabeth of England. He had skills as a scientist, wrote poetry still
recognized as among the most beautiful writing of the time, was a proven
leader of men, an enterprising entrepreneur, a great sea captain, and on
top of all this was a handsome, dashing courtier who charmed his way into
becoming one of the queen’s favorites. Wherever he went however, pea
ple blocked his path. Eventually he suffered a terrific fall from grace, lead-
ing even to prison and finally the executioner’s axe.
Raleigh could not understand the stubborn opposition he faced from
the other courtiers. He did not see that he had not only made no attempt to
disguise the degree of his skills and qualifies, he had imposed them on one
and all, making a show of his versatility, thinking it impressed people and
won him friends. In fact it made him silent enemies, people who felt infe-
rior to him and did all they could to ruin him the moment he tripped up or
made the slightest mistake. In the end, the reason he was executed was
ueason, but envy will use any cover it finds to mask its destructiveness.
The envy elicited by Sir Walter Raleigh is the worst kind: It was in-
spired by his natural talent and grace, which he felt was best displayed in
its full flower. Money others can attain; power as well. But superior intelli-
gence, good looks, cha.rm—these are qualities no one can acquire. The nat-
urally perfect have to work the most to disguise their brilliance, displaying
a defect or two to deflect envy before it takes root. It is a common and
naive mistake to think you are charming people with your natural talents
when in fact they are coming to hate you.
A great danger in the realm of power is the sudden improvement in for
tune——an unexpected promotion, a victory or success that seems to come
out of nowhere. This is sure to stir up envy among your former peers.
When Archbishop de Retz was promoted to the rank of cardinal, in
1651, he knew full well that many of his former colleagues envied him.
Understanding the foolishness of alienating those below him, de Retz did
everything he could to downplay his merit and emphasize the role of luck
in his success. To put people at ease, he acted humbly and deferentially, as if
nothing had changed. (In reality, of course, he now had much more power
than before.) He wrote that these wise policies “produced a good effect, by
lessening the envy which was conceived against me, which is the greatest of
all secrets.” Follow de Retz’s example. Subtly emphasize how lucky you
have been, to make your happiness seem more attainable to other people,
and the need for envy less acute. But be careful not to affect a false modesty
that people can easily see through. This will only make them more envious.
The act has to be good; your humility, and your openness to those you have
left behind, have to seem genuine. Any hint of insincerity will only make
your new status more oppressive. Remember: Despite your elevated posi»
tion, it will do you no good to alienate your former peers. Power requires a
wide and solid support base, which envy can silently destroy.
Political power of any kind creates envy, and one of the best ways to
deflect it before it takes root is to seem unambitious. When Ivan the Terri-
ble died, Boris Godunov knew he was the only one on the scene who could
lead Russia. But if he sought the position eagerly, he would stir up envy
and suspicion among the boyars, so he refused the crown, not once but
several times. He made people insist that he take the throne. George Wash-
ington used the same strategy to great effect, first in refusing to keep the po-
sition of Commander in Chief of the American army, second in resisting
the presidency. In both cases he made himself more popular than ever.
People cannot envy the power that they themselves have given a person
who does not seem to desire it.
According to the Elizabethan statesman and writer Sir Francis Bacon,
the wisest policy of the powerful is to create a kind of pity for themselves,
as if their responsibilities were a burden and a sacrifice. How can one envy
a man who has taken on a heavy load for the public interest? Disguise your
power as a. kind of self—sacrifice rather than a source of happiness and you
make it seem less enviable. Emphasize your troubles and you turn a poten-
tial danger (envy) into a source of moral support (pity). A similar ploy is to
hint that your good fortune will benefit those around you. To do this you
may need to open your purse strings, like Cimon, a wealthy general in an-
cient Athens who gave lavishly in all kinds of ways to prevent people from
resenting the influence he had bought in Athenian politics. He paid a high
price to cleflect their envy, but in the end it saved him from ostracism and
banishment from the city.
The painter J. M. W. Turner devised another way of giving to deflect
the envy of his fellow artists, which he recognized as his greatest obstacle to
his success. Noticing that his incomparable color skills made them afraid to
hang their paintings next to his in exhibitions, he realized that their fear
would turn to envy, and would eventually make it harder for him to find
galleries to show in. On occasion, then, Turner is known to have temporar-
ily dampened the colors in his paintings with soot to earn him the goodwill
of his colleagues.
one afhis men to have
them ernbarkrd. He
himself retzwzod In
Rome.
..
. The Lguruitity of
marbles was iirnnrnse,
so rluu, spread over the
piazza. they were the
admiration ofull and a
joy to the pope. who
heaped 1'mmeu.s'ura!:Ie
flzvarr upon MiL'helzm-
gala; and when he
began to work upon
them again and again
wem to see him at his
house, and talked to
hm: abzzm‘ the tomb
and other (hing: as
with his own brother.
And in order that he
mighr more easily go (0
him, the pope ordered
I11!!! 11 drawbririge
should be thrown
arrnszr from the Corri-
clore to the rooms of
Michelangelo. by which
he might visit him in
private.
There many and
frequent fax.-ar.r were
the cause (as often is
the care at court) of
much envy, and, after
the envy, of e!z4l.'14r‘.\:\'
per,\'r'('mion, sizx(.'¢’
Brumame, the architect.
who was loved by the
pope, made him Change
his mind as lo the
monument by Ielling
him. as is‘ said by the
vulgar, Ihrrt it is
unlucky to build (mes
tomb in onciv lifetime,
and other rules, Fear us
well as er: vy slirnulaled
Bramanm f<:r1ize;u.:lg»
men! Ilf/Wit?/1t’[llI1[;'£’I0
hurl exposccl many of
his errors.
.
.
. Now
imcuxzxc he had no
doubt char Michelan-
gelo knew rlmrr: errors
ofhir, he always sought
to remove him from
R0011’, or. at leaxl. to
deprive him 0/‘the
LAW 46
407
favor ofzhe pope. and
ofthe glory and useful-
Hess /Imt he might have
(I('ql¢in’a' Ivy his inclus-
try. He succeeded‘ in the
matter 0f the tomb.
There is no douh: that
if Miclwlangelo had
been allowed to finish
it, acconl/‘rig to /xirfirst
design, having so large
a field in which to show
his warm, no other
artisr, however Cele»
brated (be lvrald with-
out envy) could have
wrartetl /rom hm: the
Mg]: place he would
have held
VITA m M1LtH1:I.A,N(;m.o,
/\s(‘,ANI() (‘ON mvl,
1553
But over anybody seri-
ausly con_fe.\‘.s' Io envy?
Something there is in it
universally fell Io he
more shameful than
even felonimu‘ crime.
And rwl only does‘
evcryl>or1_y disuwn it,
but the In-(tar sort are
inc/inecl to irzcrredulity
when it is in earnest
impuaerl to an intelli-
gent man. But .sim'e
(odgmrem is in the hour!
not the brain. no degree
afimellec! supplies a
guamnlee against it.
BILLY sumo,
HERMAN‘ MFLVII 1.1;‘,
18194891
408
LAW $6
To deflect envy, Graciein recommends that the powerful display a
weakness,
at minor social indiscretion, a harmless vice. Give those who
envy you something to feed on, distracting them from your more impor-
tant sins. Remember: It is the reality that matters. You may have to play
games with appearances, but in the end you will have what counts: true
power. In some Arab countries, a man will avoid arousing envy by doing
as Cosimo de Medici did by showing his wealth only on the inside of his
house. Apply this wisdom to your own character.
Beware of some of envy’s disguises. Excessive praise is an almost sure
sign that the person praising you envies you; they are either setting you up
for a. fall—-it will be impossible for you to live up to their prajse——or they
are sharpening their blades behind your back. At the same time, those who
are hypercrifical of you, or who slander you publicly, probably envy you
as well. Recognize their behavior as disguised envy and you keep out of
the trap of mutual mud-slinging, or of taking their criticisms to heart. Win
your revenge by ignoring their measly presence.
Do not try to help or do favors for those who envy you; they will think
you are condescending to them. joe Orton’s attempt to help Halliwell find
a gallery for his work only intensified his lover‘s feelings of inferiority and
envy. Once envy reveals itself for what it is, the only solution is often to
flee the presence of the enviers, leaving them to stew in a hell of their own
creation.
Finally, be aware that some emrimnments are more conducive to envy
than others. The effects of envy are more serious among colleagues and
peers, where there is a veneer of equality. Envy is also destructive in demo~
cratic environments where overt displays of power are looked down upon.
Be extrasensitive in such environments. The filmmaker Ingmar Bergman
was hounded by Swedish tax authorities because he stood out in a county
where standing out from the crowd is frowned on. It is almost impossible
to avoid envy in such cases, and there is little you can do but accept it gm»
ciously and take none of it personally. As Thoreau once said, “Envy is the
tax which all distinction must pay.”
Image: A Garden of Weeds. You may not
feed them but they spread as you water
the garden. You may not see how, but
they take over, tall and ugly, pre-
venting anything beautiful from
flourishing. Before it is too late,
do not water indiscrimis
nately. Destroy the weeds
of envy by giving them
nothing to feed on.
Authority: Upon occasion, reveal a harmless defect in your charac-
ter. For the envious accuse the most perfect of sinning by having no
sins. They become an Argus, all eyes for finding fault with excel-
lence—it is their only consolation. Do not let envy burst with its own
venom—affect some lapse in valor or intellect,
so
as to disarm it
beforehand. You thus wave your red cape before the Horns of Envy,
in order to
save your immortality. (Baltasar Gracién, 1601-1658)
REVERSAL
The reason for being careful with the envious is that they are so indirect,
and will find innumerable ways to undermine you. But treading carefully
around them will often only make their envy worse. They sense that you
are being cautious, and it registers as yet another sign of your superiority.
That is why you must act before envy takes root.
Once envy is there, however, whether through your fault or not, it is
sometimes best to affect the opposite approach: Display the utmost disdain
for those who envy you. Instead of hiding your perfection, make it obvi-
ous. Make every new triumph an opportunity to make the envious squirm.
Your good fortune and power become their living hell. If you attain a posi-
tion of unimpeachable power, their envy will have no effect on you, and
you will have the best revenge of all: They are trapped in envy while you
are free in your power.
This is how Michelangelo triumphed over the venomous architect
Bramante, who turned Pope Julius against Michela.ngelo’s design for his
tomb. Bramante envied Michelangelo’s godlike skills, and to this one tri-
umph—the aborted tomb project—he thought to add another, by pushing
the pope to commission Michelangelo to paint the murals in the Sistine
Chapel. The project would take years, during which Michelangelo would
accomplish no more of his brilliant sculptures. Furthermore, Bramante
considered Michelangelo not nearly as skilled in painting as in sculpture.
The chapel would spoil his image as the perfect artist.
Michelangelo saw the trap and wanted to turn down the commission,
but he could not refuse the pope,
so he accepted it without complaint.
Then, however, he used Bra.rnante’s envy to spur him to greater heights,
making the Sistine Chapel his most perfect work of all. Every time Bra-
mante heard of it or saw it, he felt more oppressed by his own envy—the
sweetest and most lasting revenge you can exact on the envious.
Know how to triumph
over envy and malice.
Hrre (.'(}Vll£fVI‘L[)L
although prudent,
counls, indeed, for
little; mugnanimity is
better. A good word
cormerning one who
speaks evil ofyou
cannot be praised too
highly: there is no
revrtrige more heroic
than that brought
about by those merits
and ultaimnents which
frustrate and torment
the ctzviousz Every
stroke ofgood fortune
is (I further twist oflhe
rape round the neck of
rho ill-disposed and the
heaven o/‘the envied is
hell for the envious. To
convert your good
fortune [mo ;mi.w/n /or
your meniires is held to
he the nzrm sewrc
punislzrrwrlt you vim
iriflict on them. The
(envious man dim not
only once but as many
times as zhepersoli he
envies liver to hear the
mice ofpraisec the
etwnity oflhe [utters
jizme is the measure of
(he farrnerk punish-
ment: my one is immor-
tal in his glory. lite
latter in his misery. The
Irumper offume which
sounds immortulityfor
the om) heralds dmth
for the other. who is
semencetl to be choked
to death on his own
mv
n
B.-\l,TASAl( (iRA<‘|A.~4.
l6()l—l658
LAW 46
409
410
LAW
47
DO NOT GO PAST THE
MARK YOU AIMED FOR;
IN VICTORY,
LEARN WHEN TO STOP
JUDGMENT
The moment of victmy is often the moment of greatest
peril. In the heat of victmy, armgance and ovenronfil
dense can push you past thegaalyou had aimedfar, and
by going wafar, you make more enemies than you defeat.
Do not allow success to go to your head. There is no sub»
stitutefor strategy and carefulplanning. Set a goal, and
when you reach it, stop.
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
In 559 B.C., a young man named Cyrus gathered an immense army from
the scattered tribes of Persia and marched against his grandfather Astyages,
king of the Medes. He defeated Astyages with ease, had himself crowned
king of Medea and Persia, and began to forge the Persian Empire. Victory
followed victory in quick succession. Cyrus defeated Croesus, ruler of
Lydia, then conquered the Ionian islands and other smaller kingdoms; he
marched on Babylon and crushed it. Now he was known
as Cyrus the
Great, King of the World.
After capturing the riches of Babylon, Cyrus set his sights on the east,
on the half-barbaric tribes of the Massagetai, a. vast realm on the Caspian
Sea. A fierce warrior race led by Queen Tomyris, the Massagetai lacked the
riches of Babylon, but Cyrus decided to attack them anyway, believing
himself superhuman and incapable of defeat. The Massagetai would fall
easily to his vast armies, making his empire immense.
In 529 B.C., then, Cyrus marched to the wide river Araxes, gateway to
the kingdom of the Massagetai. As he set up camp on the western bank, he
received a message from Queen Tomyris: “King of the Medes,” she told
him, “I advise you to abandon this enterprise, for you cannot know if in the
end it will do you any good. Rule your own people, and try to bear the
sight of me ruling mine. But of course you will refuse my advice, as the last
thing you wish for is to live in peace.” Tomyris, confident of her army’s
strength and not wishing to delay the inevitable battle, offered to withdraw
the troops on her side of the river, allowing Cyrus to cross its waters safely
and fight her army on the eastern side, if that was his desire.
Cyrus agreed, but instead of engaging the enemy directly he decided
to play a trick. The Massagetai knew few luxuries. Once Cyrus had crossed
the river and made his camp on the eastern side, he set the table for an
elaborate banquet, full of meat, delicacies, and strong wine. Then he left
his weakest troops in the camp and withdrew the rest of the army to the
river. A large Massagetai detachment soon attacked the camp and killed all
of the Persian soldiers in a fierce battle. Then, overwhelmed by the fabu—
lous feast that had been left behind, they ate and drank to their hearts’ con-
tent Later, inevitably, they fell asleep. The Persian army returned to the
camp that night, killing many of the sleeping soldiers and capturing the
rest. Among the prisoners was their general, a youth named Spargapises,
son of Qieen Tomyris.
When the queen learned what had happened, she sent a message to
Cyrus, chiding him for using tricks to defeat her army. “Now listen to me,”
she wrote, “and I will advise you for your own good: Give me back my son
and leave my country with your forces intact, and be content with your tri-
umph over a third part of the Massagetai. If you refuse, I swear by the sun
our master to give you more blood than you can drink, for all your glut-
tony.
” Cyrus scoffed at her: He would not release her son. He would crush
these barbarians.
The queen’s son, seeing he would not be released, could not stand the
Vllll‘. \ \l\(Il Ultllll 3
(AH KICRIZI,
'/W0 rrockerelx f()l([,’ll{
on a rlunghwp. One
cuckcrcl war the
stronger: he
vunquirlzcd the other
and draw him from
the dungheap.
All the hem gathered
around the cockerel,
and began to laud him.
The cuzrkrtrel wanletl
his strength and glory
to be known in the maxi
wml. He flew (m (up of
the bum, flapper! his
wings. and crowed in a
land mine: “Look at
me, all of you. I am (1
Vi(‘I(N‘l()l1.\‘ cockcrcl.
Nu uther wcktzrel in
the world has such
ryrenglh. us I.
"
The cockcrel had not
finished, when an angle
killed him, seized him
in his claws, and
carried him to his mart.
XABI Ls,
Lt-,0 Tm srov,
1828 —l 9 l t)
LAW 47
411
l’II|‘ >l.t_)l
I‘ \( Ii 4)!‘
l\{l)\‘i—|:\\\||\\|‘|U\J
In all your L.'F0.\'.V-
r.mmimir1rm.s'
.
.
.
, mm‘:
impmmm n/all. let me
rr»/war Ihe mjtmcliun In
he ever on /he ulerl for
a good /7]Il(,’[’ In xnlp.
Nor/ting am he more
tmpnrlzim than to close
your e.rmmImn'(m will;
.1 mum,/wh. So many
Iuw_\'z'r.s' murder] in
(‘arc/ting u witrzers in
11
Serious crmrrzldictiori;
lmt, rm! saris/ierl with
this: go on asking qmI.\'—
(ions. and layer off
their e.t41rr1inaIiun until
the effect upon (he fury
of tlzrirfornmr arivmie
(age is lost u/Iugctlwr.
TH}: /nu‘ or (‘Ross-
I.-.‘(»\MIN/\l'l()‘~£.
FRANCIS L, WI-1 LMAN.
l‘)l3
PHI‘, (H Ifllilth \t2l|l\tl
t1l5\|‘}l(r\|
We rmd of many
In.»mm‘e‘.\' of this kimi,
/‘ur the general who by
his valor Imx
(,‘()I1([ll6I‘erI u tlalvz for
/ziy rnuslw‘, and won
great glow for himself
by his victory over the
enemy, and has loaded
his soldiers with rich
Imnty, m’t[uirF.\' m?1'¢'\‘—
sarily with his own
wldicrs, as well us with
[/1038 nflhe L’Il(’IIl)' and
with the vulajnrrs ufllw
prirxng rohig/1 u n77u—
mlirm. that his‘ very
wrtury may lmcurm»
distmveful, and u l‘lllIXAf
for apprc/misimz In his
[7I‘lIl(,‘t’. For as the
41.?
LAW 47
humiliation, and so he killed himself. The news of her son’s death over»
whelmed Tomyris. She gathered all the forces that she could muster in her
kingdom, and whipping them into
a vengeful frenzy, engaged Qrms’s
troops in a violent and bloody battle. Finally, the Massagetai prevailed. In
their anger they decimated the Persian army, killing Cyrus himself.
After the battle, Tomyris and her soldiers searched the battlefield for
Cyrus’s corpse. When she found it she cut olf his head and shoved it into a
wineskin full of human blood, crying out, “Though I have conquered you
and live, yet you have ruined me by treacherously taking my son. See
now--I fulfill my threat: You have your fill of blood.” After Cyrus’s death,
the Persian Empire quickly unraveled. One act of arrogance undid all of
Cyrus’s good work.
Interpretation
There is nothing more intoxicating than victory, and nothing more dan-
gerous.
Cyrus had built his great empire on the ruins of a previous one. A hun-
dred years earlier, the powerful Assyrian Empire had been totally de«
stroyed, its once splendid capital of Nineveh but ruins in the sand. The
Assyrians had suffered this fate because they had pushed too far, destroy-
ing one city-state after another until they lost sight of the purposes of their
victories, and also of the costs. They overextended themselves and made
many enemies who were finally able to band together and destroy them.
Cyrus ignored the lesson of Assyria. He paid no heed to the warnings
of oracles and advisers. He did not worry about offending a queen. His
many victories had gone to his head, clouding his reason. Instead of con-
solidating his already vast empire, he pushed forward. Instead of recogniz-
ing each situation as different, he thought each new war would bring the
same result as the one before as long as he used the methods he knew:
ruthless force and cunning.
Understand: In the realm of power, you must be guided by reason. To
let a momentary thrill or an emotional victory influence or guide your
moves will prove fatal. When you attain success, step back. Be cautious.
When you gain victory, understand the part played by the particular cir-
cumstances of a situation, and never simply repeat the same actions again
and again. History is littered with the mins of victorious empires and the
corpses of leaders who could not learn to stop and consolidate their gains.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
No single person in history has occupied a more delicate and precarious
position than the kings mistress. She had no real or legitimate power base
to fall back on in times of trouble‘, she was surrounded by packs of envious
courtiers eagerly anticipating her fall from grace; and finally, since the
source of her power was usually her physical beauty, for most royal mis-
tresses that fall was inevitable and unpleasant.
King Louis XV of France began to keep official mistresses in the early
days of his reign, each woman’s good fortune rarely lasting more than a
few years. But then came Madame de Pompadour, who, when she was a
middle-class child of nine named jeanne Poisson, had been told by a for-
tune~teller that she would someday be the king’s favorite. This seemed an
absurd dream, since the royal mistress almost always came from the aris~
tocracy. Jeanne nevertheless believed herself destined to seduce the king,
and doing so became her obsession. She applied herselfto the talents the
king’s favorite had to have-—-music, dancing, acting, horseback riding——-
and she excelled in every one of them. As a young woman, she married a
man of the lower nobility, which gave her an entree to the best salons in
Paris. Word quickly spread of her beauty, talent, charm, and intelligence.
Jeanne Poisson became close friends with Voltaire, Montesquieu, and
other great minds of the time, but she never lost sight of the goal she had
set herself as a girl: to capture the heart of the king. Her husband had a
chateau in a forest where the king would often go hunting, and she began
to spend a lot of time there. Studying his movements like a hawk, she
would make sure he would “happen” to come upon her while she was out
walking in her most alluring dress, or riding in her splendid coach. The
king began to take note of her, making her gifts of the game he caught in
the hunt.
In 1744 Louis’s current mistress, the Duchesse de Chateauroux, died.
Jeanne went on the offensive. She placed herself everywhere he would be:
at masked balls at Versailles, at the opera, wherever their paths would
cross, and wherever she could display her many talents: dancing, singing,
riding, coquetry. The king finally succumbed to her charms, and in a cere-
mony at Versailles in September of 1745, this twenty—four—year~old daugh-
ter of a rniddleaclass banking agent was officially inaugurated as the king’s
mistress. She was given her own room in the palace, a room the king could
enter at any time via a hidden stairway and back door. And because some
of the courtiers were angry that he had chosen a woman of low origins, he
made her a marquise. From now on she would be known as Madame de
Pompadour.
The king was a man whom the slightest feeling of boredom would op-
press out of proportion. Madame de Pompadour knew that keeping him
under her spell meant keeping him amused. To that end she put on con-
stant theatrical productions at Versailles, in which she starred. She orgaw
nizecl elaborate hunting parties, masked balls, and whatever else it would
take to keep him diverted outside the bedroom. She became a patmness of
the arts, and the arbiter of taste and fashion for all of France. Her enemies
at the court only grew in number with each new success, but Madame de
Pompadour thwarted them in a totally novel way for a l-:ing’s mistress: with
extreme politeness. Snobs who resented her for her low birth she won over
with charm and grace. Most unusual of all, she befriended the queen, and
insisted that Louis XV pay more attention to his wife, and treat her more
kindly. Even the royal family hegmdgingly gave her their support. To
nature afmen is amhi»
lions us we’/I m‘ .\'u.\'pi—
(tour, and puts no
limits 10 one 3' gum!
{(>rnme, ll is not inqmsu
siblre rival the 5u.i'pir'1'an
that may sutldrmly be
amuslwl in the miml of
ihe prince {yr the
victory‘ oflhc gzermml
rrmv have been aggrw
V/marl by .\‘()me haughty
<=.rpre.«‘5i<:/Ix Hr imnlmx
acts an his 1>art;.m 1/mt
the prince will trmu—
rally be mods to think
ofxccurimg l1inx.wlf
against the umbmmr nf
Izrir general.
And to do (his, /ha
means mm xzrggesl
themselves to him are
either to have Jim
gemvml killed. or to
(feprivc him of rim:
reputmzvu which he
has ll(.‘I[ulI'é’(l with the
prince is army and the
people. by using ewr_)'
mmns Io pmve that the
general'S wcmry was
not due to his skill and
courage, but to chance
and (he cowardice of
the mcmy. or m the
sagaczry ofthr: nrhcr
cu,'7t.1in.V who were wi//1
him in (Ila! action.
Nl('(‘(lLO lVl.«\CI-HAVF.) Ll.
l4E:9—lS27
LAW 47
413
A mun who was
fulnmls or a t7't’¢'
climber was guiding
rmmwrze in climbing a
tall mu’. He mvlerml the
mom to our (ht! mp
brrmdiex, and. during
this time, when I/re rmm
seemed to by in great
dimgct; the expert mid
nothing. Only when the
mm: was contirig tlown
and had reached the
lurighl of the euvm (fill
the expert ml! out, “lie
mrefld! Watch your
step muting down!" I
asked him.
“ VVI1y dérl
you my timl? At that
heiglil he t"(}‘ulclf'li!1Z[)
the ram‘ affine way ifiw
rkrise.
"
"Tlmtir (lie point,
" suit!
the éviparl. “As long as
the man was up at .2
dizzy height and the
lwrarzcher were threw’-
ening to break, he
izimself was so afraid I
sazrl notlxirzg. Misktkcs
are zzlwiiys made whwz
people get so the cm
'
p[a(7$!.$'.
"
This man heltmgrd to
th( lower! class, bu! his
words were in pvrfiztl
¢l(.'L'(Ir(l with the
[ireccgm ofllzc sages. In
luutball low, they say
that uflvr you have
irirkcd out of a zlijficizll
plum and you think tin‘
Hex! one will by ca.v:'z~r
you are sure to mi.x‘.\‘ the
hall.
HSSAV5 IN l|)Ll-
FOI ?k'l'El:N'|'H KEN I'll KY
414
LAW -17
crown her glory, the king made her a duchess. Her sway was felt even in
politics: Indeed she became the untitled minister of foreign affairs.
In 1751, when Madame de Pompadour was at the height of her power,
she experienced her worst crisis. Physically weakened by the responsibili—
ties of her position, she found it increasingly difficult to meet the king’s de~
mands in bed. This was usually the point at which the mistress would meet
her end, struggling to maintain her position
as her beauty faded. But
Madame de Pompadour had a strategy: She encouraged the king to set up
a kind of brothel, Pare aux Cerfs, on the grounds of Versailles. There the
middle-aged king could have liaisons with the most beautiful young girls in
the realm.
Madame de Pompadour knew that her charm and her political acu—
men had made her indispensable to the king. What did she have to fear
from a sixteen-year-old who had none of her power and presence? Vv'hat
did it matter if she lost her position in the bedroom, as long as she re-
mained the most powerful woman in France? To secure that position she
became still closer friends with the queen, with whom she started attending
church. Although her enemies at the court conspired to have her toppled
from her official position as l<ing’s mistress, the king kept her on, for he
needed her calming elfect. It was only when her part in the disastrous
Seven Years’ War drew much criticism on her that she slowly withdrew
from public affairs.
Madame de Pompadour’s health had always been delicate, and she
died at the age of forty~three, in 1764. Her reign as mistress had lasted an
unprecedented twenty years. “She was regretted by all,” wrote the Due de
Croy, “for she was kindly and helpful to everyone who approached her.”
Interpretation
Aware of the temporariness of her power, the kings mistress would often
go into a kind of frenzy after capturing the king: She would try to accumu-
late as much money as possible to protect her afler her inevitable fall. And
to extend her reign as long as possible, she would be ruthless with her ene-
mies in the court. Her situation, in other words, seemed to demand from
her a greed and vindictiveness that would often be her undoing. Madame
de Pompadour succeeded where all others had failed because she never
pressed her good fortune. Instead of bullying the courtiers from her power»
ful position as the king’s mistress, she tried to win their support. She never
revealed the slightest hint of greed or arrogance. When she could no
longer perform her physical duties
as mistress, she did not fret at the
thought of someone replacing her in bed. She simply applied some strat-
egy--she encouraged the king to take young lovers, knowing that the
younger and prettier they were, the less of a threat they posed, since they
could not compare to her in charrn and sophistication and would soon
bore the monarch.
Success plays strange tricks on the mind. It makes you feel invulnera~
ble, while also making you more hostile and emotional when people chal-
lenge your power. It makes you less able to adapt to circumstance. You
come to believe your character is more responsible for your success than
your sirategizing and planning. Like Madame de Pompadour, you need to
realize that your moment of triumph is also a moment when you have to
rely on cunning and strategy all the more, consolidating your power base,
recognizing the role of luck and circumstance in your success, and remain-
ing vigilant against changes in your good fortune. It is the moment of vic-
tory when you need to play the couttier's game and pay more attention
than ever to the laws of power.
The greatest danger occurs at the moment afvictory.
Napoleon {i(/nnpawz, I 769»!82 I
KEYS TO POWER
Power has its own rhythms and patterns. Those who succeed at the game
are the ones who control the patterns and vary them at will, keeping peo-
ple off balance while they set the tempo. The essence ofstrategy is control-
ling what comes next, and the elation of victory can upset your ability to
control what comes next in two ways. First, you owe your success to a pat»
tern that you are apt to try to repeat. You will try to keep moving in the
same direction without stopping to see whether this is still the direction that
is best for you. Second, success tends to go to your head and make you
emotional. Feeling invulnerable, you make aggressive moves that ulti-
mately undo the victory you have gained.
The lesson is simple: The powerful vary their rhythms and patterns,
change course, adapt to circumstance, and learn to improvise. Rather than
letting their dancing feet impel them forward, they step back and look
where they are going. It is as if their bloodstream bore a kind of antidote to
the intoxication of victory, letting them control their emotions and come to
a kind of mental halt when they have attained success. They steady them-
selves, give themselves the space to reflect on what has happened, examine
the role of circumstance and luck in their success. As they say in riding
school, you have to be able to control yourself before you can control the
horse.
Luck and circumstance always play a. role in power. This is inevitable,
and actually makes the game more interesting. But despite what you may
think, good luck is more dangerous than had luck. Bad luck teaches valu~
able lessons about patience, timing, and the need to be prepared for the
worst; good luck deludes you into the opposite lesson, making you think
your brillliance will cany you through. Your fortune will inevitably turn,
and when it does you will be completely unprepared.
According to Machiavelli, this is what undid Cesare Borgia. He had
many triumphs, was actually a clever strategist, but had the bad luck to
have good luck: He had a. pope for a father. Then, when he had bad luck
for real—his fathefs death—-he was unprepared for it, and the many ene~
LAW 47
-I15
416
LAW 47
mies he had made devoured him. The good luck that elevates you or seals
your success brings the moment for you to open your eyes: The wheel of
fortune will hurtle you down as easily as up. If you prepare for the fall, it is
less likely to ruin you when it happens.
People who have a run of success can catch a kind of fever, and even
when they themselves try to stay calm, the people below them often pres—
sure them to go past their mark and into dangerous waters. You have to
have a strategy for dealing with these people. Simply preaching moderar
tion will make you look weak and small-minded; seeming to fail to follow
up on a victory can lessen your power.
When the Athenian general and statesman Pericles led a series of
naval campaigns around the Black Sea in 436 u.(:., his easy triumphs en-
flamed the Athenians’ desire for more. They dreamed of conquering
Egypt, overrunning Persia, sailing for Sicily. On the one hand Pericles
reined in these dangerous emotions by warning of the perils of hubris. On
the other hand he fed them by fighting small battles that he knew he could
win, creating the appearance that he was preserving the momentum of suc»
cess. The skill with which Pericles played this game is revealed by what
happened when he died: The demagogues Cook over, pushed Athens into
invading Sicily, and in one rash move destroyed an empire.
The rhythm of power often requires an alternation of force and cun-
ning. Too much force creates a counterreaction; too much cunning, no
matter how cunning it is, becomes predictable. Working on behalf of his
master, the shogun Oda Nobunaga, the great sixteenth-century japanese
general (and future emperor) Hideyoshi once engineered a stunning vic-
tory over the army of the formidable General Yoshimoto. The shogun
wanted to go further, to take on and crush yet another powerful enemy, but
Hideyoshi reminded him of the old Japanese saying: “When you have
won a victory, tighten the strings of your helmet.” For Hideyoshi this was
the moment for the shogun to switch from force to cunning and indirec-
tion, setting his enemies against one another through a. series of deceptive
alliances. In this way he would avoid stirring up needless opposition by
appearing overly aggressive. When you are victorious, then, lie low, and
lull the enemy into inaction. These changes of rhythm
are immensely
powerful.
People who go past the mark are often motivated by a desire to please
a master by proving their dedication. But an excess of effort exposes you to
the risk of making the master suspicious of you. On several occasions, gen-
erals under Philip of Macedon were disgraced and demoted immediately
after leading their troops to a great victory; one more such victory, Philip
thought, and the man might become a rival instead of an underling. When
you serve a master, it is often wise to measure your victories carefully, let-
ting him get the glory and never making him uneasy. It is also wise to es-
tablish a pattern of strict obedience to earn his trust. In the fourth century
B.C.,
a. captain under the notoriously severe Chinese general Wu Ch’i
charged ahead before
a battle had begun and came back with several
enemy heads. He thought he had shown his fiery enthusiasm, but Wu Ch’i
was unimpressed. “A talented officer,” the general said with a sigh as he or-
dered the man beheaded, “but a disobedient one.”
Another moment when
3. small success can spoil the chances for a
larger one may come if a master or superior grants you a favor: It is a dan-
gerous mistake to ask for more. You will seem insecur%perhaps you feel
you did not deserve this favor, and have to grab as much as you can when
you have the chance, which may not come again. The proper response is
to accept the favor graciously and withdraw. Any subsequent favors you
should earn without having to ask for them.
Finally, the moment when you stop has great dramatic import. What
comes last sticks in the mind as a kind of exclamation point. There is no
better time to stop and walk away than after a victory. Keep going and you
risk lessening the effect, even ending up defeated. As lawyers say of cross-
examination, “Always stop with a victory.”
Image: Icarus Falling
from the Sky. His father
Daedalus fashions wings
of wax that allow the
two men to fly out of
the labyrinth
and
escape the Minotaur.
Elated by the tri-
umphant
escape
and the feeling of
flight, Icarus soars
higher and high-
er. until the sun
melts the wings
and he hurtles
to
his
death.
Authority: Princes and republics should content themselves with victory,
for when they aim at more, they generally lose. The use of insulting lan-
guage toward an enemy arises from the insolence of victory, or from the
false hope of victory, which latter misleads men as often in their actions
as in their words; for when this false hope takes possession of the mind,
it makes men go beyond the mark, and causes them to sacrifice a. cer-
tain good for an uncertain better. {Niccolo Machiavelli, 14694527)
LAW 47
‘
417
4'78
LAW 47
REVE R SAL
As Machiavelli says, either destroy a man or leave him alone entirely. In-
flicting half punishment or mild injury will only create an enemy whose
bitterness will grow with time, and who will take revenge. When you beat
an enemy, then, make your victory complete. Crush him into nonexis
tence. In the moment of victory, you do not restrain yourself from crushing
the enemy you have defeated, but rather from needlessly advancing
against others. Be merciless with your enemy, but do not create new ene-
mies by overreaching.
There are some who become more cautious than ever after a victory,
which they see as just giving them more possessions to wony about and
protect. Your caution after victory should never make you hesitate, or lose
momentum, but rather act as a safeguard against rash action. On the other
hand, momentum as a phenomenon is greatly overrated. You create your
own successes, and if they follow one upon the other, it is your own doing.
Belief in momentum will only make you emotional, less prone to act strate»
gically, and more apt to repeat the same methods. Leave momentum for
those who have nothing better to rely upon.
48
ASSUME FORMLESSNESS
JUDGMENT
By taking a shape, by having a visible plan, you open
yoursesy" to attack. Instead of taking a form. for your
enemy to grasp, keep yourselfadaptable and on the move.
Accept the fast that nothing is certain and no law is
fixed. The best way to protect yourself is to be as fluid
and formless as water; never bet on stability M lasting
order. Everything changvs.
419
In mania] am, it is
impormm that .struIi,'g_\'
he Awful/zrmuzhle, that
form be (’()(1L‘(’(.4[(’([. «ml
(hm IflU|’(’I?1<'MI.\‘ by
(nze.xpu'[z'd, so that
pre[1uri'dr1v\'v u;,'1Iim‘I
Ilmn he mzpnsri/715*.
W/ml (‘VIII/)/(‘V Ll gum]
general In wm wit/mm
fro’/1'5 ulwuyr having
um"allmmuhIi- wisdom
and a mm/us n/Jwanrli
rim! Imvm no mu‘l:\'
Only I}zr'f2:rr21l('.\',s‘
cannot be a/]l*clm!,
Sages‘ hide in nn/k((h-
oi/mhilily. so their /01’!-
irx;;s cmmuy be
0hservL'()',‘ I/my uywmrr
in fm‘nzIl'.\'.xm’\‘.s. so (heir
limnv mnnm he <'m.m'rl,
'l'Hl- nook (3|"l'|H*
llL./\l'V'AN .\1.\s1Hzs.
Cunm.
\‘F((J,'V‘l) (TN I'l'R‘-'
|%.(‘
'|\IH_ I)‘)(. \\'ll ll HI!
I |€t)l’l’l-‘ll |:\I¢.\
"W/mt crime have I
umzmz'I1c>,d (hm I
.3’/Hill/II be I/ms muIi—
lured by my own
mu.s'Ivr? "pc;m'vely
L’.XL'[£IiIYl(’l[ ./(Iwlcr. u
vomxg n2u.\'Iij],' "llL»ri"s
a pretly irurulitiuu/"or a
dog Q/III)‘ prrlmnonxl
How am I xlzow my
fmrn nmung my
/'rz'<-,rid,\‘.7 0/1! king of
beans’, or rd!/yer their
lyrimt, who would dare‘
Io (rent you rhu.\'I"' llis‘
mmplu/nls‘ were not
unfoumletl, for that
very niorniim, his
nra.m'r, dr's])i1‘(‘ /he
/rizrrrrillg .\hri1'ki 0_/‘(Mr
yazmg friend, had
420
LAW 48
TRANSGRESSION OF THE LAW
By the eighth century B.C., the city-states of Greece had grown so large and
prosperous that they had run out of land to support their expanding popu-
lations. So they turned to the sea, establishing colonies in Asia Minor,
Sicily, the Italian peninsula, even Africa. The city-state of Sparta, however,
was landlocked and surrounded by mountains. Lacking
access to the
Mediterranean, the Spartans never became
a seafaring people; instead
they turned on the cities around them, and, in a series of brutal, violent
conflicts lasting more than a hundred years, managed to conquer an im-
mense area that would provide enough land for their citizens. This solution
to their problem, however, brought a new, more formidable one: How
could they maintain and police their conquered territories? The subordi-
nate peoples they ruled now outmimbered them ten to one. Surely this
horde would take a horrible revenge on them.
Sparta’s solution was to create a society dedicated to the art of war.
Spartans would be tougher, stronger, and fiercer than their neighbors. This
was the only way they could ensure their stability and survival.
When a Spartan boy reached the age of seven, he was taken from his
mother and placed in a military club where he was trained to fight and un-
derwent the strictest discipline. The boys slept on beds of reeds; they were
allotted only one outer garment to wear for an entire year. They studied
none of the arts; indeed, the Spartans banned music, and permitted only
slaves to practice the crafts that were necessary to sustain them. The only
skills the Spartans taught were those of warfare. Children seen as weaklings
were left to die in a cavern in the mountains. No system of money or trad-
ing was allowed in Sparta; acquired wealth, they believed, would sow self-
ishness and dissension, weakening their warrior discipline. The only way a
Spartan could earn a living was through agriculture, mostly on state—owned
lands, which slaves, called helots, would work for him.
The Spartans’ single-mindedness allowed them to forge the most pow-
erful infantry in the world. They marched in perfect order and fought with
incomparable bravery. Their tighbknit phalamxes could vanquish an army
ten times their size, as they proved in defeating the Persians at Thermopy-
lae. A Spartan column on the march would strike terror in the enemy; it
seemed to have no weaknesses. Yet although the Spartans proved them~
selves mighty warriors, they had no interest in creating an empire. They
only wanted to keep what they had already conquered and to defend it
against invaders. Decades would pass without a single change in the system
that had succeeded so well in preserving Spa.rta’s status quo.
At the same time that the Spartans were evolving their warlike culture,
another city—state was rising to equal prominence: Athens, Unlike Sparta,
Athens had taken to the sea, not so much to create colonies as for purposes
of trade. The Athenians became great merchants; their currency, the fa-
mous “owl coins,” spread throughout the Mediterranean. Unlike the rigid
Spartans, the Athenians responded to every problem with consummate
creativity, adapting to the occasion and creating new social forms and new
arts at an incredible pace. Their society was in constant flux. And as their
power grew, they came to pose a threat to the defense-minded Spartans.
In 4-31 B.C., the war that had been brewing between Athens and Sparta
for so long finally erupted. It lasted twenty—seven years, but after many
twists of fortune, the Spartan war machine finally emerged victorious. The
Spartans now commanded an empire. and this time they could not stay in
their shell. If they gave up what they had gained, the beaten Athenians
would regroup and rise against them, and the long war would have been
fought for naught.
After the war, Athenian money poured into Sparta. The Spartans had
been trained in warfare, not politics or economics; because they were so
unaccustomed to it, wealth and its accompanying ways of life seduced and
overwhelmed them. Spartan governors were sent to rule what had been
Athenian lands; far from home, they succumbed to the worst forms of cor-
ruption. Sparta had defeated Athens, but the fluid Athenian way of life was
slowly breaking down its discipline and loosening its rigid order. And
Athens, meanwhile, was adapting to losing its empire, managing to thrive
as a cultural and economic center.
Confused by a change in its status quo, Sparta grew weaker and
weaker. Some thirty years after defeating Athens, it lost an important battle
with the city-state of Thebes. Almost overnight, this once mighty nation
collapsed, never to recover.
Interpretation
In the evolution of species, protective armor has almost always spelled dis-
aster. Although there are a few exceptions, the shell most often becomes a
dead end for the animal encased in it; it slows the creature down, making it
hard for it to forage for food and making it a target for fast~moving preda-
tors. Animals that take to the sea or sky, and that move swiftly and unpre
djctably, are infinitely more powerful and secure.
In facing a serious problem~——controlling superior numbers—Sparta
reacted like an animal that develops a shell to protect itself from the envi-
ronment. But like a turtle, the Spartans sacrificed mobility for safety. They
managed to preserve stability for three hundred years, but at what cost?
They had no culture beyond warfare, no arts to relieve the tension, a con
stant anxiety about the status quo. While their neighbors took to the sea,
learning to adapt to a world of constant motion, the Spartans entombed
themselves in their own system. Victory would mean new lands to govern,
which they did not want; defeat would mean the end of their military ma
chine, which they did not want, either. Only stasis allowed them to survive.
But nothing in the world can remain stable forever, and the shell or system
you evolve for your protection will someday prove your undoing.
In the case of Sparta, it was not the armies of Athens that defeated it,
but the Athenian money. Money flows everywhere it has the opportunity
to go; it cannot be controlled, or made to fit a prescribed pattern. It is in-
herently chaotic. And in the long run, money made Athens the conqueror,
bt1rb(u'ou.s'ly cu! ov/“f‘hi,V
fang pmrlmz ears‘.
Jowier (’X])8CIL‘(I null!‘
mg lets than to givv up
the ghost.
As he advmicml in
years, he pcrceivezl that
he gairwzl more than he
had lost by his mama»
rinrgfnr, Ewing natu-
rally inclined E(>fl'g,‘IJI
with oilmrs, he would
often have rcmrnvd
/Itlmi’, with this part
dz'.s'figurcd in (J /mmlrrd
plm'1'.\'. A qum‘r'clmrn:=
dog always has has ear.-c
lacermed.
The (ex: we leave
others to lay hold of
the better. When one
has hm one point tr)
dwfmzd, it xlzoulcl be
prom-,m1 for fear nf
accident. Ta/<<' for
example’ _Mas!£'! Jowlcr,
who. being arrrwd with
(1 .\‘])i/{ed collar, and
having about as much
cur us a bird. (1 Wolf
would he puzzlwi 1:;
know where to
tackle him.
FABLES
JF,Al\' DE LA F0\I'l‘AINI;.
I621
I695
LAW ta
4.?!
Om’ sedzwlivr? and ulttl
mutely ulwu_V.\‘ frlllli
path has been the
dewelopmem of ]W()f(’f.'<
Iivc armor. An organ-
i.\‘r2r can protect itself by
crmcenlmem, by .y'wif1-
Hers mflighl, by e/[E10
rive coamwrartuck, by
uniting for mlark and
defense with other indi-
vizfltaix uf ils species
and also by encasing
itself within bony plates
and spines.
.
.
. Almost
always the experiment
ofarmorfuiled. Crew
rurev adopting it tended
to become unwieldy,
They had 10 move rela-
live!)1 slowly. Hence
they were forced to live
mairtly on vcgemble
food; and thus in
genera! they were at if
dzimrivanrage as
compared with foes
:'i1=ir:g on more rapidly
“profitable
" animal
food: The repeated faii«
ure r)/‘pro(ecIi1«'e armor
show: that, even at (1
somewhaz low evolw
Iionury level. mind
iriumphed over more
mamrr. It Lr this .\‘(V! of
Irhtmph wlzrriz has
him: .ruprr°meI_V Ilxrrrr
plified in Man.
S(‘lF,NTll l(‘ '1 HEORY
1\l\'l) RIIHUIUN.
E. W. B,»‘\RNl-.3.
1933
422
l
LAW 43
by infiltrating the Spartan system and corroding its protective armor. In the
battle between the two systems, Athens was fluid and creative enough to
take new forms, while Sparta could grow only more rigid until it cracked.
This is the way the world works, whether for animals, cultures, or indi-
viduals. In the face of the world’s harshness and danger, organisms of any
kind develop protection-—a coat of armor, a rigid system, a comforting rit-
ual. For the short term it may work, but for the long term it spells disaster.
People weighed down by a system and inflexible ways of doing things can
not move fast, cannot sense or adapt to change. They lumber around more
and more slowly until they go the way of the brontosaurus. Learn to move
fast and adaptor you will be eaten.
The best way to avoid this fate is to assume formlessness. No predator
alive can attack what it cannot see.
OBSERVANCE OF THE LAW
When World V\7ar II ended and the Japanese, who had invaded China
in 1937, had finally been thrown out, the Chinese Nationalists, lead by
Chiang Kai-shek, decided the time had come to annihilate the Chinese
Communists, their hated rivals, once and for all. They had almost suc-
ceeded in 1935, forcing the Communists into the Long March, the grueling
retreat that had greatly diminished their numbers. Although the Commu«
nists had recovered somewhat during the war against japan, it would not
be difficult to defeat them now. They controlled only isolated areas in the
countryside, had unsophisticated weaponry, lacked any military experi-
ence or training beyond mountain fighting, and controlled no important
parts ofChina, except areas of Manchutia, which they had managed to take
after the Japanese retreat. Chiang decided to commit his best forces in
Manclmria. He would take over its major cities and from those bases would
spread through this northern industrial region, sweeping the Communists
away. Once Manchuria had fallen the Communists would collapse.
In 1945 and ’46 the plan worked perfectly: The Nationalists easily
took the major Manchurian cities. Puzzlingly, though, in the face of this
critical campaign, the Communist strategy made no sense. When the Na-
tionalists began their push, the Communists dispersed to Manchuria’s most
out-of—the-way corners. Their small units harassed the Nationalist armies,
ambushing them here, retreating unexpectedly there, but these dispersed
units never linked up, making them hard to attack. They would seize a
town only to give it up a few weeks later. Forming neither rear guards I101’
vanguards, they moved like mercury, never staying in one place, elusive
and formless.
The Nationalists ascribed this to two things: cowardice in the face
of superior forces and inexperience in strategy. Mao Tse~tung, the Com»
munjst leader, was more a poet and philosopher than a general, whereas
Chiang had studied warfare in the West and was a follower of the German
military writer Carl Von Clausewitz, among others.
Yet a pattern did eventually emerge in Mao‘s attacks. After the Nation-
alists had taken the cities, leaving the Communists to occupy what was gen-
erally considered Ma.nchun‘a’s useless space, the Communists started using
that large space to surround the cities. If Chiang sent an army from one city
to reinforce another, the Communists would encircle the rescuing army.
Chia.ng’s forces were slowly broken into smaller and smaller units, isolated
from one another, their lines of supply and communication cut. The Na-
tionalists still had superior firepower, but if they could not move, what
good was it?
A kind of terror overcame the Nationalist soldiers. Commanders com-
fortably remote from the front lines might laugh ax Man, but the soldiers
had fought the Communists in the mountains, and had come to fear their
elusiveness. Now these soldiers sat in their cities and watched as their fast-
moving enemies, as fluid as water, poured in on them from all sides. There
seemed to be millions of them. The Communists also encircled the sol-
diers’ spirits, bombarding them with propaganda to lower their morale and
pressure them to desert.
The Nationalists began to surrender in their minds. Their encircled
and isolated cities started collapsing even before being directly attacked;
one after another fell in quick succession. In November of 1948, the Na-
tionalists surrendered Manchuria to the Communist»-a humiliafing blow
to the technically superior Nationalist army, and one that proved decisive
in the war. By the following year the Communists controlled all of China.
Interpretation
The two board games that best approximate the strategies of war are chess
and the Asian game of go. In chess the board is small. In comparison to go,
the attack comes relatively quickly, forcing a decisive battle. It rarely pays
to withdraw, or to sacrifice your pieces, which must be concentrated at key
areas. Go is much less formal. It is played on a large grid, with 361 inter-
sections——nearly six times as many positions as in chess. Black and white
stones (one color for each side) are placed on the board’s intersections, one
at a time, wherever you like. Once all your stories (52 for each side) are on
the board, the object is to isolate the stones of your opponent by encircling
them.
A game of go——called wet’-chi in China-can last up to three hundred
moves. The strategy is more subtle and fluid than chess, developing slowly;
the more complex the pattern your stories initially create on the board, the
harder it is for your opponent to understand your strategy. Fighting to con-
trol a particular area is not worth the trouble: You have to think in larger
terms, to be prepared to sacrifice an area in order eventually to dominate
the board. What you are after is not an entrenched position but mobility.
With mobility you can isolate the opponent in small areas and then encir-
cle them. The aim is not to kill off the opponent’s pieces directly,
as in
chess, but to induce a kind of paralysis and collapse. Chess is linear, posi-
tion oriented, and aggressive; go is nonlinear and fluid. Aggression is indi-
Tllli ll.\Rl-I AI\D
I'll!» 'l‘R|nlZ
The Sage nail/wr seeks
to follow the ways of
the rmrienls nor estab-
lirhes any fixed stan-
dard for all times‘ but
exantines the things af
his age and then
{3r€pun¢.\‘ to rich]
with (Item.
There was In Sung a
man, who tilled afield
in wliiclz tlzerc stoorl
Ilze trunk ofa tree.
Once a hare, while
rwmmg fast. rushed
uguénri the tmrzk,
broke its neck, and
died. Tlzeyeupon the
man am his plough
usiclc and watched (hm
tree, hoping that he
would gel anmlrer ham
Yet he never caught
rmorher hare and was
ltimself ridic':¢letI by Ike
people of Sung. Now
supposing sornebody
wanmd to govern the
people of the present
age will: the policies
ofrlze early kings. he
would be doing exactly
lire smne thing as that
man who warclzed the
tree’.
HAN-l‘l1l-'l’Zt..
CIIJNESF Pllll.0SOl'lIFR,
mun) <,r,:~ I run’ mr,
LAW i8
423
Ciolrudru! Rommel
mrpassed Parson as a
(‘rmlive imeliect.
.
.
.
Roman’! sfmmwd miii-
mrry formalism. 11::
made #10 fixed plans
beyond those intended
for the inilial clash;
rlmrw/‘Ier, he tailored
his tactics to meet
specific sizmztions as
they arose. He was a
lightning-fa.s': dea‘.n‘on-
maker. 111;)/sir‘a!Iy
mninluirtirtg ll pace that
matched his active
mentality. In a forbid-
ding sea ofmml, he
operated in a free erzwl
ronmem. Once
Rommel ruptured the
British lines in Africa.
he had (he whole
nortllem part af the
continent opened
to him.
Cmnpamrively free
from the lzumszringing
aurlwrizy of Benin,
disregarding nrdels
even from [filter
himself on occusion.
Rommel irnplmnmrml
one xucce.rsful operw
(hm uftrtr «mother until
he had most of North
Aj’r1c(: zmdcr his
control and (Tuiro
(rambling at his‘ feet.
THE‘ M41 or WINMNG
WARi
lAMr=.s NIRAZEK.
I968
424
LAW 45
rect until the end of the game, when the winner can surround the 0ppo—
nent’s stones at an accelerated pace.
Chinese military strategists have been influenced by go for centuries.
Its proverbs have been applied to war time. and again; Mao Tsemzng was
an addict of wei-chi, and its precepts were ingrained in his strategies. A key
wet‘-chi concept, for example, is to use the size of the board to your advan»
tage, spreading out in every direction so that your opponent cannot fathom
your movements in a simple linear way.
“Every Chinese,” Mao once wrote, “should consciously throw himself
into this war of ajigsaw pattern” against the Nationalists. Place your men in
ajigsaw pattern in go, and your opponent loses himself trying to figure out
what you are up to. Either he wastes time pursuing you or, like Chiang Kai‘
shek, he assumes you are incompetent and fails to protect himself. And if
he concentrates on single areas, as Western strategy advises, he becomes a
sitting duck for encirclement. In the weiwhi way of war, you encircle the
enemy’s brain, using mind games, propaganda, and irritation tactics to
confuse and dishearten. This was the strategy of the Communis(s—an ap-
parent foxmlessness that disoriented and terrified their enemy.
Where chess is linear and direct, the ancient game of go is closer to the
kind of strategy that will prove relevant in a world where battles are fought
indirectly, in vast, loosely connected areas. Its strategies are abstract and
multidimensional, inhabiting a plane beyond time and space: the sl:ratc~
gist’s mind. In this fluid form of warfare, you value movement over posi-
tion. Your speed and mobility make it impossible to predict your moves;
unable to understand you, your enemy can form no strategy to defeat you.
Instead of fixing on particular spots, this indirect form of warfare spreads
out, just as you can use the large and disconnected nature of the real world
to your advantage. Be like a vapor. Do not give your opponents anything
solid to attack; watch as they exhaust themselves pursuing you, trying to
cope with your elusiveness. Only formlessness allows you to truly surprise
your enemies—by the time they figure out where you are and what you are
up to, it is too late.
When you want tofight us, we don’t let you and you can ’tfind us. But when
we want tofight you, we make sure that you can ’z get away and we hit you
squarely.
.
. and wipe you out.
.
.
. The enemy advances, we retreat; the em.-my
camps, we harms; the enemy tires, we attadc; the enemy retreats, we pursue.
Mao Tkevtung. 18934976
KEYS TO POWER
The human animal is distinguished by its constant creation of forms.
Rarely expressing its emotions directly, it gives them form through lan-
guage, or through socially acceptable rituals. We cannot communicate our
emotions without a form.
The forms that we create, however, change constandymin fashion, in
style, in all those human phenomena representing the mood of the mo-
ment. We are constantly altering the forms we have inherited from previ-
ous generations, and these changes are signs of life and vitality. Indeed. the
things that don’t change, the forms that rigidify, come to look to us like
death, and we destroy them. The young show this most clearly: Uncom-
fortable with the forms that society imposes upon them, having no set iden-
tity, they play with their own characters, trying on a variety of masks and
poses to express themselves. This is the vitality that drives the motor of
form, creating constant changes in style.
The powerful are often people who in their youth have shown im~
mense creativity in expressing something new through a new form. Society
grants them power because it hungers for and rewards this sort of newness.
The problem comes later, when they often grow conservative and posses-
sive. They no longer dream of creating new forms; their identifies are set,
their habits congeal, and their rigidity makes them easy targets. Everyone
knows their next move. Instead of demanding respect they elicit boredom:
Get off the stage! we say, let someone else, someone younger, entertain us.
When locked in the past, the powerful look comica.l——they are overripe
fruit, waiting to fall from the tree.
Power can only thrive if it is flexible in its forms. To be formless is not
to be amorphous; everything has a form—~—it is impossible to avoid. The
formlessness of power is more like that of water, or mercury, taking the
form of whatever is around it. Changing constantly, it is never predictable.
The powerful are constantly creating form, and their power comes from
the rapidity with which they can change. Their formlessness is in the eye of
the enemy who cannot see what they are up to and so has nothing solid to
attack. This is the premier pose of power: Lmgraspable, as elusive and swift
as the god Mercury, who could take any form he pleased and used this
ability to wreak havoc on Mount Olympus.
Human creations evolve toward abstraction, toward being more rnen~
tal and less material. This evolution is clear in art, which, in this century,
made the great discovery of abstraction and conceptualism; it can also be
seen in politics, which over time have become less overtly violent, more
complicated, indirect and cerebral. Warfare and strategy too have followed
this pattern. Strategy began in the manipulation of armies on land, posi—
tioning them in ordered forrnations; on land, strategy is relatively two di-
mensional, and controlled by topography. But all the great powers have
eventually taken to the sea, for commerce and colonization. And to protect
their trading lanes they have had to learn how to fight at sea. Maritime war-
fare requires tremendous creativity and abstract thinking, since the lines
are constantly shifting. Naval captains distinguish themselves by their abil»
ity to adapt to the literal fluidity of the terrain and to confuse the enemy
with an abstract, hard—to—ant:icipate form. They are operating in a third di-
mension: the mind.
Back on land, guerrilla warfare too demonstrates this evolution toward
abstraction. T. E. Lawrence was perhaps the first modern strategist to de-
(Ill\l"x’\< Tlxll \Il\l(!l(
To tarry can (he
insliamual inhih2li(m
ciemamled by the
modern world and In
hr? able In cope‘ with the
mergy rllmx which
results from this mhihis
tion, the ego has In
1mrt'r.'rg0 41 change. The
ego. i.e.. that part of
the person lhal is
exposed to dangur.
bccanzex rigid, as we
say, wlwn il lr continu-
ully .\‘uhje('Ied to lhc
smite or similar
c'on_f?z'cr.r between mar,-xi
and a j}'ur-inducing
outer world. I: acquirer
in this prr,7L't's.\' a
chronic, amommirally
funcrlmrirlg mmle of
reu1‘Iir7IL, i.e.. its “vim!-
(Ic'1er."II is as iftlre
a/"fecti vc personality
armored
. .j.' (Li ifthe
hard 5/zell it develops
were inlmdecl to deflect
and weaken the blows
of the outer world as
well as the rlurmrririg
ofme inner needs. This
armoriug maker the
person less smszrnre In
unpleasure. hm aim
reyrrim‘ Izil‘ libirlimzl
and ::ygre5sivz' motility
and thus ri‘(lll(‘E’S his
(1/z/uwityv for (1r,'IIimze-
men! and pleasure. We
say the ego has become
l'c.c,\' flexible and more
rigid. 11/111 Ihu? {ht (rbiI~
fly to regulate me
enemy economy
deprenrlx rm the wrmnt
of the armnring.
VVIIHELM REWH.
l897-A1957
LAW 48
425
velop the theory behind this kind of warfare, and to put it into practice. His
ideas influenced Mao, who found in his writings
an uncanny Western
equivalent to wei-chi. Lawrence was working with Arabs fighting for their
territory against the Turks. His idea was to make the Arabs blend into the
vast desert, never providing a target, never collecting together in one place.
As the Turks scrambled to fight this vaporous army, they spread them-
selves thin, wasfing energy in moving from place to place. They had the su-
perior firepower but the Arabs kept the inifiative by playing cat and
mouse, giving the Turks nothing to hold on to, destroying their morale.
“Most wars were wars of contact.
.
.
. Ours should be a war of detachment,”
Lawrence wrote. “We were to contain the enemy by the silent threat of a
vast unknown desert, not disclosing ourselves till we attacked.”
This is the ultimate form of strategy. The war of engagement has he-
come far too dangerous and costly; indirection and elusiveness yield far
better results at a much lower cost. The main cost, in fact, is mental-—the
thinking it takes to align your forces in scattered patiems, and to under-
mine the minds and psychology of your opponents. And nothing will infu-
riate and disoxient them more than formlessness. In a world where wars of
detachment are the order of the day, formlessness is crucial.
The first psychological requirement of formlessness is to train yourself
to take nothing personally. Never show any defensiveness. When you act
defensive, you show your emotions, revealing a clear form. Your oppo-
nents will realize they have hit a nerve, an Achilles’ heel. And they will hit
it again and again. So train yourself to take nothing personally. Never let
anyone get your back up. Be like a slippery ball that cannot be held: Let no
one know what gets to you, or where your weaknesses lie. Make your face
a formless mask and you will infuriate and disorient your scheming col-
leagues and opponents.
One man who used this technique was Baron James Rothschild. A
German Jew in Paris, in a culture decidedly unfriendly to foreigners, Roth-
schild never took any attack on him personally or showed he had been
hurt in any way. He furthermore adapted himself to the political climate,
whatever it wa.s«——-the stiffly formal Restoration monarchy of Louis XVIII,
the bourgeois reign of Louis-Philippe, the democratic revolution of 1848,
the upstart Louis-Napoleon crowned emperor in 1852. Rothschild
ac-
cepted them one and all, and blended in. He could afford to appear hypo-
critical or opportunistic because he was valued for his money, not his
politics; his money was the currency of power. While he adapted and
thrived, outwardly never showing a form, all the other great families that
had begun the century immensely wealthy were mined in the period’s
complicated shifts and turns of fortune. Attaching themselves to the past,
they revealed their embrace of a form.
Throughout history, the formless style of ruling has been most adeptly
practiced by the queen who reigns alone. A queen is in a radically diflerent
position from a. king; because she is a woman, her subjects and courtiers
are likely to doubt her ability to rule, her strength of character. If she favors
one side in some ideological struggle, she is said to be acting out of emo-
tional attachment. Yet if she represses her emotions and plays the authori-
tarian, in the male fashion, she arouses worse criticism still. Either by
nature or by experience, then, queens tend to adopt a flexible style of gov-
erning that in the end often proves more powerful than the more direct,
male form.
Two female leaders exemplifying the forxnless style of rule are Queen
Elizabeth of England and Empress Catherine the Great of Russia. In the vi-
olent wars between Catholics and Protestants, Elizabeth steered a middle
course. She avoided alliances that would commit her to one side, and that
over time would harm the country. She managed to keep her country at
peace until it was strong enough for war. Her reign was one of the most glo-
rious in history because of her incredible capacity to adapt and her flexible
ideology.
Catherine the Great too evolved an improvisatory style of governing.
Afler she deposed her husband, Emperor Peter H, taking sole control of
Russia in 1762, no one thought she would survive. But she had no precon»
ceived ideas, no philosophy or theory to dictate her policies. Although a
foreigner (she came from Germany), she understood Russia’s moods, and
how it was changing over the years. “One must govern in such a way that
one’s people think they themselves want to do what one commands them
to do,” she said, and to do this she had to be always a step ahead of their
desires and to adapt to their resistance. By never forcing the issue, she re«
formed Russia in a strikingly short period of time.
This feminine, fomiless style of ruling may have emerged as a way of
prospering under difficult circumstances, but it has proved immensely se-
ductive to those who have served under it. Being fluid, it is relatively easy
for its subjects to obey, for they feel less coerced, less bent to their mler’s
ideology. It also opens up options where an adherence to a doctrine closes
them off. Without committing to one side, it allows the ruler to play one
enemy off another. Rigid rulers may seem strong, but with time their in-
flexibility wears on the nerves, and their subjects find ways to push them
from the stage. Fle>u'ble, formless rulers will be much criticized, but they
will endure, and people will eventually come to identify with them, since
they are as their subjects are--changing with the wind, open to circum-
stance.
Despite upsets and delays, the permeable style of power generally tri~
umphs in the end, just
as Athens eventually won victory over Sparta
through its money and its culture. When you find yourself in conflict with
someone stronger and more rigid, allow them a momentary victory. Seem
to bow to their superiority. Then, by being formless and adaptable, slowly
insinuate yourself into their soul. This way you will catch them off guard,
for rigid people are always ready to ward of‘! direct blows but are helpless
against the subtle and insinuating. To succeed at such a strategy you must
play the cha.meleon—conform on the surface, while breaking down your
enemy from the inside.
LAW 48
E
427
428
LAW 48
For centuries the Japanese would accept foreigners graciously, and ap—
peared susceptible to foreign cultures and influences. joao Rodriguez, a
Portuguese priest who arrived in japan in 1577 and lived there for many
years, wrote, “I am flabbergasted by the Japanese willingness to my and ac-
cept everything Portuguese.” He saw japanese in the streets wearing Por—
tuguese clothing, with rosary beads at their necks and crosses at their hips.
This might seem like a weak, mutable culture, but ]apa.n’s adaptability
actually protected the country from having an alien culture imposed by
military invasion. It seduced the Portuguese and other Westerners into be-
lieving the japanese were yielding to a superior culture when actually the
foreign culture’s ways were merely a fashion to be donned and doffed.
Under the surface, Japanese culture thrived. Had the Japanese been rigid
about foreign influences and tried to fight them off, they might have suf-
fered the injuries that the West inflicted on China. That is the power of
i'ormlessness—~—it gives the aggressor nothing to react against, nothing to hit.
In evolution, largeness is often the first step toward extinction. What is
immense and bloated has no mobility, but must constantly feed itself. The
unintelligent are often seduced into believing that size connotes power, the
bigger the better.
In 4-83 13.0., King Xerxes of Persia invaded Greece, believing he could
conquer the country in one easy campaign. After all, he had the largest
army ever assembled for one invasion-—the historian Herodotus estimated
it at over more than five million. The Persians planned to build a bridge
across the l-Iellespont to overrun Greece from the land, while their equally
immense navy would pin the Greek ships in harbor, preventing their
forces from escaping to sea. The plan seemed sure, yet as Xerxes prepared
the invasion, his adviser Artabanus warned his master of grave misgivings:
“The two mightiest powers in the world are against you,” he said. Xerxes
laughed-—what powers could match his gigantic army? “I will tell you what
they are,” answered Artabanus. “The land and the sea." There were no safe
harbors large enough to receive Xerxes‘ fleet. And the more land the Per-
sians conquered, and the longer their supply lines stretched, the more ru-
inous the cost of feeding this immense army would prove.
Thinking his adviser a coward, Xerxes proceeded with the invasion.
Yet as Artabanus predicted, bad weather at sea decimated the Persian fleet,
which was too large to take shelter in any harbor. On land, meanwhile, the
Persian army destroyed everything in its path, which only made it impossi—
hie to feed, since the destruction included crops and stores of food. it was
also an easy and slowqnoving target. The Greeks practiced all kinds of de
ceptive maneuvers to disorient the Persians. Xerxes’ eventual defeat at the
hands of the Greek allies was an immense disaster. The story is emblematic
of all those who sacrifice mobility for size: The flexible and fleet of foot will
almost always win, for they have more strategic options. The more gigantic
the enemy, the easier it is to induce collapse.
The need for formlessness becomes greater the older we get, as we
grow more likely to become set in our ways and assume too rigid a form.
We become predictable, always the First sign of decrepitude. And pre~
dictability makes us appear comical. Although ridicule and disdain might
seem mild forms of attack, they are actually potent weapons, and will even~
tually erode a foundation of power. An enemy who does not respect you
will grow bold, and boldness makes even the smallest animal dangerous.
The late-eighteenth-ceniniry court of France, as exemplified by Marie-
Antoinette, had become so hopelessly tied to a rigid formality that the
average Frenchman thought it a silly relic. This depreciation of 21 centuries-
old institution was the first sign of a terminal disease, for it represented a
symbolic loosening of the people’s lies to monarchy. As the situation wors-
ened, Marie-Antoinette and King Louis XVI grew only more rigid in their
adherence to the past—and quickened their path to the guillotine. King
Charles I of England reacted similarly to the tide of democratic change
brewing in England in the 1630s: He disbanded Parliament, and his court
rituals grew increasingly formal and distant. He wanted to return to an
older style of ruling, with adherence to all kinds of petty protocol. His
rigidity only heightened the desire for change. Soon, of course, he was
swept up in a devastating civil war, and eventually he lost his head to the
executioner’s axe.
As you get older, you must rely even less on the past Be vigilant lest
the form your character has taken makes you seem a relic. It is not a matter
of mimicking the fashions of youtl1—that is equally worthy of laughter.
Rather your mind must constantly adapt to each circumstance, even the in-
evitable change that the time has come to move over and let those of
younger age prepare for their ascendancy. Rigidity will only make you
look uncannily like a cadaver.
Never forget, though, that fonnlessuess is a strategic pose. It gives you
room to create tactical surprises; as your enemies struggle to guess your
next move, they reveal their own strategy, putting them at a decided disad—
vantage. It keeps the initiative on your side, putting your enemies in the
position of never acting, constantly reacting. It foils their spying and intelli-
gence. Remember: Formlessness is a tool. Never confuse it with a go~with-
the~llow style, or with a religious resignation to the twists of fortune. You
use formlessness, not because it creates inner harmony and peace, but be-
cause it will increase your power.
Finally, learning to adapt to each new circumstance means seeing
events through your own eyes, and often ignoring the advice that people
constantly peddle your way. It means that ultimately you must throw out
the laws that others preach, and the books they write to tell you what to do,
and the sage advice of the elder. “The laws that govern circumstances are
abolished by new circumstances,” Napoleon wrote, which means that it is
up to you to gauge each new situation. Rely too much on other people’s
ideas and you end up taking a form not of your own making. Too much re«
spect for other people’s wisdom will make you depreciate your own. Be
brutal with the past, especially your own, and have no respect for the
philosophies that are foisted on you from outside.
LAW 4 8
429
430
LAW 43
Im age: Mer cury. The winged messenger,
god of commerce, patron saint of thieves,
gamblers, and all those who deceive through
swiftness. The day Mercury was born he invented
the lyre; by that evening he had stolen the cattle of
Apollo. He would scour the world, assuming
whatever form he desired. Like the liquid metal
named after him, he embodies the elusive,
the ungraspable——the power of formlessness.
Authority: Therefore the consummation of forming an army is to arrive
at formlessness. Victory in war is not repetitious, but adapts its form
endlessly.
.
.
. A military force has no constant formation, water has no
constant shape: The ability to gain victory by changing and adapting ac
cording to the opponent is called genius. (Sun-tzu, fourth century B.c.)
REVERSAL
Using space to disperse and create an abstract pattern should not mean for-
saking the concentration of your power when it is valuable to you. Form~
lessness makes your enemies hunt all over for you, scattering their own
forces, mental as well as physical. When you finally engage them, though,
hit them with a powerful, concentrated blow. That is how Mao succeeded
against the Nationalists: He broke their forces into small, isolated units,
which he then could easily overwhelm with a strong attack. The law of con—
centration prevailed.
When you play with formlessness, keep on top of the process, and
keep your longeterm strategy in mind. When you assume a form and go on
the attack, use concentration, speed, and power.


PENGUIN BOOKS
THE ART OF SEDUCTION
Robert Greene, author of The 48 Laws of Power, has a
degree in classical literature. He lives in Los Angeles.
Visit his Web site: www.seductionbook.com
Joost Elffers is the producer of Viking Studio's best-
selling The Secret Language of Birthdays, The Secret
Language of Relationships, as well as Play with Your Food.
He lives in New York City.
the art of
eduction
Robert Greene
A Joost Elffers Book
PENGUIN BOOKS
PENGUIN BOOKS
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014, U.S.A.
Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
Penguin Books Australia Ltd, 250 Camberwell Road, Camberwell,Victoria 3124, Australia
Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 10 Alcorn Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4V 3B2
Penguin Books India (P) Ltd, 11 Community Centre,
Panchsheel Park, New Delhi - 110 017, India
Penguin Books (N.Z.) Ltd, Cnr Rosedale and Airborne Roads,
Albany, Auckland, New Zealand
Penguin Books (South Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue,
Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South Africa
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices:
80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
First published in the United States of America by Viking Penguin,
a member of Penguin Putnam Inc. 2001
Published in Penguin Books 2003
1 3 5 7 9 
1 0 
8 6 4 2
Copyright © Robert Greene and Joost Elffers, 2001
All rights reserved
Every effort has been made to trace copyright holders. The publisher apologizes
for any errors or omissions in the list that follows and would be grateful to be
notified of any corrections that should appear in any reprint.
THE LIBRARY OF CONGRESS HAS CATALOGUED THE HARDCOVER EDITION AS FOLLOWS:
Greene Robert.
The art of seduction / Robert Greene.
p. cm.
"A Joost Elffers book."
ISBN 0-670-89192-4 (hc.)
ISBN 0 14 20.0119 8 (pbk.)
1. Sexual excitement. 2. Sex instruction. 3. Seduction. 
I.Title.
HQ31 .G82 2001
306.7—dc21
2001025868
Printed in the United States of America
Set in Bembo
Designed by Jaye Zimet with Joost Elffers
Except in the United States of America, this book is sold subject to the condition
that it shall not, by way of trade or otherwise, be lent, re-sold, hired out, or otherwise
circulated without the publisher's prior consent in any form of binding or cover other
than that in which it is published and without a similar condition including
this condition being imposed on the subsequent purchaser.
The scanning, uploading and distribution of this book via the Internet or via any
other means without the permission of the publisher is illegal and punishable by law.
Please purchase only authorized electronic editions, and do not participate in or encourage
electronic piracy of copyrighted materials. Your support of the author's rights is appreciated.
Grateful acknowledgment is made for permission to reprint excerpts from the following copyrighted works:
Falling in Love by Francesco Alberoni, translated by Lawrence Venuti. Reprinted by permission of
Random House, Inc.
Seduction by Jean Baudrillard, translated by Brian Singer. St. Martin's Press, 1990. Copyright © New
World Perspectives. 1990. Reprinted by permission of Palgrave.
The Decameron by Giovanni Boccaccio, translated by G. H. McWilliam (Penguin Classics 1972, second
edition 1995). Copyright © G. H. McWilliam, 1972, 1995. Reprinted by permission of Penguin
Books Ltd.
Warhol by David Bourdon, published by Harry N. Abrams, Inc., New York. All rights reserved.
Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
Behind the Mask: On Sexual Demons, Sacred Mothers, Transvestites, Gangsters and Other Japanese Cultural
Heroes by Ian Buruma, Random blouse UK, 1984. Reprinted with permission.
Andreas Capcllanus on Love by Andreas Capellanus. translated by P. G. Walsh. Reprinted by permission
of Gerald Duckworth & Co. Ltd.
The Book of the Courtier by Baldassare Castiglione, translated by George Bull (Penguin Classics 1967,
revised edition 1976). Copyright © George Bull, 1967, 1976. Reprinted by permission of Penguin
Books Ltd.
Portrait of a Seductress: The World of Natalie Barney by Jean Chalon, translated by Carol Barko, Crown
Publishers, Inc., 1979. Reprinted with permission.
Lenin: The Man Behind the Mask by Ronald W. Clark, Faber & Faber Ltd., 1988. Reprinted with
permission.
Pursuit of the Millennium by Norman Cohn. Copyright © 1970 by Oxford University Press. Used by
permission of Oxford University Press, Inc.
Tales from The Thousand and One Nights, translated by N. J. Dawood (Penguin Classics, 1955, revised
edition 1973). Translation copyright © N. J. Dawood. 1954, 1973. Reprinted by permission of
Penguin Books Ltd.
Emma, Lady Hamilton by Flora Fraser, Alfred A. Knopf, 1987. Copyright © 1986 by Flora Fraser.
Reprinted by permission.
Evita: The Real Life of Eva Peron by Nicolas Fraser and Marysa Navarro, W. W Norton & Company,
Inc., 1996. Reprinted by permission.
The World's Lure: Fair Women, Their Loves, Their Power, Their Fates by Alexander von
Gleichen-Russwurm. translated by Hannah Waller, Alfred A. Knopf, 1927. Copyright 1927 by
Alfred A. Knopf. Inc. Reprinted with permission.
The Greek Myths by Robert Graves. Reprinted by permission of Carcanet Press Limited.
The Kennedy Obsession: The American Myth of JFK by John Hellman, Columbia University Press 1997.
Reprinted by permission of Columbia University Press.
The Odyssey by Homer, translated by E. V Rieu (Penguin Classics, 1946). Copyright © The Estate of
E. V. Rieu, 1946. Reprinted by permission of Penguin Books Ltd.
The Life of an Amorous Woman and Other Writings by Ihara Saikaku, translated by Ivan Morris.
Copyright © 1963 by New Directions Publishing Corp. Reprinted by permission of New Directions
Publishing Corp.
"The Seducer's Diary" from Either/Or, Part 1 by Søren Kierkegaard, translated by Howard V. Hong and
Edna H. Hong. Copyright © 1987 by Princeton University Press. Reprinted by permission of
Princeton University Press.
Sirens: Symbols of Seduction by Meri Lao, translated by John Oliphant of Rossie, Park Street Press,
Rochester. Vermont, 1998. Reprinted with permission.
Lives of the Courtesans by Lynne Lawner, Rizzoli, 1987. Reprinted with permission of the author.
The Theatre of Don Juan: A Collection of Plays and Views, 1630-1963 edited with a commentary by
Oscar Mandel. Copyright © 1963 by the University of Nebraska Press. Copyright © renewed 1991 by
the University of Nebraska Press. Reprinted by permission of the University of Nebraska Press.
Don Juan and the Point of Horror by James Mandrell. Reprinted with permission of
Penn State University Press.
Bel-Ami by Guy de Maupassant, translated by Douglas Parmee (Penguin Classics, 1975). Copyright ©
Douglas Parmee. 1975. Reprinted by permission of Penguin Books Ltd.
The Arts and Secrets of Beauty by Lola Montez, Chelsea House, 1969. Used with permission.
The Age of the Crowd by Serge Moscovici. Reprinted with permission ot Cambridge University Press.
The Tale of Genji by Murasaki Shikibu, translated by Edward G. Seidensncker, Alfred A. Knopf, 1976.
Copyright © 1976 by Edward G. Seidensticker. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
The Erotic Poems by Ovid, translated by Peter Green (Penguin Classics, 1982). Copyright © Peter
Green, 1982. Reprinted by permission of Penguin Books Ltd.
The Metamorphoses by Ovid, translated by Mary M. Innes (Penguin Classics, 1955). Copyright ©
Mary M. Innes, 1955. Reprinted by permission of Penguin Books Ltd.
My Sister, My Spouse: A Biography of Lou Andreas-Salomé by H. F. Peters, W. W. Norton & Company,
Inc., 1962. Reprinted with permission.
The. Symposium by Plato, translated by Walter Hamilton (Penguin Classics, 1951). Copyright © Walter
Hamilton. 1951. Reprinted by permission of Penguin Books Ltd.
The Rise and Fall of Athens: Nine Greek Lives by Plutarch, translated by Ian Scott-Kilvert (Penguin
Classics, 1960). Copyright © Ian Scott-Kilvert, 1960. Reprinted by permission of Penguin Hooks Ltd.
Love Declared by Denis de Rougemont, translated by Richard Howard. Reprinted by permission of
Random House, Inc.
The Wisdom of Life and Counsels and Maxims by Arthur Schopenhauer, translated by T. Bailey Saunders
(Amherst, NY: Prometheus Books, 1995). Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
The Pillow Book of Sei Shonagon by Sei Shonagon, translated and edited by Ivan Morris, Columbia
University Press. 1991. Reprinted by permission of Columbia University Press.
Liaison by Joyce Wadler, published by Bantam Books, 1993. Reprinted by permission of the author.
Max Weber: Essays in Sociology by Max Weber, edited and translated by H. H. Certh and C. Wright
Mills. Copyright 1946, 1958 by H. H. Gerth and C. Wright Mills. Used by permission of Oxford
University Press, Inc.
The Game of Hearts: Harriette Wilson & Her Memoirs edited by Lesley Blanch. Copyright © 1955 by
Lesley Blanch. Reprinted with permission of Simon & Schuster.
To the memory of my father
Acknowledgments
First, I would like to thank Anna Biller for her countless contributions to
this book: the research, the many discussions, her invaluable help with the
text itself, and, last but not least, her knowledge of the art of seduction, of
which I have been the happy victim on numerous occasions.
I must thank my mother, Laurette, for supporting me so steadfastly
throughout this project and for being my most devoted fan.
I would like to thank Catherine Léouzon, who some years ago intro-
duced me to Les Liaisons Dangereuses and the world of Valmont.
I would like to thank David Frankel, for his deft editing and for his
much-appreciated advice; Molly Stern at Viking Penguin, for overseeing
the project and helping to shape it; Radha Pancham, for keeping it all orga-
nized and being so patient; and Brett Kelly, for moving things along.
With heavy heart I would like to pay tribute to my cat Boris, who for
thirteen years watched over me as I wrote and whose presence is sorely
missed. His successor, Brutus, has proven to be a worthy muse.
Finally, I would like to honor my father. Words cannot express how
much I miss him and how much he has inspired my work.
iX
Contents
Acknowlegments • ix
Preface • xix
Part One
The Seductive Character page 1
The Siren page 5
A man is often secretly oppressed by the role he has to play—by always having to be responsi-
ble, in control, and rational. The Siren is the ultimate male fantasy figure because she offers a
total release from the limitations of his life. In her presence, which is always heightened and
sexually charged, the male feels transported to a realm of pure pleasure. In a world where
women are often too timid to project such an image, learn to take control of the male libido by
embodying his fantasy.
The Rake page 17
A woman never quite feels desired and appreciated enough. She wants attention, but a man is
too often distracted and unresponsive. The Rake is a great female fantasy-figure—when he de-
sires a woman, brief though that moment may be, he will go to the ends of the earth for her.
He may be disloyal, dishonest, and amoral, but that only adds to his appeal. Stir a woman's
repressed longings by adapting the Rake's mix of danger and pleasure.
The Ideal Lover page 29
Most people have dreams in their youth that get shattered or worn down with age. They find
themselves disappointed by people, events, reality, which cannot match their youthful ideals.
Ideal Lovers thrive on people's broken dreams, which become lifelong fantasies. You long for ro-
mance? Adventure? Lofty spiritual communion? The Ideal Lover reflects your fantasy. He or
she is an artist in creating the illusion you require. In a world of disenchantment and baseness,
there is limitless seductive power in following the path of the Ideal Lover.
xi
xii 
• 
Contents
The Dandy page 41
Most of us feel trapped within the limited roles that the world expects us to play. We are in-
stantly attracted to those who are more fluid than we are—those who create their own persona.
Dandies excite us because they cannot be categorized, and hint at a freedom we want for our-
selves. They play with masculinity and femininity; they fashion their own physical image,
which is always startling. Use the power of the Dandy to create an ambiguous, alluring pres-
ence that stirs repressed desires.
The Natural page 53
Childhood is the golden paradise we are always consciously or unconsciously trying to re-create.
The Natural embodies the longed-for qualities of childhood—spontaneity, sincerity, unpre-
tentiousness. In the presence of Naturals, we feel at ease, caught up in their playful spirit,
transported back to that golden age. Adopt the pose of the Natural to neutralize people's
defensivencss and infect them with helpless delight.
The Coquette page 67
The ability to delay satisfaction is the ultimate art of seduction—while waiting, the victim is
held in thrall. Coquettes are the grand masters of the game, orchestrating a back-and-forth
movement between hope and frustration. They bait with the promise of reward—the hope of
physical pleasure, happiness, fame by association, power—all of which, however, proves elu-
sive; yet this only makes their targets pursue them the more. Imitate the alternating heat and
coolness of the Coquette and you will keep the seduced at your heels.
The Charmer page 79
Charm is seduction without sex. Charmers are consummate manipulators, masking their clev-
erness by creating a mood of pleasure and comfort. Their method is simple: They deflect atten-
tion from themselves and focus it on their target. They understand your spirit, feel your pain,
adapt to your moods. In the presence of a Charmer you feel better about yourself. Learn to cast
the Charmer's spell by aiming at people's primary weaknesses: vanity and self-esteem.
The Charismatic page 95
Charisma is a presence that excites us. It comes from an inner quality—self-confidence, sexual
energy, sense of purpose, contentment—that most people lack and want. This quality radiates
outward, permeating the gestures of Charismatics, making them seem extraordinary and supe-
rior. They learn to heighten their charisma with a piercing gaze, fiery oratory, an air of mys-
tery. Create the charismatic illusion by radiating intensity while remaining detached.
The Star page 119
Daily life is harsh, and most of us constantly seek escape from it in fantasies and dreams. Stars
feed on this weakness; standing out from others through a distinctive and appealing style, they
make us want to watch them. At the same time, they are vague and ethereal, keeping their
distance, and letting us imagine more than is there. Their dreamlike quality works on our un-
conscious. Learn to become an object of fascination by projecting the glittering but elusive pres-
ence of the Star.
Contents 
• xiii
The Anti-Seducer page 131
Seducers draw you in by the focused, individualized attention they pay to you. Anti-seducers
are the opposite: insecure, self-absorbed, and unable to grasp the psychology of another person,
they literally repel Anti-Seducers have no self-awareness, and never realize when they are
pestering, imposing, talking too much. Root out anti-seductive qualities in yourself and recog-
nize them in others—there is no pleasure or profit in dealing with the Anti-Seducer.
The Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types page 147
Part Two
The Seductive Process page 161
Phase One: Separation—Stirring Interest and Desire
1 Choose the Right Victim page 167
Everything depends on the target of your seduction. Study your prey thoroughly, and choose
only those who will prove susceptible to your charms. The right victims are those for whom you
can fill a void, who see in you something exotic. They are often isolated or unhappy, or can
easily be made so—for the completely contented person is almost impossible to seduce. The
perfect victim has some quality that inspires strong emotions in you, making your seductive
maneuvers seem more natural and dynamic. The perfect victim allows for the perfect chase.
2 Create a False Sense of Security—Approach Indirectly page 177
If you are too direct early on, you risk stirring up a resistance that will never be lowered. At
first there must be nothing of the seducer in your manner. The seduction should begin at an
angle, indirectly, so that the target only gradually becomes aware of you. Haunt the periphery
of your target's life—approach through a third party, or seem to cultivate a relatively neutral re-
lationship, moving gradually from friend to lover. Lull the target into feeling secure, then strike.
3 Send Mixed Signals page 185
Once people are aware of your presence, and perhaps vaguely intrigued, you need to stir their
interest before it settles on someone else. Most of us are much too obvious—instead, be hard to
figure out. Send mixed signals: both tough and tender, both spiritual and earthly, both inno-
cent and cunning. A mix of qualities suggests depth, which fascinates even as it confuses. An
elusive, enigmatic aura will make people want to know more, drawing them into your circle.
Create such a power by hinting at something contradictory within you.
4 Appear to Be an Object of Desire—Create Triangles page 195
Few are drawn to the person whom others avoid or neglect; people gather around those who
have already attracted interest. To draw your victims closer and make them hungry to possess
you, you must create an aura of desirability—of being wanted and courted by many. It will
become a point of vanity for them to be the preferred object of your attention, to win you away
from a crowd of admirers. Build a reputation that precedes you: If many have succumbed to
your charms, there must be a reason.
xiv 
• 
Contents
5 Create a Need—Stir Anxiety and Discontent page 203
A perfectly satisfied person cannot be seduced. Tension and disharmony must be instilled in
your targets minds. Stir within them feelings of discontent, an unhappiness with their circum-
stances and with themselves. The feelings of inadequacy that you create will give you space to
insinuate yourself, to make them see you as the answer to their problems. Pain and anxiety are
the proper precursors to pleasure. Learn to manufacture the need that you can fill.
6 Master the Art of Insinuation page 211
Making your targets feel dissatisfied and in need of your attention is essential, but if you are
too obvious, they will see through you and grow defensive. There is no known defense, how-
ever, against insinuation—the art of planting ideas in people's minds by dropping elusive hints
that take root days later, even appearing to them as their own idea. Create a sublanguage—
bold statements followed by retraction and apology, ambiguous comments, banal talk combined
with alluring glances—that enters the target's unconscious to convey your real meaning. Make
everything suggestive.
7 Enter Their Spirit page 219
Most people are locked in their own worlds, making them stubborn and hard to persuade. The
way to lure them out of their shell and set up your seduction is to enter their spirit. Play by
their rules, enjoy what they enjoy, adapt yourself to their moods. In doing so you will stroke
their deep-rooted narcissism and lower their defenses. Indulge your targets' every mood and
whim, giving them nothing to react against or resist.
8 Create Temptation page 229
Lure the target deep into your seduction by creating the proper temptation: a glimpse of the
pleasures to come. As the serpent tempted Eve with the promise of forbidden knowledge, you
must awaken a desire in your targets that they cannot control. Find that weakness of theirs,
that fantasy that has yet to be realized, and hint that you can lead them toward it. The key is
to keep it vague. Stimulate a curiosity stronger than the doubts and anxieties that go with it,
and they will follow you.
Phase Two: Lead Astray—Creating Pleasure and Confusion
9 Keep Them in Suspense—What Comes Next? page 241
The moment people feel they know what to expect from you, your spell on them is broken.
More: You have ceded them power. The only way to lead the seduced along and keep the up-
per hand is to create suspense, a calculated surprise. Doing something they do not expect from
you will give them a delightful sense of spontaneity—they will not be able to foresee what
comes next. You are always one step ahead and in control. Give the victim a thrill with a sud-
den change of direction.
Contents 
• xv
10 Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion page 251
It is hard to make people listen; they are consumed with their own thoughts and desires, and
have little time for yours. The trick to making them listen is to say what they want to hear, to
fill their ears with whatever is pleasant to them. This is the essence of seductive language. In-
flame people's emotions with loaded phrases, flatter them, comfort their insecurities, envelop
them in sweet words and promises, and not only will they listen to you, they will lose their
will to resist you.
11 Pay Attention to Detail page 265
Lofty words of love and grand gestures can be suspicious: Why are you trying so hard to
please? The details of a seduction—the subtle gestures, the offhand things you do—are often
more charming and revealing. You must learn to distract your victims with a myriad of pleas-
ant little rituals—thoughtful gifts tailored just for them, clothes and adornments designed to
please them, gestures that show the time and attention you are paying them. Mesmerized by
what they see, they will not notice what you are really up to.
12 Poeticize Your Presence page 277
Important things happen when your targets are alone: The slightest feeling of relief that you
are not there, and it is all over. Familiarity and overexposure will cause this reaction. Remain
elusive, then. Intrigue your targets by alternating an exciting presence with a cool distance,
exuberant moments followed by calculated absences. Associate yourself with poetic images and
objects, so that when they think of you, they begin to see you through an idealized halo. The
more you figure in their minds, the more they will envelop you in seductive fantasies.
13 Disarm Through Strategic Weakness and Vulnerability page 285
Too much maneuvering on your part may raise suspicion. The best way to cover your tracks is
to make the other person feel superior and stronger. If you seem to be weak, vulnerable, en-
thralled by the other person, and unable to control yourself you will make your actions look
more natural, less calculated. Physical weakness—tears, bashfulness, paleness—will help cre-
ate the effect. Play the victim, then transform your target's sympathy into love.
14 Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion page 295
To compensate for the difficulties in their lives, people spend a lot of their time daydreaming,
imagining a future full of adventure, success, and romance. If you can create the illusion that
through you they can live out their dreams, you will have them at your mercy. Aim at secret
wishes that have been thwarted or repressed, stirring up uncontrollable emotions, clouding their
powers of reason. Lead the seduced to a point of confusion in which they can no longer tell the
difference between illusion and reality.
15 Isolate the Victim page 309
An isolated person is weak. By slowly isolating your victims, you make them more vulnerable
to your influence. Take them away from their normal milieu, friends, family, home. Give them
the sense of being marginalized, in limbo—they are leaving one world behind and entering
another. Once isolated like this, they have no outside support, and in their confusion they are
easily led astray. Lure the seduced into your lair, where nothing is familiar.
xvi 
• 
Contents
Phase Three: The 
Precipice—Deepening 
the Effect Through Extreme Measures
16 Prove Yourself page 321
Most people want to be seduced. If they resist your efforts, it is probably because you ham' not
gone far enough to allay their doubts—about your motives, the depth of your feelings, and so
on. One well-timed action that shows how far you are willing to go to win them over will dis-
pel their doubts. Do not worry about looking foolish or making a mistake—any kind of deed
that is self-sacrificing and for your targets' sake will so overwhelm their emotions, they won't
notice anything else.
17 Effect a Regression page 333
People who have experienced a certain kind of pleasure in the past will try to repeat or relive
it. The deepest-rooted and most pleasurable memories are usually those from earliest child-
hood, and are often unconsciously associated with a parental figure. Bring your targets back to
that point by placing yourself in the oedipal triangle and positioning them as the needy child.
Unaware of the cause of their emotional response, they will fall in love with you.
18 Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo page 349
There are always social limits on what one can do. Some of these, the most elemental taboos,
go back centuries; others are more superficial, simply defining polite and acceptable behavior.
Making your targets feel that you are leading them past either kind of limit is immensely se-
ductive. People yearn to explore their dark side. Once the desire to transgress draws your tar-
gets to you, it will be hard for them to stop. Take them farther than they imagined—the
shared feeling of guilt and complicity will create a powerful bond.
19 Use Spiritual Lures page 359
Everyone has doubts and insecurities—about their body, their self-worth, their sexuality. If
your seduction appeals exclusively to the physical, you will stir up these doubts and make your
targets self-conscious. Instead, lure them out of their insecurities by making them focus on
something sublime and spiritual: a religious experience, a lofty work of art, the occult. Lost in
a spiritual mist, the target will feel light and uninhibited. Deepen the effect of your seduction
by making its sexual culmination seem like the spiritual union of two souls.
20 Mix Pleasure with Pain page 369
The greatest mistake in seduction is being too nice. At first, perhaps, your kindness is charm-
ing, but it soon grows monotonous; you are trying too hard to please, and seem insecure. In-
stead of overwhelming your targets with niceness, try inflicting some pain. Make them feel
guilty and insecure. Instigate a breakup—now a rapprochement, a return to your earlier kind-
ness, will turn them weak at the knees. The lower the lows you create, the greater the highs.
To heighten the erotic charge, create the excitement of fear.
Contents 
• xvii
Phase Four: Moving In for the Kill
21 Give Them Space to Fall—The Pursuer Is Pursued page 383
If your targets become too used to you as the aggressor, they will give less of their own energy,
and the tension will slacken. You need to wake them up, turn the tables. Once they are under
your spell, take a step bach and they will start to come after you. Hint that you are growing
bored. Seem interested in someone else. Soon they will want to possess you physically, and re-
straint will go out the window. Create the illusion that the seducer is being seduced.
22 Use Physical Lures page 393
Targets with active minds are dangerous: If they see through your manipulations, they may
suddenly develop doubts. Put their minds gently to rest, and waken their dormant senses, by
combining a nondefensive attitude with a charged sexual presence. While your cool, noncha-
lant air is lowering their inhibitions, your glances, voice, and bearing—oozing sex and
desire—are getting under their skin and raising their temperature. Never force the physical;
instead infect your targets with heat, lure them into lust. Morality, judgment, and concern for
the future will all melt away.
23 Master the Art of the Bold Move page 405
A moment has arrived: Your victim clearly desires you, but is not ready to admit it openly, let
alone act on it. This is the time to throw aside chivalry, kindness, and coquetry and to over-
whelm with a bold move. Don't give the victim time to consider the consequences. Showing
hesitation or awkwardness means you are thinking of yourself as opposed to being over-
whelmed by the victim's charms. One person must go on the offensive, and it is you.
24 Beware the Aftereffects page 415
Danger follows in the aftermath of a successful seduction. After emotions have reached a pitch,
they often swing in the opposite direction—toward lassitude, distrust, disappointment. If you
are to part, make the sacrifice swift and sudden. If you are to stay in a relationship, beware a
flagging of energy, a creeping familiarity that will spoil the fantasy. A second seduction is re-
quired. Never let the other person take you for granted—use absence, create pain and conflict,
to keep the seduced on tenterhooks.
Appendix A: Seductive Environment/Seductive Time page 431
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses page 441
Selected Bibliography • 455
Index • 457
Preface
Thousands of years ago, power was mostly gained through physical vio-
lence and maintained with brute strength. There was little need for
subtlety—a king or emperor had to be merciless. Only a select few had
power, but no one suffered under this scheme of things more than women.
They had no way to compete, no weapon at their disposal that could make
a man do what they wanted—politically, socially, or even in the home.
Of course men had one weakness: their insatiable desire for sex. A
woman could always toy with this desire, but once she gave in to sex the
man was back in control; and if she withheld sex, he could simply look
elsewhere—or exert force. What good was a power that was so temporary
and frail? Yet women had no choice but to submit to this condition. There
were some, though, whose hunger for power was too great, and who, over
the years, through much cleverness and creativity, invented a way of turn-
ing the dynamic around, creating a more lasting and effective form of
power.
These women—among them Bathsheba, from the Old Testament;
Helen of Troy; the Chinese siren Hsi Shi; and the greatest of them all,
Cleopatra—invented seduction. First they would draw a man in with an al-
luring appearance, designing their makeup and adornment to fashion the
image of a goddess come to life. By showing only glimpses of flesh, they
would tease a man's imagination, stimulating the desire not just for sex but
for something greater: the chance to possess a fantasy figure. Once they had
their victims' interest, these women would lure them away from the mascu-
line world of war and politics and get them to spend time in the feminine
world—a world of luxury, spectacle, and pleasure. They might also lead
them astray literally, taking them on a journey, as Cleopatra lured Julius
Caesar on a trip down the Nile. Men would grow hooked on these refined,
sensual pleasures—they would fall in love. But then, invariably, the women
would turn cold and indifferent, confusing their victims. Just when the
men wanted more, they found their pleasures withdrawn. They would be
forced into pursuit, trying anything to win back the favors they once had
tasted and growing weak and emotional in the process. Men who had
physical force and all the social power—men like King David, the Trojan
Paris, Julius Caesar, Mark Antony, King Fu Chai—would find themselves
becoming the slave of a woman.
In the face of violence and brutality, these women made seduction a
Oppression and scorn,
thus, were and must have
been generally the share of
women in emerging
societies; this state lasted in
all its force until centuries
of experience taught them
to substitute skill for force.
Women at last sensed that,
since they were weaker,
their only resource was to
seduce; they understood
that if they were dependent
on men through force, men
could become dependent on
them through pleasure.
More unhappy than men,
they must have thought
and reflected earlier than
did men; they were the first
to know that pleasure was
always beneath the idea
that one formed of it, and
that the imagination went
farther than nature. Once
these basic truths were
known, they learned first
to veil their charms in order
to awaken curiosity; they
practiced the difficult art of
refusing even as they
wished to consent; from
that moment on, they
knew how to set men's
imagination afire, they
knew how to arouse and
direct desires as they
pleased: thus did beauty
and love come into being;
now the lot of women
xx 
• 
Preface
sophisticated art, the ultimate form of power and persuasion. They learned
to work on the mind first, stimulating fantasies, keeping a man wanting
more, creating patterns of hope and despair—the essence of seduction.
Their power was not physical but psychological, not forceful but indirect
and cunning. These first great seductresses were like military generals plan-
ning the destruction of an enemy, and indeed early accounts of seduction
often compare it to battle, the feminine version of warfare. For Cleopatra,
it was a means of consolidating an empire. In seduction, the woman was no
longer a passive sex object; she had become an active agent, a figure of
power.
With a few exceptions—the Latin poet Ovid, the medieval
troubadours—men did not much concern themselves with such a frivolous
art as seduction. Then, in the seventeenth century came a great change:
men grew interested in seduction as a way to overcome a young woman's
resistance to sex. History's first great male seducers—the Duke de Lauzun,
the different Spaniards who inspired the Don Juan legend—began to adopt
the methods traditionally employed by women. They learned to dazzle
with their appearance (often androgynous in nature), to stimulate the
imagination, to play the coquette. They also added a new, masculine ele-
ment to the game: seductive language, for they had discovered a woman's
weakness for soft words. These two forms of seduction—the feminine use
of appearances and the masculine use of language—would often cross
gender lines: Casanova would dazzle a woman with his clothes; Ninon
de l'Enclos would charm a man with her words.
At the same time that men were developing their version of seduction,
others began to adapt the art for social purposes. As Europe's feudal system
of government faded into the past, courtiers needed to get their way in
court without the use of force. They learned the power to be gained by se-
ducing their superiors and competitors through psychological games, soft
words, a little coquetry. As culture became democratized, actors, dandies,
and artists came to use the tactics of seduction as a way to charm and win
over their audience and social milieu. In the nineteenth century another
great change occurred: politicians like Napoleon consciously saw them-
selves as seducers, on a grand scale. These men depended on the art of se-
ductive oratory, but they also mastered what had once been feminine
strategies: staging vast spectacles, using theatrical devices, creating a charged
physical presence. All this, they learned, was the essence of charisma—and
remains so today. By seducing the masses they could accumulate immense
power without the use of force.
Today we have reached the ultimate point in the evolution of seduc-
tion. Now more than ever, force or brutality of any kind is discouraged. All
areas of social life require the ability to persuade people in a way that does
not offend or impose itself. Forms of seduction can be found everywhere,
blending male and female strategies. Advertisements insinuate, the soft sell
dominates. If we are to change people's opinions—and affecting opinion is
basic to seduction—we must act in subtle, subliminal ways. Today no politi-
became less harsh, not that
they had managed to
liberate themselves entirely
from the state of oppression
to which their weakness
condemned them; but, in
the state of perpetual war
that continues to exist
between women and men,
one has seen them, with
the help of the caresses they
have been able to invent,
combat ceaselessly,
sometimes vanquish, and
often more skillfully take
advantage of the forces
directed against them;
sometimes, too, men have
turned against women
these weapons the women
had forged to combat them,
and their slavery has
become all the harsher
for it.
—CHODERLOS DE LACLOS, ON
THE 
EDUCATION 
OF 
WOMEN,
TRANSLATED BY LYDIA DAVIS, IN
THE 
LIBERTINE 
READER,
EDITED BY MICHAEL FEHER
Much more genius is
needed to make love than
to command armies.
— N I N O N D E L ' E N C L O S
Menelaus, if you are really
going to kill her, \ Then
my blessing go with you,
but you must do it now, \
Before her looks so twist
the strings of your heart \
That they turn your mind;
for her eyes are like armies,
\And where her glances
fall, there cities burn, \
Until the dust of their
ashes is blown \ By her
sighs. I know her,
Men elans, \ And so do
you. And all those who
know her suffer.
— H E C U B A SPEAKING ABOUT
HELEN OF TROY IN EURIPIDES,
THE 
TROJAN 
WOMEN,
TRANSLATED BY NEIL CURRY
Preface 
• 
xxi
cal campaign can work without seduction. Since the era of John F.
Kennedy, political figures are required to have a degree of charisma, a fasci-
nating presence to keep their audience's attention, which is half the battle.
The film world and media create a galaxy of seductive stars and images. We
are saturated in the seductive. But even if much has changed in degree and
scope, the essence of seduction is constant: never be forceful or direct; in-
stead, use pleasure as bait, playing on people's emotions, stirring desire and
confusion, inducing psychological surrender. In seduction as it is practiced
today, the methods of Cleopatra still hold.
People are constantly trying to influence us, to tell us what to do, and just
as often we tune them out, resisting their attempts at persuasion. There is a
moment in our lives, however, when we all act differently—when we are in
love. We fall under a kind of spell. Our minds are usually preoccupied with
our own concerns; now they become filled with thoughts of the loved one.
We grow emotional, lose the ability to think straight, act in foolish ways
that we would never do otherwise. If this goes on long enough something
inside us gives way: we surrender to the will of the loved one, and to our
desire to possess them.
Seducers are people who understand the tremendous power contained
in such moments of surrender. They analyze what happens when people
are in love, study the psychological components of the process—what spurs
the imagination, what casts a spell. By instinct and through practice they
master the art of making people fall in love. As the first seductresses knew,
it is much more effective to create love than lust. A person in love is emo-
tional, pliable, and easily misled. (The origin of the word "seduction" is the
Latin for "to lead astray") A person in lust is harder to control and, once
satisfied, may easily leave you. Seducers take their time, create enchantment
and the bonds of love, so that when sex ensues it only further enslaves
the victim. Creating love and enchantment becomes the model for all
seductions—sexual, social, political. A person in love will surrender.
It is pointless to try to argue against such power, to imagine that you are
not interested in it, or that it is evil and ugly. The harder you try to resist
the lure of seduction—as an idea, as a form of power—the more you will
find yourself fascinated. The reason is simple: most of us have known the
power of having someone fall in love with us. Our actions, gestures, the
things we say, all have positive effects on this person; we may not com-
pletely understand what we have done right, but this feeling of power is in-
toxicating. It gives us confidence, which makes us more seductive. We may
also experience this in a social or work setting—one day we are in an ele-
vated mood and people seem more responsive, more charmed by us. These
moments of power are fleeting, but they resonate in the memory with
great intensity. We want them back. Nobody likes to feel awkward or timid
or unable to reach people. The siren call of seduction is irresistible because
power is irresistible, and nothing will bring you more power in the modern
world than the ability to seduce. Repressing the desire to seduce is a kind of
No man hath it in his
power to over-rule the
deceitfulness of a woman.
—MARGUERITE OF NAVARRE
This important side-track,
by which woman succeeded
in evading man's strength
and establishing herself in
power, has not been given
due consideration by
historians. From the
moment when the woman
detached herself from the
crowd, an individual
finished product, offering
delights which could not be
obtained by force, but only
by flattery . . . . 
the reign
of love's priestesses was
inaugurated. It was a
development of far-reaching
importance in the history of
civilization. 
. . . Only by
the circuitous route of the
art of love could woman
again assert authority, and
this she did by asserting
herself at the very point at
which she would normally
be a slave at the man's
mercy. She had discovered
the might of lust, the secret
of the art of love, the
daemonic power of a
passion artificially aroused
and never satiated. The
force tints unchained was
thenceforth to count among
the most tremendous of the
world's forces and at
moments to have power
even over life and death. . . .
• The deliberate spell-
binding of man's senses
was to have a magical effect
upon him, opening up an
infinitely wider range of
sensation and spurring him
on as if impelled by an
inspired dream.
—ALEXANDER VON GLEICHEN-
RUSSWURM, 
THE WORLD'S
LURE, TRANSLATED BY HANNAH
WALLER
xxii 
• 
Preface
hysterical reaction, revealing your deep-down fascination with the process;
you are only making your desires stronger. Some day they will come to the
surface.
To have such power does not require a total transformation in your
character or any kind of physical improvement in your looks. Seduction is a
game of psychology, not beauty, and it is within the grasp of any person to
become a master at the game. All that is required is that you look at the
world differently, through the eyes of a seducer.
A seducer does not turn the power off and on—every social and per-
sonal interaction is seen as a potential seduction. There is never a moment
to waste. This is so for several reasons. The power seducers have over a man
or woman works in social environments because they have learned how to
tone down the sexual element without getting rid of it. We may think we
see through them, but they are so pleasant to be around anyway that it does
not matter. Trying to divide your life into moments in which you seduce
and others in which you hold back will only confuse and constrain you.
Erotic desire and love lurk beneath the surface of almost every human en-
counter; better to give free rein to your skills than to try to use them only
in the bedroom. (In fact, the seducer sees the world as his or her bedroom.)
This attitude creates great seductive momentum, and with each seduction
you gain experience and practice. One social or sexual seduction makes the
next one easier, your confidence growing and making you more alluring.
People are drawn to you in greater numbers as the seducer's aura descends
upon you.
Seducers have a warrior's outlook on life. They see each person as a
kind of walled castle to which they are laying siege. Seduction is a process
of penetration: initially penetrating the target's mind, their first point of
defense. Once seducers have penetrated the mind, making the target fanta-
size about them, it is easy to lower resistance and create physical surrender.
Seducers do not improvise; they do not leave this process to chance. Like
any good general, they plan and strategize, aiming at the target's particular
weaknesses.
The main obstacle to becoming a seducer is this foolish prejudice we
have of seeing love and romance as some kind of sacred, magical realm
where things just fall into place, if they are meant to. This might seem ro-
mantic and quaint, but it is really just a cover for our laziness. What will se-
duce a person is the effort we expend on their behalf, showing how much
we care, how much they are worth. Leaving things to chance is a recipe for
disaster, and reveals that we do not take love and romance very seriously. It
was the effort Casanova expended, the artfulness he applied to each affair
that made him so devilishly seductive. Falling in love is a matter not of
magic but of psychology. Once you understand your target's psychology,
and strategize to suit it, you will be better able to cast a "magical" spell. A
seducer sees love not as sacred but as warfare, where all is fair.
Seducers are never self-absorbed. Their gaze is directed outward, not
inward. When they meet someone their first move is to get inside that per-
The first thing to get in
your head is that every
single \ Girl can be
caught—and 
that you'll
catch her if \ You set your
toils right. Birds will
sooner fall dumb in \
Springtime, \ Cicadas in
summer, or a hunting-dog \
Turn his back on a hare,
than a lover's bland
inducements \ Can fail
with a woman, Even one
you suppose \ Reluctant
will want it.
—OVID, 
THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
The combination of these
two elements, enchantment
and surrender, is, then,
essential to the love which
we are discussing. . . .
What exists in love is
surrender due to
enchantment.
—JOSÉ 
ORTEGA Y GASSET, ON
LOVE, TRANSLATED BY TOBY
TALBOT
What is good?—All that
heightens the feeling of
power, the will to power,
power itself in man. •
What is bad?—All that
proceeds from weakness. •
What 
is happiness?—The
feeling that power
increases—that a resistance
is overcome.
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, THE
ANTI—CHRIST, TRANSLATED BY
R. 
J. HOLLINGDALE
Preface • 
xxiii
son's skin, to see the world through their eyes. The reasons for this are sev-
eral. First, self-absorption is a sign of insecurity; it is anti-seductive. Every-
one has insecurities, but seducers manage to ignore them, finding therapy
for moments of self-doubt by being absorbed in the world. This gives them
a buoyant spirit—we want to be around them. Second, getting into some-
one's skin, imagining what it is like to be them, helps the seducer gather
valuable information, learn what makes that person tick, what will make
them lose their ability to think straight and fall into a trap. Armed with
such information, they can provide focused and individualized attention—a
rare commodity in a world in which most people see us only from behind
the screen of their own prejudices. Getting into the targets' skin is the first
important tactical move in the war of penetration.
Seducers see themselves as providers of pleasure, like bees that gather
pollen from some flowers and deliver it to others. As children we mostly
devoted our lives to play and pleasure. Adults often have feelings of being
cut off from this paradise, of being weighed down by responsibilities. The
seducer knows that people are waiting for pleasure—they never get enough
of it from friends and lovers, and they cannot get it by themselves. A person
who enters their lives offering adventure and romance cannot be resisted.
Pleasure is a feeling of being taken past our limits, of being overwhelmed—
by another person, by an experience. People are dying to be overwhelmed,
to let go of their usual stubbornness. Sometimes their resistance to us is
a way of saying, Please seduce me. Seducers know that the possibility of
pleasure will make a person follow them, and the experience of it will
make someone open up, weak to the touch. They also train themselves to
be sensitive to pleasure, knowing that feeling pleasure themselves will make
it that much easier for them to infect the people around them.
A seducer sees all of life as theater, everyone an actor. Most people feel
they have constricted roles in life, which makes them unhappy. Seducers,
on the other hand, can be anyone and can assume many roles. (The arche-
type here is the god Zeus, insatiable seducer of young maidens, whose
main weapon was the ability to assume the form of whatever person or ani-
mal would most appeal to his victim.) Seducers take pleasure in performing
and are not weighed down by their identity, or by some need to be them-
selves, or to be natural. This freedom of theirs, this fluidity in body and
spirit, is what makes them attractive. What people lack in life is not more
reality but illusion, fantasy, play. The clothes that seducers wear, the places
they take you to, their words and actions, are slightly heightened—not
overly theatrical but with a delightful edge of unreality, as if the two of you
were living out a piece of fiction or were characters in a film. Seduction is
a kind of theater in real life, the meeting of illusion and reality.
Finally, seducers are completely amoral in their approach to life. It is all
a game, an arena for play. Knowing that the moralists, the crabbed repressed
types who croak about the evils of the seducer, secretly envy their power,
they do not concern themselves with other people's opinions. They do not
deal in moral judgments—nothing could be less seductive. Everything is
The disaffection, neurosis,
anguish and frustration
encountered by
psychoanalysis comes no
doubt from being unable to
love or to be loved, from
being unable to give or take
pleasure, but the radical
disenchantment comes from
seduction and its failure.
Only those who lie
completely outside
seduction are ill, 
even if
they remain fully capable of
loving and making love.
Psychoanalysis believes it
treats the disorder of sex
and desire, but in reality it
is dealing with the
disorders of seduction. . . .
The most serious
deficiencies always concern
charm and not pleasure,
enchantment and not some
vital or sexual satisfaction.
—JEAN 
BAUDRILLARD,
SEDUCTION
Whatever is done from love
always occurs beyond good
and evil.
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE,
BEYOND 
GOOD AND 
EVIL,
TRANSLATED BY WALTER
KAUFMANN
xxiv 
• 
Preface
pliant, fluid, like life itself. Seduction is a form of deception, but people
want to be led astray, they yearn to be seduced. If they didn't, seducers
would not find so many willing victims. Get rid of any moralizing tenden-
cies, adopt the seducer's playful philosophy, and you will find the rest of the
process easy and natural.
The Art of Seduction is designed to arm you with weapons of persuasion and
charm, so that those around you will slowly lose their ability to resist with-
out knowing how or why it has happened. It is an art of war for delicate
times.
Every seduction has two elements that you must analyze and under-
stand: first, yourself and what is seductive about you; and second, your tar-
get and the actions that will penetrate their defenses and create surrender.
The two sides are equally important. If you strategize without paying at-
tention to the parts of your character that draw people to you, you will be
seen as a mechanical seducer, slimy and manipulative. If you rely on your
seductive personality without paying attention to the other person, you will
make terrible mistakes and limit your potential.
Consequently, The Art of Seduction is divided into two parts. The first
half, "The Seductive Character," describes the nine types of seducer, plus
the Anti-Seducer. Studying these types will make you aware of what is
inherently seductive in your character, the basic building block of any se-
duction. The second half, "The Seductive Process," includes the twenty-
four maneuvers and strategies that will instruct you on how to create a
spell, break down people's resistance, give movement and force to your
seduction, and induce surrender in your target. As a kind of bridge be-
tween the two parts, there is a chapter on the eighteen types of victims of a
seduction—each of them missing something from their lives, each cradling
an emptiness you can fill. Knowing what type you are dealing with will
help you put into practice the ideas in both sections. Ignore any part of this
book and you will be an incomplete seducer.
The ideas and strategies in The Art of Seduction are based on the writings
and historical accounts of the most successful seducers in history. The
sources include the seducers' own memoirs (by Casanova, Errol Flynn, Na-
talie Barney, Marilyn Monroe); biographies (of Cleopatra, Josephine Bona-
parte, John F. Kennedy, Duke Ellington); handbooks on the subject (most
notably Ovid's Art of Love); and fictional accounts of seductions (Choderlos
de Laclos's Dangerous Liaisons, Søren Kierkegaard's The Seducer's Diary,
Murasaki Shikibu's The Tale of Genji). The heroes and heroines of these lit-
erary works are generally modeled on real-life seducers. The strategies they
employ reveal the intimate connection between fiction and seduction, cre-
ating illusion and leading a person along. In putting the book's lessons into
practice, you will be following in the path of the greatest masters of the art.
Finally, the spirit that will make you a consummate seducer is the spirit
in which you should read this book. The French writer Denis Diderot
once wrote, "I give my mind the liberty to follow the first wise or foolish
Should anyone here in
Rome lack finesse at love-
making, \ Let him \ Try
me—read my book, and
results are guaranteed! \
Technique is the secret.
Charioteer, sailor,
oarsman, \ All need it.
Technique can control \
Love himself.
— O V I D , THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
Preface 
• 
xxv
idea that presents itself, just as in the avenue de Foy our dissolute youths
follow close on the heels of some strumpet, then leave her to pursue an-
other, attacking all of them and attaching themselves to none. My thoughts
are my strumpets." He meant that he let himself be seduced by ideas, fol-
lowing whichever one caught his fancy until a better one came along, his
thoughts infused with a kind of sexual excitement. Once you enter these
pages, do as Diderot advised: let yourself be lured by the stories and ideas,
your mind open and your thoughts fluid. Slowly you will find yourself ab-
sorbing the poison through the skin and you will begin to see everything as
a seduction, including the way you think and how you look at the world.
Most virtue is a demand for greater seduction.
—NATALIE BARNEY
W
e all have the power of attraction—the ability to draw people in and
hold them in our thrall. Far from all of us, though, are aware of this
inner potential, and we imagine attractiveness instead as a near-mystical
trait that a select few are born with and the rest will never command. Yet all
we need to do to realize our potential is understand what it is in a person's
character that naturally excites people and develop these latent qualities
within us.
Successful seductions rarely begin with an obvious maneuver or strate-
gic device. That is certain to arouse suspicion. Successful seductions begin
with your character, your ability to radiate some quality that attracts people
and stirs their emotions in a way that is beyond their control. Hypnotized
by your seductive character, your victims will not notice your subsequent
manipulations. It will then be child's play to mislead and seduce them.
There are nine seducer types in the world. Each type has a particular
character trait that comes from deep within and creates a seductive pull.
Sirens have an abundance of sexual energy and know how to use it. Rakes
insatiably adore the opposite sex, and their desire is infectious. Ideal Lovers
have an aesthetic sensibility that they apply to romance. Dandies like to play
with their image, creating a striking and androgynous allure. Naturals are
spontaneous and open. Coquettes are self-sufficient, with a fascinating cool
at their core. Charmers want and know how to please—they are social crea-
tures. Charismatics have an unusual confidence in themselves. Stars are ethe-
real and envelop themselves in mystery.
The chapters in this section will take you inside each of the nine types.
At least one of the chapters should strike a chord—you will recognize part
of yourself. That chapter will be the key to developing your own powers of
attraction. Let us say you have coquettish tendencies. The Coquette chap-
ter will show you how to build upon your own self-sufficiency, alternating
heat and coldness to ensnare your victims. It will show you how to take
your natural qualities further, becoming a grand Coquette, the type we
fight over. There is no point in being timid with a seductive quality. We are
charmed by an unabashed Rake and excuse his excesses, but a halfhearted
Rake gets no respect. Once you have cultivated your dominant character
trait, adding some art to what nature has given you, you can then develop a
second or third trait, adding depth and mystery to your persona. Finally the
section's tenth chapter, on the Anti-Seducer, will make you aware of the op-
3
4 • The Art of Seduction
posite potential within you—the power of repulsion. At all cost you must
root out any anti-seductive tendencies you may have.
Think of the nine types as shadows, silhouettes. Only by stepping into
one of them and letting it grow inside you can you begin to develop the
seductive character that will bring you limitless power.
A
man is often
secretly oppressed by
the 
role 
he 
has 
to
play—by always having to
be responsible, in control, and
rational. The Siren is the ulti-
mate male fantasy figure because
she offers a total release from the
limitations of his life. In her pres-
ence, which is always heightened and
sexually 
charged, 
the 
male feels
transported to a world of pure plea-
sure. She is dangerous, and in pursu-
ing her energetically the man can lose
control over himself something he
yearns to do. The Siren is a mirage;
she lures men by cultivating a par-
ticular appearance and manner.
In a world where women are
often too timid to project such
an image, learn to take
control of the male li-
bido by embodying
his 
fantasy.
The Spectacular Siren
I
n the year 48 B.C., Ptolemy XIV of Egypt managed to depose and exile
his sister and wife, Queen Cleopatra. He secured the country's borders
against her return and began to rule on his own. Later that year, Julius Cae-
sar came to Alexandria to ensure that despite the local power struggles,
Egypt would remain loyal to Rome.
One night Caesar was meeting with his generals in the Egyptian palace,
discussing strategy, when a guard entered to report that a Greek merchant
was at the door bearing a large and valuable gift for the Roman leader.
Caesar, in the mood for a little fun, gave the merchant permission to enter.
The man came in, carrying on his shoulders a large rolled-up carpet. He
undid the rope around the bundle and with a snap of his wrists unfurled
it—revealing the young Cleopatra, who had been hidden inside, and who
rose up half clothed before Caesar and his guests, like Venus emerging from
the waves.
Everyone was dazzled at the sight of the beautiful young queen (only
twenty-one at the time) appearing before them suddenly as if in a dream.
They were astounded at her daring and theatricality—smuggled into the
harbor at night with only one man to protect her, risking everything on a
bold move. No one was more enchanted than Caesar. According to the
Roman writer Dio Cassius, "Cleopatra was in the prime of life. She had a
delightful voice which could not fail to cast a spell over all who heard it.
Such was the charm of her person and her speech that they drew the cold-
est and most determined misogynist into her toils. Caesar was spellbound as
soon as he set eyes on her and she opened her mouth to speak." That same
evening Cleopatra became Caesar s lover.
Caesar had had numerous mistresses before, to divert him from the rig-
ors of his campaigns. But he had always disposed of them quickly to return
to what really thrilled him—political intrigue, the challenges of warfare,
the Roman theater. Caesar had seen women try anything to keep him un-
der their spell. Yet nothing prepared him for Cleopatra. One night she
would tell him how together they could revive the glory of Alexander the
Great, and rule the world like gods. The next she would entertain him
dressed as the goddess Isis, surrounded by the opulence of her court.
Cleopatra initiated Caesar in the most decadent revelries, presenting herself
as the incarnation of the Egyptian exotic. His life with her was a constant
game, as challenging as warfare, for the moment he felt secure with her she
In the mean time our good
ship, with that perfect wind
to drive her, fast
approached the Sirens' Isle.
But now the breeze
dropped, 
some power lulled
the waves, and a breathless
calm set in. Rising from
their seats my men drew
in the sail and threw it into
the hold, then sat down
at the oars and churned the
water white with their
blades of polished pine.
Meanwhile I took a large
round of wax, cut it up
small with my sword, and
kneaded the pieces with all
the strength of my fingers.
The wax soon yielded to
my vigorous treatment and
grew warm, for I had the
rays of my Lord the Sun to
help me. I took each of my
men in turn and plugged
their ears with it. They
then made me a prisoner
on my ship by binding me
hand and foot, standing
me up by the step of the
mast and tying the rope's
ends to the mast itself.
This done, they sat down
once more and struck the
grey water with their oars.
• We made good progress
and had just come within
call of the shore when the
Sirens became aware that a
ship was swiftly bearing
7
8 
• 
The Art of Seduction
would suddenly turn cold or angry and he would have to find a way to re-
gain her favor.
The weeks went by. Caesar got rid of all Cleopatra's rivals and found
excuses to stay in Egypt. At one point she led him on a lavish historical ex-
pedition down the Nile. In a boat of unimaginable splendor—towering
fifty-four feet out of the water, including several terraced levels and a pil-
lared temple to the god Dionysus—Caesar became one of the few Romans
to gaze on the pyramids. And while he stayed long in Egypt, away from
his throne in Rome, all kinds of turmoil erupted throughout the Roman
Empire.
When Caesar was murdered, in 44 B.C., he was succeeded by a triumvi-
rate of rulers including Mark Antony, a brave soldier who loved pleasure
and spectacle and fancied himself a kind of Roman Dionysus. A few years
later, while Antony was in Syria, Cleopatra invited him to come meet her
in the Egyptian town of Tarsus. There—once she had made him wait for
her—her appearance was as startling in its way as her first before Caesar. A
magnificent gold barge with purple sails appeared on the river Cydnus. The
oarsmen rowed to the accompaniment of ethereal music; all around the
boat were beautiful young girls dressed as nymphs and mythological figures.
Cleopatra sat on deck, surrounded and fanned by cupids and posed as the
goddess Aphrodite, whose name the crowd chanted enthusiastically.
Like all of Cleopatra's victims, Antony felt mixed emotions. The exotic
pleasures she offered were hard to resist. But he also wanted to tame her—to
defeat this proud and illustrious woman would prove his greatness. And so
he stayed, and, like Caesar, fell slowly under her spell. She indulged him in
all of his weaknesses—gambling, raucous parties, elaborate rituals, lavish
spectacles. To get him to come back to Rome, Octavius, another member of
the Roman triumvirate, offered him a wife: Octavius's own sister, Octavia,
one of the most beautiful women in Rome. Known for her virtue and
goodness, she could surely keep Antony away from the "Egyptian whore."
The ploy worked for a while, but Antony was unable to forget Cleopatra,
and after three years he went back to her. This time it was for good: he had
in essence become Cleopatra's slave, granting her immense powers, adopting
Egyptian dress and customs, and renouncing the ways of Rome.
Only one image of Cleopatra survives—a barely visible profile on a coin—
but we have numerous written descriptions. She had a long thin face and a
somewhat pointed nose; her dominant features were her wonderfully large
eyes. Her seductive power, however, did not lie in her looks—indeed many
among the women of Alexandria were considered more beautiful than she.
What she did have above all other women was the ability to distract a man.
In reality, Cleopatra was physically unexceptional and had no political
power, yet both Caesar and Antony, brave and clever men, saw none of
this. What they saw was a woman who constantly transformed herself be-
fore their eyes, a one-woman spectacle. Her dress and makeup changed
from day to day, but always gave her a heightened, goddesslike appearance.
down upon them, and
broke into their liquid song.
• "Draw near," they sang,
"illustrious 
Odysseus,
flower of Achaean chivalry,
and bring your ship to rest
so that you may hear our
voices. No seaman ever
sailed his black ship past
this spot without listening
to the sweet tones that flow
from our lips . . ." • The
lovely voices came to me
across the water, and my
heart was filled with such a
longing to listen that with
nod and frown I signed to
my men to set me free.
— H O M E R , THE ODYSSEY, BOOK
X I I , TRANSLATED BY E.V. RIEU
The charm of [Cleopatra's]
presence was irresistible,
and there was an attraction
in her person and talk,
together with a peculiar
force of character, which
pervaded her every word
and action, and laid all
who associated with her
under its spell. It was a
delight merely to hear the
sound of her voice, with
which, like an instrument
of many strings, she could
pass from one language to
another.
—PLUTARCH, 
MAKERS OF
ROME, TRANSLATED BY IAN
SCOTT-KILVERT
The immediate attraction
of a song, a voice, or scent.
The attraction of the
panther with his perfumed
scent . . . According to the
ancients, the panther is
the only animal who emits
a perfumed odor. It uses
this scent to draw and
capture its victims. . . .
But what is it that seduces
in a scent? . . . What is it
in the song of the Sirens
that seduces us, or in the
beauty of a face, in the depths
The Siren • 9
Her voice, which all writers talk of, was lilting and intoxicating. Her words
could be banal enough, but were spoken so sweetly that listeners would
find themselves remembering not what she said but how she said it.
Cleopatra provided constant variety—tributes, mock battles, expedi-
tions, costumed orgies. Everything had a touch of drama and was accom-
plished with great energy. By the time your head lay on the pillow beside
her, your mind was spinning with images and dreams. And just when you
thought you had this fluid, larger-than-life woman, she would turn distant
or angry, making it clear that everything was on her terms. You never pos-
sessed Cleopatra, you worshiped her. In this way a woman who had been
exiled and destined for an early death managed to turn it all around and
rule Egypt for close to twenty years.
From Cleopatra we learn that it is not beauty that makes a Siren but
rather a theatrical streak that allows a woman to embody a man's fantasies.
A man grows bored with a woman, no matter how beautiful; he yearns for
different pleasures, and for adventure. All a woman needs to turn this
around is to create the illusion that she offers such variety and adventure. A
man is easily deceived by appearances; he has a weakness for the visual.
Create the physical presence of a Siren (heightened sexual allure mixed
with a regal and theatrical manner) and he is trapped. He cannot grow
bored with you yet he cannot discard you. Keep up the distractions, and
never let him see who you really are. He will follow you until he drowns.
The Sex Siren
N
orma Jean Mortensen, the future Marilyn Monroe, spent part of her
childhood in Los Angeles orphanages. Her days were filled with
chores and no play. At school, she kept to herself, smiled rarely, and
dreamed a lot. One day when she was thirteen, as she was dressing for
school, she noticed that the white blouse the orphanage provided for her
was torn, so she had to borrow a sweater from a younger girl in the house.
The sweater was several sizes too small. That day, suddenly, boys seemed to
gather around her wherever she went (she was extremely well-developed
for her age). She wrote in her diary, "They stared at my sweater as if it were
a gold mine."
The revelation was simple but startling. Previously ignored and even
ridiculed by the other students, Norma Jean now sensed a way to gain at-
tention, maybe even power, for she was wildly ambitious. She started to
smile more, wear makeup, dress differently. And soon she noticed some-
thing equally startling: without her having to say or do anything, boys fell
passionately in love with her. "My admirers all said the same thing in differ-
ent ways," she wrote. "It was my fault, their wanting to kiss me and hug
me. Some said it was the way I looked at them—with eyes full of passion.
Others said it was my voice that lured them on. Still others said I gave off
vibrations that floored them."
of an abyss . . . ?
Seduction lies in the
annulment of signs and
their meaning, in pure
appearance. The eyes that
seduce have no meaning,
they end in the gaze, as
the face with makeup
ends in only pure
appearance. . . . The scent
of the panther is also a
meaningless 
message—and
behind the message the
panther is invisible, as is
the woman beneath her
makeup. The Sirens too
remained unseen. 
The
enchantment 
lies in what
is hidden.
—JEAN BAUDRILLARD, DE LA
SÉDUCTION
We're dazzled by feminine
adornment, by the surface,
\ All gold and jewels: so
little of what we observe \
Is the girl herself And
where (you may ask) amid
such plenty \ Can our
object of passion be found?
The eye's deceived \ By
Love's smart camouflage.
— O V I D , CURES FOR LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
He was herding his cattle
on Mount Gargarus, the
highest peak of Ida, when
Hermes, accompanied by
Hera, Athene, and
Aphrodite delivered the
golden apple and Zeus's
message: "Paris, since you
are as handsome as you are
wise in affairs of the heart,
Zeus commands you to
judge which of these
goddesses is the fairest. " •
"So be it," sighed Paris.
"But first I beg the losers
not to be vexed with me. I
am only a human being,
liable to make the stupidest
10 • The Art of Seduction
A few years later Marilyn was trying to make it in the film business.
Producers would tell her the same thing: she was attractive enough in per-
son, but her face wasn't pretty enough for the movies. She was getting
work as an extra, and when she was on-screen—even if only for a few sec-
onds—the men in the audience would go wild, and the theaters would
erupt in catcalls. But nobody saw any star quality in this. One day in 1949,
only twenty-three at the time and her career at a standstill, Monroe met
someone at a diner who told her that a producer casting a new Groucho
Marx movie, Love Happy, was looking for an actress for the part of a blond
bombshell who could walk by Groucho in a way that would, in his words,
"arouse my elderly libido and cause smoke to issue from my ears." Talking
her way into an audition, she improvised this walk. "It's Mae West, Theda
Bara, and Bo Peep all rolled into one," said Groucho after watching her
saunter by. "We shoot the scene tomorrow morning." And so Marilyn cre-
ated her infamous walk, a walk that was hardly natural but offered a strange
mix of innocence and sex.
Over the next few years, Marilyn taught herself through trial and er-
ror how to heighten the effect she had on men. Her voice had always been
attractive—it was the voice of a little girl. But on film it had limitations un-
til someone finally taught her to lower it, giving it the deep, breathy tones
that became her seductive trademark, a mix of the little girl and the vixen.
Before appearing on set, or even at a party, Marilyn would spend hours be-
fore the mirror. Most people assumed this was vanity—she was in love with
her image. The truth was that image took hours to create. Marilyn spent
years studying and practicing the art of makeup. The voice, the walk, the
face and look were all constructions, an act. At the height of her fame, she
would get a thrill by going into bars in New York City without her makeup
or glamorous clothes and passing unnoticed.
Success finally came, but with it came something deeply annoying to
her: the studios would only cast her as the blond bombshell. She wanted se-
rious roles, but no one took her seriously for those parts, no matter how
hard she downplayed the siren qualities she had built up. One day, while she
was rehearsing a scene from The Cherry Orchard, her acting instructor, Mi-
chael Chekhov, asked her, "Were you thinking of sex while we played the
scene?" When she said no, he continued, "All through our playing of the
scene I kept receiving sex vibrations from you. As if you were a woman in
the grip of passion. . . . I understand your problem with your studio now,
Marilyn. You are a woman who gives off sex vibrations—no matter what
you are doing or thinking. The whole world has already responded to those
vibrations. They come off the movie screens when you are on them."
Marilyn Monroe loved the effect her body could have on the male libido.
She tuned her physical presence like an instrument, making herself reek of
sex and gaining a glamorous, larger-than-life appearance. Other women
knew just as many tricks for heightening their sexual appeal, but what sepa-
rated Marilyn from them was an unconscious element. Her background
mistakes." 
• The
goddesses all agreed to
abide by his decision. •
"Will it be enough to
judge them as they are?"
Paris asked Hermes, "or
should they he naked?" •
"The rules of the contest
are for you to decide,"
Hermes answered with a
discreet smile. • "In that
case, will they kindly
disrobe?" • Hermes told
the goddesses to do so, and
politely turned his back. •
Aphrodite was soon ready,
but Athene insisted that
she should remove the
famous magic girdle, which
gave her an unfair
advantage by making
everyone fall in love
withthe wearer. "Very
well" 
said Aphrodite
spitefully. "I will, on
condition that you remove
your helmet—you look
hideous without it. " •
"Now, if you please, 1
must judge you one at
a time" announced
Paris. . . . Come here,
Divine Hera! 
Will you
other two goddesses be good
enough to leave us for a
while?" • 
"Examine me
conscientiously," said Hera,
turning slowly around, and
displaying her magnificent
figure, "and remember that
if you judge me the fairest,
1 will make you lord of all
Asia, and the richest man
alive. " • "I am not to be
bribed my Lady . . . Very
well, thank you. Now I
have seen all that I need to
see. 
Come, Divine
Athene!" • 
"Here I am,"
said Athene, striding
purposefully 
forward.
"Listen, Paris, if you have
enough common sense to
award me the prize, I will
make you victorious in
all your battles, as well
as the handsomest and
wisest man in the world."
• "I am a humble
The Siren • 11
had deprived her of something critical: affection. Her deepest need was to
feel loved and desired, which made her seem constantly vulnerable, like a
little girl craving protection. She emanated this need for love before the
camera; it was effortless, coming from somewhere real and deep inside. A
look or gesture that she did not intend to arouse desire would do so doubly
powerfully just because it was unintended—its innocence was precisely
what excited a man.
The Sex Siren has a more urgent and immediate effect than the Spec-
tacular Siren does. The incarnation of sex and desire, she does not bother
to appeal to extraneous senses, or to create a theatrical buildup. Her time
never seems to be taken up by work or chores; she gives the impression that
she lives for pleasure and is always available. What separates the Sex Siren
from the courtesan or whore is her touch of innocence and vulnerability.
The mix is perversely satisfying: it gives the male the critical illusion that he
is a protector, the father figure, although it is actually the Sex Siren who
controls the dynamic.
A woman doesn't have to be born with the attributes of a Marilyn
Monroe to fill the role of the Sex Siren. Most of the physical elements are
a construction; the key is the air of schoolgirl innocence. While one part of
you seems to scream sex, the other part is coy and naive, as if you were in-
capable of understanding the effect you are having. Your walk, your voice,
your manner are delightfully ambiguous—you are both the experienced,
desiring woman and the innocent gamine.
Your next encounter will be with the Sirens, who bewitch
every man that approaches them. . . . For with the music
of their song the Sirens cast their spell upon him, as they
sit there in a meadow piled high with the moldering skele-
tons of men, whose withered skin still hangs upon their
bones.
—CIRCE 
TO ODYSSEUS, THE ODYSSEY, BOOK XII
Keys to the Character
T
he Siren is the most ancient seductress of them all. Her prototype is
the goddess Aphrodite—it is her nature to have a mythic quality about
her—but do not imagine she is a thing of the past, or of legend and his-
tory: she represents a powerful male fantasy of a highly sexual, supremely
confident, alluring female offering endless pleasure and a bit of danger. In
today's world this fantasy can only appeal the more strongly to the male
psyche, for now more than ever he lives in a world that circumscribes his
aggressive instincts by making everything safe and secure, a world that offers
less chance for adventure and risk than ever before. In the past, a man had
some outlets for these drives—warfare, the high seas, political intrigue. In
the sexual realm, courtesans and mistresses were practically a social institu-
herdsman, not a soldier,"
said Paris. . . . "But I
promise to consider fairly
your claim to the apple.
Now you are at liberty to
put on your clothes and
helmet again. Is Aphrodite
ready?" • Aphrodite sidled
up to him, and Paris
blushed because she came
so close that they were
almost touching. • "Look
carefully, please, pass
nothing over. . . . By the
way, as soon as I saw you,
I said to myself: 'Upon my
word, there goes the
handsomest young man in
Phrygia! Why does he
waste himself here in the
wilderness herding stupid
cattle?' Well, why do you,
Paris? Why not move into
a city and lead a civilized
life? What have you to lose
by marrying someone like
Helen of Sparta, who is as
beautiful as I am, and no
less passionate? . . . I
suggest now that you tour
Greece with my son Eros
as your guide. Once you
reach Sparta, he and I will
see that Helen falls head
over heels in love with
you." • "Would you swear
to that?" Paris ashed
excitedly. 
• Aphrodite
uttered a solemn oath, and
Paris, without a second
thought, awarded her the
golden apple.
—ROBERT GRAVES, THE GREEK
MYTHS, VOLUME I
12 • 
The Art of Seduction
tion, and offered him the variety and the chase that he craved. Without any
outlets, his drives turn inward and gnaw at him, becoming all the more
volatile for being repressed. Sometimes a powerful man will do the most ir-
rational things, have an affair when it is least called for, just for a thrill, the
danger of it all. The irrational can prove immensely seductive, even more
so for men, who must always seem so reasonable.
If it is seductive power you are after, the Siren is the most potent of all.
She operates on a man's most basic emotions, and if she plays her role prop-
erly, she can transform a normally strong and responsible male into a child-
ish slave. The Siren operates well on the rigid masculine type—the soldier
or hero—just as Cleopatra overwhelmed Mark Antony and Marilyn Mon-
roe Joe DiMaggio. But never imagine that these are the only types the
Siren can affect. Julius Caesar was a writer and thinker, who had transferred
his intellectual abilities onto the battlefield and into the political arena; the
playwright Arthur Miller fell as deeply under Monroe's spell as DiMaggio.
The intellectual is often the one most susceptible to the Siren call of pure
physical pleasure, because his life so lacks it. The Siren does not have to
worry about finding the right victim. Her magic works on one and all.
First and foremost, a Siren must distinguish herself from other women.
She is by nature a rare thing, mythic, only one to a group; she is also a valu-
able prize to be wrested away from other men. Cleopatra made herself dif-
ferent through her sense of high drama; the Empress Josephine Bonaparte's
device was her extreme languorousness; Marilyn Monroe's was her little-
girl quality. Physicality offers the best opportunities here, since a Siren is
preeminently a sight to behold. A highly feminine and sexual presence,
even to the point of caricature, will quickly differentiate you, since most
women lack the confidence to project such an image.
Once the Siren has made herself stand out from others, she must have
two other critical qualities: the ability to get the male to pursue her so
feverishly that he loses control; and a touch of the dangerous. Danger is
surprisingly seductive. To get the male to pursue you is relatively simple: a
highly sexual presence will do this quite well. But you must not resemble a
courtesan or whore, whom the male may pursue only to quickly lose inter-
est in her. Instead, you are slightly elusive and distant, a fantasy come to life.
During the Renaissance, the great Sirens, such as Tullia d'Aragona, would
act and look like Grecian goddesses—the fantasy of the day. Today you
might model yourself on a film goddess—anything that seems larger than
life, even awe inspiring. These qualities will make a man chase you vehe-
mently, and the more he chases, the more he will feel that he is acting on
his own initiative. This is an excellent way of disguising how deeply you
are manipulating him.
The notion of danger, challenge, sometimes death, might seem out-
dated, but danger is critical in seduction. It adds emotional spice and is
particularly appealing to men today, who are normally so rational and re-
pressed. Danger is present in the original myth of the Siren. In Homer's
Odyssey, the hero Odysseus must sail by the rocks where the Sirens, strange
To whom aw I compare
the lovely girl, so blessed by
fortune, if not to the
Sirens, who with their
lodestone draw the ships
towards them? Thus, I
imagine, did Isolde attract
many thoughts and hearts
that deemed themselves
safe from love's
disquietude. 
And indeed
these 
two—anchorless
ships and stray thoughts—
provide a good comparison.
They are both so seldom
on a straight course, lie so
often in unsure havens,
pitching and tossing and
heaving to and fro. Just so,
in the same way, do
aimless desire and random
love-longing drift like an
anchorless ship. This
charming young princess,
discreet and courteous
Isolde, drew thoughts from
the hearts that enshrined
them as a lodestone draws
in ships to the sound of the
Sirens' song. She sang
openly and secretly, in
through ears and eyes to
where many a heart was
stirred. The song which she
sang openly in this and
other places was her own
sweet singing and soft
sounding of strings that
echoed for all to hear
through the kingdom of the
ears deep down into the
heart. But her secret song
was her wondrous beauty
that stole with its rapturous
music hidden and unseen
through the windows of the
eyes into many noble
hearts and smoothed on the
magic which took thoughts
prisoner suddenly, 
and,
taking them, fettered them
with desire!
—GOTTFRIED 
VON STRASSBURG,
TRISTAN, TRANSLATED BY
A . T . HATTO
The Siren • 13
female creatures, sing and beckon sailors to their destruction. They sing of
the glories of the past, of a world like childhood, without responsibilities, a
world of pure pleasure. Their voices are like water, liquid and inviting.
Sailors would leap into the water to join them, and drown; or, distracted
and entranced, they would steer their ship into the rocks. To protect his
sailors from the Sirens, Odysseus has their ears filled with wax; he himself is
tied to the mast, so he can both hear the Sirens and live to tell of it—a
strange desire, since the thrill of the Sirens is giving in to the temptation to
follow them.
Just as the ancient sailors had to row and steer, ignoring all distractions,
a man today must work and follow a straight path in life. The call of some-
thing dangerous, emotional, unknown is all the more powerful because it is
so forbidden. Think of the victims of the great Sirens of history: Paris
causes a war for the sake of Helen of Troy, Caesar risks an empire and
Antony loses his power and his life for Cleopatra, Napoleon becomes a
laughingstock over Josephine, DiMaggio never gets over Marilyn, and
Arthur Miller can't write for years. A man is often ruined by a Siren, yet
cannot tear himself away. (Many powerful men have a masochistic streak.)
An element of danger is easy to hint at, and will enhance your other Siren
characteristics—the touch of madness in Marilyn, for example, that pulled
men in. Sirens are often fantastically irrational, which is immensely attrac-
tive to men who are oppressed by their own reasonableness. An element of
fear is also critical: keeping a man at a proper distance creates respect, so
that he doesn't get close enough to see through you or notice your weaker
qualities. Create such fear by suddenly changing your moods, keeping the
man off balance, occasionally intimidating him with capricious behavior.
The most important element for an aspiring Siren is always the physical,
the Siren's main instrument of power. Physical qualities—a scent, a height-
ened femininity evoked through makeup or through elaborate or seductive
clothing—act all the more powerfully on men because they have no mean-
ing. In their immediacy they bypass rational processes, having the same ef-
fect that a decoy has on an animal, or the movement of a cape on a bull.
The proper Siren appearance is often confused with physical beauty, par-
ticularly the face. But a beautiful face does not a Siren make: instead it cre-
ates too much distance and coldness. (Neither Cleopatra nor Marilyn
Monroe, the two greatest Sirens in history, were known for their beautiful
faces.) Although a smile and an inviting look are infinitely seductive, they
must never dominate your appearance. They are too obvious and direct.
The Siren must stimulate a generalized desire, and the best way to do this is
by creating an overall impression that is both distracting and alluring. It is
not one particular trait, but a combination of qualities:
The voice. Clearly a critical quality, as the legend indicates, the Siren's
voice has an immediate animal presence with incredible suggestive power.
Perhaps that power is regressive, recalling the ability of the mother's voice
Falling in love with statues
and paintings, even
making love to them is an
ancient fantasy, one of
which the Renaissance was
keenly aware. Giorgio
Vasari, writing in the
introductory section of the
Lives about art in
antiquity, tells how men
violated the laws, going
into the temples at night
and making love with
statues of Venus. In the
morning, priests would
enter the sanctuaries to find
stains on the marble
figures.
—LYNNE LAWNER,
LIVES 
OF THE COURTESANS
14 
• 
The Art of Seduction
to calm or excite her child even before the child understood what she was
saying. The Siren must have an insinuating voice that hints at the erotic,
more often subliminally than overtly. Almost everyone who met Cleopatra
commented on her delightful, sweet-sounding voice, which had a mesmer-
izing quality. The Empress Josephine, one of the great seductresses of the
late eighteenth century, had a languorous voice that men found exotic, and
suggestive of her Creole origins. Marilyn Monroe was born with her
breathy, childlike voice, but she learned to lower to make it truly seductive.
Lauren Bacall's voice is naturally low; its seductive power comes from its
slow, suggestive delivery. The Siren never speaks quickly, aggressively, or at
a high pitch. Her voice is calm and unhurried, as if she had never quite
woken up—or left her bed.
Body and adornment. If the voice must lull, the body and its adornment
must dazzle. It is with her clothes that the Siren aims to create the god-
dess effect that Baudelaire described in his essay "In Praise of Makeup":
"Woman is well within her rights, and indeed she is accomplishing a kind
of duty in striving to appear magical and supernatural. She must astonish
and bewitch; an idol, she must adorn herself with gold in order to be
adored. She must borrow from all of the arts in order to raise herself above
nature, the better to subjugate hearts and stir souls."
A Siren who was a genius of clothes and adornment was Pauline Bona-
parte, sister of Napoleon. Pauline consciously strove for a goddess effect,
fashioning hair, makeup, and clothes to evoke the look and air of Venus,
the goddess of love. No one in history could boast a more extensive and
elaborate wardrobe. Pauline's entrance at a ball in 1798 created an astound-
ing effect. She asked the hostess, Madame Permon, if she could dress at her
house, so no one would see her clothes as she came in. When she came
down the stairs, everyone stopped dead in stunned silence. She wore the
headdress of a bacchante—clusters of gold grapes interlaced in her hair,
which was done up in the Greek style. Her Greek tunic, with its gold-
embroidered hem, showed off her goddesslike figure. Below her breasts was
a girdle of burnished gold, held by a magnificent jewel. "No words can
convey the loveliness of her appearance," wrote the Duchess d'Abrantes.
"The very room grew brighter as she entered. The whole ensemble was so
harmonious that her appearance was greeted with a buzz of admiration
which continued with utter disregard of all the other women."
The key: everything must dazzle, but must also be harmonious, so that
no single ornament draws attention. Your presence must be charged, larger
than life, a fantasy come true. Ornament is used to cast a spell and distract.
The Siren can also use clothing to hint at the sexual, at times overtly but
more often by suggesting it rather than screaming it—that would make you
seem manipulative. Related to this is the notion of selective disclosure, the
revealing of only a part of the body—but a part that will excite and stir the
imagination. In the late sixteenth century, Marguerite de Valois, the infa-
The Siren • 15
mous daughter of Queen Catherine de Médicis of France, was one of the
first women ever to incorporate decolletage in her wardrobe, simply be-
cause she had the most beautiful breasts in the realm. For Josephine Bona-
parte it was her arms, which she carefully always left bare.
Movement and demeanor. In the fifth century B.C., King Kou Chien
chose the Chinese Siren Hsi Shih from among all the women of his realm
to seduce and destroy his rival Fu Chai, King of Wu; for this purpose, he
had the young woman instructed in the arts of seduction. Most important
of these was movement—how to move gracefully and suggestively. Hsi
Shih learned to give the impression of floating across the floor in her court
robes. When she was finally unleashed on Fu Chai, he quickly fell under
her spell. She walked and moved like no one he had ever seen. He became
obsessed with her tremulous presence, her manner and nonchalant air. Fu
Chai fell so deeply in love that he let his kingdom fall to pieces, allowing
Kou Chien to march in and conquer it without a fight.
The Siren moves gracefully and unhurriedly. The proper gestures,
movement, and demeanor for a Siren are like the proper voice: they hint at
something exciting, stirring desire without being obvious. Your air must be
languorous, as if you had all the time in the world for love and pleasure.
Your gestures must have a certain ambiguity, suggesting something both
innocent and erotic. Anything that cannot immediately be understood is
supremely seductive, and all the more so if it permeates your manner.
Symbol: Water.
The song of the Siren is liquid and
enticing, and the Siren herself is fluid and un-
graspable. Like the sea, the Siren lures you with the
promise of infinite adventure and pleasure. Forgetting past
and future, men follow her far out to sea, where they drown.
16 • 
The Art of Seduction
Dangers
N
o matter how enlightened the age, no woman can maintain the image
of being devoted to pleasure completely comfortably. And no matter
how hard she tries to distance herself from it, the taint of being easy always
follows the Siren. Cleopatra was hated in Rome as the Egyptian whore.
That hatred eventually lead to her downfall, as Octavius and the Roman
army sought to extirpate the stain on Roman manhood that she came to
represent. Even so, men are often forgiving when it comes to the Siren's
reputation. But danger often lies in the envy she stirs up among other
women; much of Rome's hatred for Cleopatra originated in the resentment
she provoked among the city's stern matrons. By playing up her innocence,
by making herself seem the victim of male desire, the Siren can somewhat
blunt the effects of feminine envy. But on the whole there is little she can
do—her power comes from her effect on men, and she must learn to ac-
cept, or ignore, the envy of other women.
Finally, the intense attention that the Siren attracts can prove irritating
and worse. Sometimes she will pine for relief from it; sometimes, too, she
will want to attract an attention that is not sexual. Also, unfortunately,
physical beauty fades; although the Siren effect depends not on a beautiful
face but on an overall impression, past a certain age that impression gets
hard to project. Both of these factors contributed to the suicide of Marilyn
Monroe. It takes a genius on the level of Madame de Pompadour, the Siren
mistress of King Louis XV, to make the transition into the role of the spir-
ited older woman who continues to seduce with her nonphysical charms.
Cleopatra had such an intellect, and had she lived long enough, she would
have remained a potent seductress for many years. The Siren must prepare
for age by paying attention early on to the more psychological, less physical
forms of coquetry that can continue to bring her power once her beauty
starts to fade.
A 
woman
never quite feels desired and appreciated
enough. She wants attention, but a man is too often
distracted and unresponsive. The Rake is a great female fantasy
figure—when he desires a woman, brief though that moment may be,
he will go to the ends of the earth for her. He may be disloyal, dishonest,
and amoral, but that only adds to his appeal. Unlike the normal, cautious
male, the Rake is delightfully unrestrained, a slave to his love of women.
There is the added lure of his reputation: so many women have suc-
cumbed to him, there has to be a reason. Words are a woman's weak-
ness, and the Rake is a master of seductive language. Stir a
woman's repressed longings by adapting the Rake's
mix of danger and pleasure.
The Ardent Rake
F
or the court of Louis XIV, the king's last years were gloomy—he was
old, and had become both insufferably religious and personally unpleas-
ant. The court was bored and desperate for novelty. So in 1710, the arrival
of a fifteen-year-old lad who was both devilishly handsome and charming
had a particularly strong effect on the ladies. His name was Fronsac, the
future Duke de Richelieu (his granduncle being the infamous Cardinal
Richelieu). He was impudent and witty. The ladies would play with him
like a toy, but he would kiss them on the lips in return, his hands wandering
far for an inexperienced boy. When those hands strayed up the skirts of a
duchess who was not so indulgent, the king was furious, and sent the youth
to the Bastille to teach him a lesson. But the ladies who had found him so
amusing could not endure his absence. Compared to the stiffs in court, here
was someone incredibly bold, his eyes boring into you, his hands quicker
than was safe. Nothing could stop him, his novelty was irresistible. The
court ladies pleaded and his stay in the Bastille was cut short.
Several years later, the young Mademoiselle de Valois was walking in a
Paris park with her chaperone, an older woman who never left her side. De
Valois's father, the Duke d'Orléans, was determined to protect her, his
youngest daughter, from all the court seducers until she could be married
off, so he had attached to her this chaperone, a woman of impeccable
virtue and sourness. In the park, however, de Valois saw a young man who
gave her a look that set her heart on fire. He walked on by, but the look was
intense and clear. It was her chaperone who told her his name: the now in-
famous Duke de Richelieu, blasphemer, seducer, heartbreaker. Someone to
avoid at all cost.
A few days later, the chaperone took de Valois to a different park, and
lo and behold, Richelieu crossed their path again. This time he was in dis-
guise, dressed as a beggar, but the look in his eye was unforgettable. Made-
moiselle de Valois returned his gaze: at last something exciting in her drab
life. Given her father's sternness, no man had dared approach her. And now
this notorious courtier was pursuing her, instead of all the other ladies at
court—what a thrill! Soon he was smuggling beautifully written notes to
her expressing his uncontrollable desire for her. She responded timidly, but
soon the notes were all she was living for. In one of them he promised to
arrange everything if she would spend the night with him; imagining it was
[After an accident at sect,
Don Juan finds himself
washed up on a beach,
where he is discovered by a
young woman.] • TISBEA:
Wake up, handsomest of
all men, and be yourself
again. • D O N JUAN: If the
sea gives me death, you
give me life. But the sea
really saved me only to be
killed by you. Oh the sea
tosses me from one torment
to the other, for I no sooner
pulled myself from the
water than I met this
siren—yourself. 
Why fill
my ears with wax, since
you kill me with your
eyes? I was dying in the
sea, but from today I shall
die of love. • TISBEA: YOU
have abundant breath for a
man almost drowned. You
suffered much, but who
knows what suffering you
are preparing for me? . . .
I found you at my feet all
water, and now you are all
fire. If you burn when you
are so wet, what will you
do when you're dry again?
You promise a scorching
flame; I hope to God
you're not lying. • D O N
JUAN: Dear girl, God
should have drowned me
before I could be charred by
you. Perhaps love was wise
19
20 
• 
The Art of Seduction
impossible to bring such a thing to pass, she did not mind playing along and
agreeing to his bold proposal.
Mademoiselle de Valois had a chambermaid named Angelique, who
dressed her for bed and slept in an adjoining room. One night as the chap-
erone was knitting, de Valois looked up from the book she was reading to
see Angelique carrying her mistress's nightclothes to her room, but for some
strange reason Angelique looked back at her and smiled—it was Richelieu,
expertly dressed as the maid! De Valois nearly gasped from fright, but caught
herself, realizing the danger she was in: if she said anything her family
would find out about the notes, and about her part in the whole affair.
What could she do? She decided to go to her room and talk the young
duke out of his ridiculously dangerous maneuver. She said good night to her
chaperone, but once she was in her bedroom, the words she had planned
were useless. When she tried to reason with Richelieu, he responded with
that look in his eye, and then with his arms around her. She could not yell,
but now she was unsure what to do. His impetuous words, his caresses, the
danger of it all—her head was whirling, she was lost. What was virtue and
her prior boredom compared to an evening with the court's most notorious
rake? So while the chaperone knitted away, the duke initiated her into the
rituals of libertinage.
Months later, de Valois's father had reason to suspect that Richelieu had
broken through his lines of defense. The chaperone was fired, the precau-
tions were doubled. D'Orléans did not realize that to Richelieu such mea-
sures were a challenge, and he lived for challenges. He bought the house
next door under an assumed name and secretly tunneled a trapdoor through
the wall adjoining the duke's kitchen cupboard. In this cupboard, over the
next few months—until the novelty wore off—de Valois and Richelieu en-
joyed endless trysts.
Everyone in Paris knew of Richelieu's exploits, for he made it a point
to publicize them as loudly as possible. Every week a new story would cir-
culate through the court. A husband had locked his wife in an upstairs
room at night, worried the duke was after her; to reach her the duke had
crawled in darkness along a thin wooden plank suspended between two
upper-floor windows. Two women who lived in the same house, one a
widow, the other married and quite religious, had discovered to their mu-
tual horror that the duke was having an affair with both of them at the
same time, leaving one in the middle of the night to be with the other.
When they confronted him, the duke, always on the prowl for something
novel, and a devilish talker, had neither apologized nor backed down, but
proceeded to talk them into a menage a trois, playing on the wounded
vanity of each woman, who could not stand the thought of him preferring
the other. Year after year, the stories of his remarkable seductions spread.
One woman admired his audacity and bravery, another his gallantry in
thwarting a husband. Women competed for his attention: if he did not
want to seduce you, there had to be something wrong with you. To be the
target of his attentions became a great fantasy. At one point two ladies
to drench me before I felt
your scalding touch. But
your fire is such that even
in water I burn. • TISBEA:
So cold and yet burning? •
D O N JUAN: So much fire
is in you. 
• TISBEA: How
well you talk! • D O N
JUAN: How well you
understand! • TISBEA: I
hope to God you're not
lying.
—TIRSO 
DE MOLINA, THE
PLAYBOY 
OF 
SEVILLE,
TRANSLATED BY ADRIENNE M.
SCHIZZANO AND OSCAR
MANDEL
Pleased with my first
success, I determined to
profit by this happy
reconciliation. I called them
my dear wives, my faithful
companions, the two beings
chosen to make me happy.
I sought to turn their
heads, and to rouse in
them desires the strength of
which I knew and which
would drive away any
reflections contrary to my
plans. 
The skillful man
who knows how to
communicate 
gradually the
heat of love to the senses of
the most virtuous woman
is quite certain of soon
being absolute master of
her mind and her person;
you cannot reflect when
you have lost your head;
and, moreover, principles of
wisdom, 
however deeply
engraved they may be on
the mind, are effaced in
that moment when the
heart yearns only for
pleasure: pleasure alone
then commands and is
obeyed. The man who has
had experience of conquests
nearly always succeeds
where he who is only timid
and in love fails. . . . •
When I had brought my
two belles to the state of
abandonment 
in which I
The Rake • 21
fought a pistol duel over the duke, and one of them was seriously
wounded. The Duchess d'Orléans, Richelieu's most bitter enemy, once
wrote, "If I believed in sorcery I should think that the Duke possessed
some supernatural secret, for I have never known a woman to oppose the
very least resistance to him."
In seduction there is often a dilemma: to seduce you need planning and cal-
culation, but if your victim suspects that you have ulterior motives, she will
grow defensive. Furthermore, if you seem to be in control, you will inspire
fear instead of desire. The Ardent Rake solves this dilemma in the most art-
ful manner. Of course he must calculate and plan—he has to find a way
around the jealous husband, or whatever the obstacle is. It is exhausting
work. But by nature, the Ardent Rake also has the advantage of an uncon-
trollable libido. When he pursues a woman, he really is aglow with desire;
the victim senses this and is inflamed, even despite herself. How can she
imagine that he is a heartless seducer who will abandon her when he so ar-
dently braves all dangers and obstacles to get to her? And even if she is
aware of his rakish past, of his incorrigible amorality, it doesn't matter, be-
cause she also sees his weakness. He cannot control himself; he actually is a
slave to all women. As such he inspires no fear.
The Ardent Rake teaches us a simple lesson: intense desire has a dis-
tracting power on a woman, just as the Siren's physical presence does on a
man. A woman is often defensive and can sense insincerity or calculation.
But if she feels consumed by your attentions, and is confident you will do
anything for her, she will notice nothing else about you, or will find a way
to forgive your indiscretions. This is the perfect cover for a seducer. The
key is to show no hesitation, to abandon all restraint, to let yourself go, to
show that you cannot control yourself and are fundamentally weak. Do not
worry about inspiring mistrust; as long as you are the slave to her charms,
she will not think of the aftermath.
The Demonic Rake
I
n the early 1880s, members of Roman high society began to talk of a
young journalist who had arrived on the scene, a certain Gabriele D'An-
nunzio. This was strange in itself, for Italian royalty had only the deepest
contempt for anyone outside their circle, and a newspaper society reporter
was almost as low as you could go. Indeed well-born men paid D'Annun-
zio little attention. He had no money and few connections, coming from a
strictly middle-class background. Besides, to them he was downright
ugly—short and stocky, with a dark, splotchy complexion and bulging eyes.
The men thought him so unappealing they gladly let him mingle with their
wives and daughters, certain that their women would be safe with this gar-
goyle and happy to get this gossip hunter off their hands. No, it was not the
men who talked of D'Annunzio; it was their wives.
wanted them, I expressed a
more eager desire; their
eyes lit up; my caresses
were returned; and it was
plain that their resistance
would not delay for more
than a few moments the
next scene I desired them
to play. I proposed that
each should accompany me
in turn into a charming
closet, next to the room in
which we were, which I
wanted them to admire.
They both remained silent.
• "You hesitate?" I said to
them. "I will see which of
you is the more attached
to me. The one who loves
me the more will be the
first to follow the lover she
wishes to convince of her
affection. . . ." • I knew
my puritan, and I was well
aware that, after a few
Struggles, she gave herself
up completely to the
present moment. 'This one
appeared to be as agreeable
to her as the others we had
previously spent together;
she forgot that she was
sharing me [with Madame
Renaud]. 
. . . • 
[When
her turn came] Madame
Renaud responded with a
transport that proved her
contentment, and she left
the sitting only after having
repeated continually:
"What a man! What a
man! He is astonishing!
How often you could be
happy with him if he were
only 
faithful!"
— T H E PRIVATE LIFE OF THE
MARSHAL DUKE OF RICHELIEU,
TRANSLATED BY F. S. FLINT
22 • The Art of Seduction
Introduced to D'Annunzio by their husbands, these duchesses and mar-
chionesses would find themselves entertaining this strange-looking man,
and when he was alone with them, his manner would suddenly change.
Within minutes these ladies would be spellbound. First, he had the most
magnificent voice they had ever heard—soft and low, each syllable articu-
lated, with a flowing rhythm and inflection that was almost musical. One
woman compared it to the ringing of church bells in the distance. Others
said his voice had a "hypnotic" effect. The words that voice spoke were in-
teresting as well—alliterative phrases, charming locutions, poetic images,
and a way of offering praise that could melt a woman's heart. D'Annunzio
had mastered the art of flattery. He seemed to know each woman's weak-
ness: one he would call a goddess of nature, another an incomparable artist
in the making, another a romantic figure out of a novel. A woman's heart
would flutter as he described the effect she had on him. Everything was
suggestive, hinting at sex or romance. That night she would ponder his
words, recalling little in particular that he had said, because he never said
anything concrete, but rather the feeling it had given her. The next day she
would receive from him a poem that seemed to have been written spe-
cifically for her. (In fact he wrote dozens of very similar poems, slightly
tailoring each one for its intended victim.)
A few years after D'Annunzio began work as a society reporter, he mar-
ried the daughter of the Duke and Duchess of Gallese. Shortly thereafter,
with the unshakeable support of society ladies, he began publishing novels
and books of poetry. The number of his conquests was remarkable, and
also the quality—not only marchionesses would fall at his feet, but great
artists, such as the actress Eleanor Duse, who helped him become a re-
spected dramatist and literary celebrity. The dancer Isadora Duncan, an-
other who eventually fell under his spell, explained his magic: "Perhaps the
most remarkable lover of our time is Gabriele D'Annunzio. And this
notwithstanding that he is small, bald, and, except when his face lights up
with enthusiasm, ugly But when he speaks to a woman he likes, his face is
transfigured, so that he suddenly becomes Apollo. . . . His effect on women
is remarkable. The lady he is talking to suddenly feels that her very soul and
being are lifted."
At the outbreak of World War I, the fifty-two-year-old D'Annunzio
joined the army. Although he had no military experience, he had a flair for
the dramatic and a burning desire to prove his bravery. He learned to fly
and led dangerous but highly effective missions. By the end of the war, he
was Italy's most decorated hero. His exploits made him a beloved national
figure, and after the war, crowds would gather outside his hotel wherever in
Italy he went. He would address them from a balcony, discussing politics,
railing against the current Italian government. A witness of one of these
speeches, the American writer Walter Starkie, was initially disappointed at
the appearance of the famous D'Annunzio on a balcony in Venice; he was
short, and looked grotesque. "Little by little, however, I began to sink under
the fascination of the voice, which penetrated into my consciousness. . . .
His very successes in love,
even more than the
marvellous voice of this
little, bald seducer with a
nose like Punch, swept
along in his train a whole
procession of enamoured
women, both opulent and
tormented. 
D'Annunzio
had successfully revived the
Byronic legend: as he
passed by full-breasted
women, standing in his
way as Boldoni would
paint them, strings of
pearls anchoring them to
life—princesses and
actresses, great Russian
ladies and even middle-
class Bordeaux
housewives—they 
would
offer themselves up to him.
—PHILIPPE JULLIAN, PRINCE OF
AESTHETES: 
COUNT 
ROBERT
DE 
MONTESQUIEOU, TRANSLATED
BY JOHN HAYLOCK AND FRANCIS
KING
In short, nothing is so
sweet as to triumph over
the Resistance of a
beautiful Person; and in
that I have the Ambition
of Conquerors, who fly
perpetually from 
Victory to
Victory and can never
prevail with themselves to
put a bound to their
Wishes. 
Nothing can
restrain the Impetuosity of
my Desires; I have an
Heart for the whole Earth;
and like Alexander, I could
wish for New Worlds
wherein to extend my
Amorous 
Conquests.
—MOLIÈRE, 
DON 
JOHN OR
THE 
LIBERTINE, TRANSLATED BY
JOHN 
OZELL
The Rake • 23
Never a hurried, jerky gesture. . . . He played upon the emotions of the
crowd as a supreme violinist does upon a Stradivarius. The eyes of the
thousands were fixed upon him as though hypnotized by his power." Once
again, it was the sound of the voice and the poetic connotations of the
words that seduced the masses. Arguing that modern Italy should reclaim
the greatness of the Roman Empire, D'Annunzio would craft slogans for
the audience to repeat, or would ask emotionally loaded questions for them
to answer. He flattered the crowd, made them feel they were part of some
drama. Everything was vague and suggestive.
The issue of the day was the ownership of the city of Fiume, just across
the border in neighboring Yugoslavia. Many Italians believed that Italy's re-
ward for siding with the Allies in the recent war should be the annexation
of Fiume. D'Annunzio championed this cause, and because of his status as
a war hero the army was ready to side with him, although the government
opposed any action. In September of 1919, with soldiers rallying around
him, D'Annunzio led his infamous march on Fiume. When an Italian gen-
eral stopped him along the way, and threatened to shoot him, D'Annunzio
opened his coat to show his medals, and said in his magnetic voice, "If you
must kill me, fire first on this!" The general stood there stunned, then
broke into tears. He joined up with D'Annunzio.
When D'Annunzio entered Fiume, he was greeted as a liberator. The
next day he was declared leader of the Free State of Fiume. Soon he was
giving daily speeches from a balcony overlooking the town's main square,
holding tens of thousands of people spellbound without benefit of loud-
speakers. He initiated all kinds of celebrations and rituals harking back to
the Roman Empire. The citizens of Fiume began to imitate him, particu-
larly his sexual exploits; the city became like a giant bordello. His popu-
larity was so high that the Italian government feared a march on Rome,
which at that point, had D'Annunzio decided to do it—and he had the
support of a large part of the military—might actually have succeeded;
D'Annunzio could have beaten Mussolini to the punch and changed the
course of history. (He was not a Fascist, but a kind of aesthetic socialist.)
He decided to stay in Fiume, however, and ruled there for sixteen months
before the Italian government finally bombed him out of the city.
Seduction is a psychological process that transcends gender, except in a few
key areas where each gender has its own weakness. The male is traditionally
vulnerable to the visual. The Siren who can concoct the right physical ap-
pearance will seduce in large numbers. For women the weakness is lan-
guage and words: as was written by one of D'Annunzio's victims, the
French actress Simone, "How can one explain his conquests except by his
extraordinary verbal power, and the musical timbre of his voice, put to the
service of exceptional eloquence? For my sex is susceptible to words, be-
witched by them, longing to be dominated by them."
The Rake is as promiscuous with words as he is with women. He
chooses words for their ability to suggest, insinuate, hypnotize, elevate, in-
Among the many modes of
handling Don Juan's effect
on women, the motif of the
irresistible hero is worth
singling out, for it
illustrates a curious change
in our sensibility. Don
Juan did not become
irresistible to women until
the Romantic age, and I
am disposed to think that
it is a trait of the female
imagination to make him
so. When the female voice
began to assert itself and
even, perhaps, to dominate
in literature, Don Juan
evolved to become the
women's rather than the
man's ideal. . . . Don
Juan is now the woman's
dream of the perfect lover,
fugitive, passionate, daring.
He gives her the one
unforgettable moment, the
magnificent exaltation of
the flesh which is too often
denied her by the real
husband, who thinks that
men are gross and women
spiritual. To be the fatal
Don Juan may be the
dream of a few men; but to
meet him is the dream of
many 
women.
—OSCAR MANDEL,"THE
LEGEND OF DON JUAN," THE
THEATRE 
OF 
DON 
JUAN
24 
• 
The Art of Seduction
feet. The words of the Rake are the equivalent of the bodily adornment of
the Siren: a powerful sensual distraction, a narcotic. The Rake's use of lan-
guage is demonic because it is designed not to communicate or convey in-
formation but to persuade, flatter, stir emotional turmoil, much as the
serpent in the Garden of Eden used words to lead Eve into temptation.
The example of D'Annunzio reveals the link between the erotic Rake,
who seduces women, and the political Rake, who seduces the masses. Both
depend on words. Adapt the character of the Rake and you will find that
the use of words as a subtle poison has infinite applications. Remember: it
is the form that matters, not the content. The less your targets focus on
what you say, and the more on how it makes them feel, the more seductive
your effect. Give your words a lofty, spiritual, literary flavor the better to in-
sinuate desire in your unwitting victims.
But what is this force, then, by which Don Juan seduces?
It is desire, the energy of sensuous desire. He desires in
every woman the whole of womanhood. The reaction to
this gigantic passion beautifies and develops the one de-
sired, who flushes in enhanced beauty by his reflection. As
the enthusiast's fire with seductive splendor illumines even
those who stand in a casual relation to him, so Don Juan
transfigures in a far deeper sense every girl.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD, EITHER/OR
Keys to the Character
A
t first it may seem strange that a man who is clearly dishonest, disloyal,
and has no interest in marriage would have any appeal to a woman.
But throughout all of history, and in all cultures, this type has had a fatal ef-
fect. What the Rake offers is what society normally does not allow women:
an affair of pure pleasure, an exciting brush with danger. A woman is often
deeply oppressed by the role she is expected to play She is supposed to be
the tender, civilizing force in society, and to want commitment and lifelong
loyalty. But often her marriages and relationships give her not romance and
devotion but routine and an endlessly distracted mate. It remains an abiding
female fantasy to meet a man who gives totally of himself, who lives for
her, even if only for a while.
This dark, repressed side of female desire found expression in the leg-
end of Don Juan. At first the legend was a male fantasy: the adventurous
knight who could have any woman he wanted. But in the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, Don Juan slowly evolved from the masculine adven-
turer to a more feminized version: a man who lived only for women. This
evolution came from women's interest in the story, and was a result of their
frustrated desires. Marriage for them was a form of indentured servitude;
but Don Juan offered pleasure for its own sake, desire with no strings at-
The Rake • 25
tached. For the time he crossed your path, you were all he thought about.
His desire for you was so powerful that he gave you no time to think or to
worry about the consequences. He would come in the night, give you an
unforgettable moment, and then vanish. He might have conquered a thou-
sand women before you, but that only made him more interesting; better to
be abandoned than undesired by such a man.
The great seducers do not offer the mild pleasures that society con-
dones. They touch a person's unconscious, those repressed desires that cry
out for liberation. Do not imagine that women are the tender creatures that
some people would like them to be. Like men, they are deeply attracted to
the forbidden, the dangerous, even the slightly evil. (Don Juan ends by go-
ing to hell, and the word "rake" comes from "rakehell," a man who rakes
the coals of hell; the devilish component, clearly, is an important part of
the fantasy.) Always remember: if you are to play the Rake, you must con-
vey a sense of risk and darkness, suggesting to your victim that she is partici-
pating in something rare and thrilling—a chance to play out her own rakish
desires.
To play the Rake, the most obvious requirement is the ability to let
yourself go, to draw a woman into the kind of purely sensual moment in
which past and future lose meaning. You must be able to abandon yourself
to the moment. (When the Rake Valmont—a character modeled after the
Duke de Richelieu—in Laclos' eighteenth-century novel Dangerous Liaisons
writes letters that are obviously calculated to have a certain effect on his
chosen victim, Madame de Tourvel, she sees right through them; but when
his letters really do burn with passion, she begins to relent.) An added
benefit of this quality is that it makes you seem unable to control yourself, a
display of weakness that a woman enjoys. By abandoning yourself to the
seduced, you make them feel that you exist for them alone—a feeling re-
flecting a truth, though a temporary one. Of the hundreds of women that
Pablo Picasso, consummate rake, seduced over the years, most of them had
the feeling that they were the only one he truly loved.
The Rake never worries about a woman's resistance to him, or for that
matter about any other obstacle in his path—a husband, a physical barrier.
Resistance is only the spur to his desire, enflaming him all the more. When
Picasso was seducing Françoise Gilot, in fact, he begged her to resist; he
needed resistance to add to the thrill. In any case, an obstacle in your way
gives you the opportunity to prove yourself, and the creativity you bring to
matters of love. In the eleventh-century Japanese novel The Tale of Genji, by
the court lady Murasaki Shikibu, the Rake Prince Niou is not disturbed by
the sudden disappearance of Ukifune, the woman he loves. She has fled be-
cause although she is interested in the prince, she is in love with another
man; but her absence allows the prince to go to extreme lengths to track
her down. His sudden appearance to whisk her away to a house deep in the
woods, and the gallantry he displays in doing so, overwhelm her. Remem-
ber: if no resistances or obstacles face you, you must create them. No se-
duction can proceed without them.
26 
• 
The Art of Seduction
The Rake is an extreme personality. Impudent, sarcastic, and bitingly
witty, he cares nothing for what anyone thinks. Paradoxically, this only
makes him more seductive. In the courtlike atmosphere of studio-era Holly-
wood, when most of the actors behaved like dutiful sheep, the great Rake
Errol Flynn stood out in his insolence. He defied the studio chiefs, engaged
in the most extreme pranks, reveled in his reputation as Hollywood's
supreme seducer—all of which enhanced his popularity. The Rake needs a
backdrop of convention—a stultified court, a humdrum marriage, a con-
servative culture—to shine, to be appreciated for the breath of fresh air he
provides. Never worry about going too far: the Rake's essence is that he
goes further than anyone else.
When the Earl of Rochester, seventeenth-century England's most no-
torious Rake and poet, abducted Elizabeth Malet, one of the most sought-
after young ladies of the court, he was duly punished. But lo and behold, a
few years later young Elizabeth, though wooed by the most eligible bache-
lors in the country, chose Rochester to be her husband. In demonstrating
his audacious desire, he made himself stand out from the crowd.
Related to the Rake's extremism is the sense of danger, taboo, perhaps
even the hint of cruelty about him. This was the appeal of another poet
Rake, one of the greatest in history: Lord Byron. Byron disliked any kind
of convention, and happily played this up. When he had an affair with his
half sister, who bore a child by him, he made sure that all of England knew
about it. He could be uncommonly cruel, as he was to his wife. But all of
this only made him that much more desirable. Danger and taboo appeal to
a repressed side in women, who are supposed to represent a civilizing, mor-
alizing force in culture. Just as a man may fall victim to the Siren through
his desire to be free of his sense of masculine responsibility, a woman may
succumb to the Rake through her yearning to be free of the constraints of
virtue and decency. Indeed it is often the most virtuous woman who falls
most deeply in love with the Rake.
Among the Rake's most seductive qualities is his ability to make women
want to reform him. How many thought they would be the one to tame
Lord Byron; how many of Picasso's women thought they would finally be
the one with whom he would spend the rest of his life. You must exploit
this tendency to the fullest. When caught red-handed in rakishness, fall
back on your weakness—your desire to change, and your inability to do so.
With so many women at your feet, what can you do? You are the one who
is the victim. You need help. Women will jump at this opportunity; they
are uncommonly indulgent of the Rake, for he is such a pleasant, dashing
figure. The desire to reform him disguises the true nature of their desire,
the secret thrill they get from him. When President Bill Clinton was clearly
caught out as a Rake, it was women who rushed to his defense, finding
every possible excuse for him. The fact that the Rake is so devoted to
women, in his own strange way, makes him lovable and seductive to them.
Finally, a Rake's greatest asset is his reputation. Never downplay your
bad name, or seem to apologize for it. Instead, embrace it, enhance it. It is
The Rake • 27
what draws women to you. There are several things you must be known
for: your irresistible attractiveness to women; your uncontrollable devotion
to pleasure (this will make you seem weak, but also exciting to be around);
your disdain for convention; a rebellious streak that makes you seem dan-
gerous. This last element can be slightly hidden; on the surface, be polite
and civil, while letting it be known that behind the scenes you are incorri-
gible. Duke de Richelieu made his conquests as public as possible, exciting
other women's competitive desire to join the club of the seduced. It was by
reputation that Lord Byron attracted his willing victims. A woman may feel
ambivalent about President Clinton's reputation, but beneath that ambiva-
lence is an underlying interest. Do not leave your reputation to chance or
gossip; it is your life's artwork, and you must craft it, hone it, and display it
with the care of an artist.
Symbol: 
Fire.
The Rake burns with a desire that
enflames the woman he is seducing. It is
extreme, uncontrollable, and dangerous. The Rake may
end in hell, but the flames surrounding him often make
him 
seem 
that 
much 
more 
desirable 
to 
women.
28 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
L
ike the Siren, the Rake faces the most danger from members of his
own sex, who are far less indulgent than women are of his constant
skirt chasing. In the old days, a Rake was often an aristocrat, and no matter
how many people he offended or even killed, in the end he would go un-
punished. Today, only stars and the very wealthy can play the Rake with
impunity; the rest of us need to be careful.
Elvis Presley had been a shy young man. Attaining early stardom, and
seeing the power it gave him over women, he went berserk, becoming a
Rake almost overnight. Like many Rakes, Elvis had a predilection for
women who were already taken. He found himself cornered by an angry
husband or boyfriend on numerous occasions, and came away with a few
cuts and bruises. This might seem to suggest that you should step lightly
around husbands and boyfriends, especially early on in your career. But the
charm of the Rake is that such dangers don't matter to them. You cannot
be a Rake by being fearful and prudent; the occasional pummeling is part
of the game. Later on, in any case, at the height of Elvis's fame, no husband
would dare touch him.
The greater danger for the Rake comes not from the violently offended
husband but from those insecure men who feel threatened by the Don Juan
figure. Although they will not admit it, they envy the Rake's life of plea-
sure, and like everyone envious, they will attack in hidden ways, often
masking their persecutions as morality. The Rake may find his career en-
dangered by such men (or by the occasional woman who is equally inse-
cure, and who feels hurt because the Rake does not want her). There is
little the Rake can do to avoid envy; if everyone was as successful in seduc-
tion, society would not function.
So accept envy as a badge of honor. Don't be naive, be aware. When
attacked by a moralist persecutor, do not be taken in by their crusade; it is
motivated by envy, pure and simple. You can blunt it by being less of a
Rake, asking forgiveness, claiming to have reformed, but this will damage
your reputation, making you seem less lovably rakish. In the end, it is better
to suffer attacks with dignity and keep on seducing. Seduction is the source
of your power; and you can always count on the infinite indulgence of
women.
Most
people have dreams in their
youth that get shattered or worn
down with age. They find themselves dis-
appointed by people, events, reality, which can-
not match their youthful ideals. Ideal Lovers thrive
on people's broken dreams, which become lifelong
fantasies. You long for romance? Adventure? Lofty
spiritual communion? The Ideal Lover reflects your
fantasy. He or she is an artist in creating the illu-
sion you require, idealizing your portrait. In a
world of disenchantment and 
baseness,
there is limitless seductive power in
following 
the path 
of the
Ideal Lover.
The Romantic Ideal
O
ne evening around 1760, at the opera in the city of Cologne, a beau-
tiful young woman sat in her box, watching the audience. Beside her
was her husband, the town burgomaster—a middle-aged man and amiable
enough, but dull. Through her opera glasses the young woman noticed a
handsome man wearing a stunning outfit. Evidently her stare was noticed,
for after the opera the man introduced himself: his name was Giovanni Gi-
acomo Casanova.
The stranger kissed the woman's hand. She was going to a ball the fol-
lowing night, she told him; would he like to come? "If I might dare to
hope, Madame," he replied, "that you will dance only with me."
The next night, after the ball, the woman could think only of Casanova.
He had seemed to anticipate her thoughts—had been so pleasant, and yet
so bold. A few days later he dined at her house, and after her husband had
retired for the evening she showed him around. In her boudoir she pointed
out a wing of the house, a chapel, just outside her window. Sure enough, as
if he had read her mind, Casanova came to the chapel the next day to at-
tend Mass, and seeing her at the theater that evening he mentioned to her
that he had noticed a door there that must lead to her bedroom. She
laughed, and pretended to be surprised. In the most innocent of tones, he
said that he would find a way to hide in the chapel the next day—and al-
most without thinking, she whispered she would visit him there after every-
one had gone to bed.
So Casanova hid in the chapel's tiny confessional, waiting all day and
evening. There were rats, and he had nothing to lie upon; yet when the
burgomaster's wife finally came, late at night, he did not complain, but qui-
etly followed her to her room. They continued their trysts for several days.
By day she could hardly wait for night: finally something to live for, an ad-
venture. She left him food, books, and candles to ease his long and tedious
stays in the chapel—it seemed wrong to use a place of worship for such a
purpose, but that only made the affair more exciting. A few days later,
however, she had to take a journey with her husband. By the time she got
back, Casanova had disappeared, as quickly and gracefully as he had come.
Some years later, in London, a young woman named Miss Pauline no-
ticed an ad in a local newspaper. A gentleman was looking for a lady lodger
to rent a part of his house. Miss Pauline came from Portugal, and was of
the nobility; she had eloped to London with a lover, but he had been
If at first sight a girl does
not make such a deep
impression on a person that
she awakens the ideal,
then ordinarily the
actuality is not especially
desirable; but if she does,
then no matter how
experienced a person is he
usually is rather
overwhelmed.
—SØREN 
KIERKEGAARD, THE
SEDUCER'S 
DIARY, 
TRANSLATED
BY HOWARD V. HONG AND
EDNA H. HONG
A good lover will behave as
elegantly at dawn as at any
other time. He drags
himself out of bed with a
look of dismay on his face.
The lady urges him on:
"Come, my friend, it's
getting light. You don't
want anyone to find you
here." He gives a deep
sigh, as if to say that the
night has not been nearly
long enough and that it is
agony to leave. Once up,
he does not instantly pull
on his trousers. Instead he
comes close to the lady and
whispers whatever was left
unsaid during the night.
Even when he is dressed,
he still lingers, vaguely
pretending to be fastening
31
32 
• The Art of Seduction
forced to return home and she had had to stay on alone for some while be-
fore she could join him. Now she was lonely, and had little money, and was
depressed by her squalid circumstances—after all, she had been raised as a
lady. She answered the ad.
The gentleman turned out to be Casanova, and what a gentleman he
was. The room he offered was nice, and the rent was low; he asked only for
occasional companionship. Miss Pauline moved in. They played chess, went
riding, discussed literature. He was so well-bred, polite, and generous. A se-
rious and high-minded girl, she came to depend on their friendship; here
was a man she could talk to for hours. Then one day Casanova seemed
changed, upset, excited: he confessed that he was in love with her. She was
going back to Portugal soon, to rejoin her lover, and this was not what she
wanted to hear. She told him he should go riding to calm down.
Later that evening she received news: he had fallen from his horse. Feel-
ing responsible for his accident, she rushed to him, found him in bed, and
fell into his arms, unable to control herself. The two became lovers that
night, and remained so for the rest of Miss Pauline's stay in London. Yet
when it came time for her to leave for Portugal, he did not try to stop her;
instead, he comforted her, reasoning that each of them had offered the
other the perfect, temporary antidote to their loneliness, and that they
would be friends for life.
Some years later, in a small Spanish town, a young and beautiful girl
named Ignazia was leaving church after confession. She was approached by
Casanova. Walking her home, he explained that he had a passion for danc-
ing the fandango, and invited her to a ball the following evening. He was so
different from anyone in the town, which bored her so—she desperately
wanted to go. Her parents were against the arrangement, but she persuaded
her mother to act as a chaperone. After an unforgettable evening of danc-
ing (and he danced the fandango remarkably well for a foreigner), Casa-
nova confessed that he was madly in love with her. She replied (very sadly,
though) that she already had a fiancé. Casanova did not force the issue, but
over the next few days he took Ignazia to more dances and to the bullfights.
On one of these occasions he introduced her to a friend of his, a duchess,
who flirted with him brazenly; Ignazia was terribly jealous. By now she was
desperately in love with Casanova, but her sense of duty and religion for-
bade such thoughts.
Finally, after days of torment, Ignazia sought out Casanova and took his
hand: "My confessor tried to make me promise to never be alone with you
again," she said, "and as I could not, he refused to give me absolution. It is
the first time in my life such a thing has happened to me. I have put myself
in God's hands. I have made up my mind, so long as you are here, to do all
you wish. When to my sorrow you leave Spain, I shall find another confes-
sor. My fancy for you is, after all, only a passing madness."
Casanova was perhaps the most successful seducer in history; few women
could resist him. His method was simple: on meeting a woman, he would
his sash. • Presently he
raises the lattice, and the
two lovers stand together by
the side door while he tells
her how he dreads the
coining day, which will
keep them apart; then he
slips away. The lady
watches him go, and this
moment of parting will
remain among her most
charming memories. •
Indeed, one's attachment to
a man depends largely on
the elegance of his leave-
taking. 
When he jumps
out of bed, scurries about
the room, tightly fastens
his trouser sash, rolls up
the sleeves of his court
cloak, overrobe, or hunting
costume, stuffs his
belongings into the breast
of his robe and then briskly
secures the outer sash—one
really begins to hate him.
—THE 
PILLOW 
BOOK OF SEI
SHONAGON, 
TRANSLATED 
AND
EDITED BY IVAN MORRIS
The Ideal Lover • 
33
study her, go along with her moods, find out what was missing in her life,
and provide it. He made himself the Ideal Lover. The bored burgomaster's
wife needed adventure and romance; she wanted someone who would sac-
rifice time and comfort to have her. For Miss Pauline what was missing was
friendship, lofty ideals, serious conversation; she wanted a man of breeding
and generosity who would treat her like a lady. For Ignazia, what was miss-
ing was suffering and torment. Her life was too easy; to feel truly alive, and
to have something real to confess, she needed to sin. In each case Casanova
adapted himself to the woman's ideals, brought her fantasy to life. Once she
had fallen under his spell, a little ruse or calculation would seal the romance
(a day among rats, a contrived fall from a horse, an encounter with another
woman to make Ignazia jealous).
The Ideal Lover is rare in the modern world, for the role takes effort.
You will have to focus intensely on the other person, fathom what she is
missing, what he is disappointed by. People will often reveal this in subtle
ways: through gesture, tone of voice, a look in the eye. By seeming to be
what they lack, you will fit their ideal.
To create this effect requires patience and attention to detail. Most
people are so wrapped up in their own desires, so impatient, they are inca-
pable of the Ideal Lover role. Let that be a source of infinite opportunity.
Be an oasis in the desert of the self-absorbed; few can resist the temptation
of following a person who seems so attuned to their desires, to bringing to
life their fantasies. And as with Casanova, your reputation as one who
gives such pleasure will precede you and make your seductions that much
The cultivation of the pleasures of the senses was ever my
principal aim in life. Knowing that I was personally calcu-
lated to please the fair sex, I always strove to make myself
agreeable to it.
—CASANOVA
The Beauty Ideal
I
n 1730, when Jeanne Poisson was a mere nine years old, a fortune-teller
predicted that one day she would be the mistress of Louis XV. The pre-
diction was quite ridiculous, since Jeanne came from the middle class, and
it was a tradition stretching back for centuries that the king's mistress be
chosen from among the nobility. To make matters worse, Jeanne's father
was a notorious rake, and her mother had been a courtesan.
Fortunately for Jeanne, one of her mother's lovers was a man of great
wealth who took a liking to the pretty girl and paid for her education.
Jeanne learned to sing, to play the clavichord, to ride with uncommon skill,
to act and dance; she was schooled in literature and history as if she were a
boy. The playwright Crébillon instructed her in the art of conversation.
During the early 1970s,
against a turbulent political
backdrop that included the
fiasco of American
involvement in the
Vietnam War and the
downfall of President
Richard 
Nixon's
presidency in the Watergate
scandal, a "me generation"
sprang 
to prominence—and
[Andy] Warhol was there
to hold up its mirror.
Unlike the radicalized
protesters of the 1960s
who wanted to change all
the ills of society, the self-
absorbed "me" people
sought to improve their
bodies and to "get in
touch" with their own
feelings. They cared
passionately about their
appearance, health, life-
style, and bank accounts.
Andy catered to their self-
centeredness and inflated
pride by offering his
services as a portraitist. By
the end of the decade, he
would be internationally
recognized as one of the
leading portraitists of his
era. . . . • Warhol offered
his clients an irresistible
product: a stylish and
flattering portrait by a
famous artist who was
himself a certified celebrity.
Conferring an alluring star
presence upon even the
most celebrated of faces, he
transformed his subjects
into glamorous 
apparitions,
presenting their faces as he
thought they wanted to be
seen and remembered. By
filtering his sitters' good
features through his
silkscreens and
exaggerating their vivacity,
he enabled them to gain
entree to a more mythic
and rarefied level of
existence. 
The possession
of great wealth and power
might do for everyday life,
but the commissioning of a
portrait by Warhol was a
34 
• 
The Art of Seduction
On top of it all, Jeanne was beautiful, and had a charm and grace that set
her apart early on. In 1741, she married a man of the lower nobility. Now
known as Madame d'Etioles, she could realize a great ambition: she opened
a literary salon. All of the great writers and philosophers of the time fre-
quented the salon, many because they were enamored of the hostess. One
of these was Voltaire, who became a lifelong friend.
Through all Jeanne's success, she never forgot the fortune-teller's pre-
diction, and still believed that she would one day conquer the king's heart.
It happened that one of her husband's country estates bordered on King
Louis's favorite hunting grounds. She would spy on him through the fence,
or find ways to cross his path, always while she happened to be wearing an
elegant, yet fetching outfit. Soon the king was sending her gifts of game.
When his official mistress died, in 1744, all of the court beauties vied to
take her place; but he began to spend more and more time with Madame
d'Etioles, dazzled by her beauty and charm. To the astonishment of the
court, that same year he made this middle-class woman his official mistress,
ennobling her with the title of the Marquise de Pompadour.
The king's need for novelty was notorious: a mistress would beguile
him with her looks, but he would soon grow bored with her and find
someone else. After the shock of his choice of Jeanne Poisson wore off, the
courtiers reassured themselves that it could not last—that he had only cho-
sen her for the novelty of having a middle-class mistress. Little did they
know that Jeanne s first seduction of the king was not the last seduction she
had in mind.
As time went by, the king found himself visiting his mistress more and
more often. As he ascended the hidden stair that led from his quarters to
hers in the palace of Versailles, anticipation of the delights that awaited him
at the top would begin to turn his head. First, the room was always warm,
and was filled with delightful scents. Then there were the visual delights:
Madame de Pompadour always wore a different costume, each one elegant
and surprising in its own way. She loved beautiful objects—fine porcelain,
Chinese fans, golden flowerpots—and every time he visited, there would
be something new and enchanting to see. Her manner was always light-
hearted; she was never defensive or resentful. Everything for pleasure. Then
there was their conversation: he had never been really able to talk with a
woman before, or to laugh, but the marquise could discourse skillfully on
any subject, and her voice was a pleasure to hear. And if the conversation
waned, she would move to the piano, play a tune, and sing wonderfully.
If ever the king seemed bored or sad, Madame de Pompadour would
propose some project—perhaps the building of a new country house. He
would have to advise in the design, the layout of the gardens, the decor.
Back at Versailles, Madame de Pompadour put hersell in charge of the
palace amusements, building a private theater for weekly performances un-
der her direction. Actors were chosen from among the courtiers, but the
female lead was always played by Madame de Pompadour, who was one of
the finest amateur actresses in France. The king became obsessed with this
sure indication that the
sitter intended to secure a
posthumous fame as 
well.
Warhol's portraits were not
so much realistic documents
of contemporary faces as
they were designer icons
awaiting future 
devotions.
—DAVID BOURDON, WARHOL
Women have served all
these centuries as looking
glasses possessing the magic
and delicious power of
reflecting the figure of a
man at twice its natural
size.
—VIRGINIA WOOLF, A ROOM
OF 
ONE'S 
OWN
The Ideal Lover • 
35
theater; he could barely wait for its performances. Along with this interest
came an increasing expenditure of money on the arts, and an involvement
in philosophy and literature. A man who had cared only for hunting and
gambling was spending less and less time with his male companions and be-
coming a great patron of the arts. Indeed he stamped a whole era with an
aesthetic style, which became known as "Louis Quinze," rivaling the style
associated with his illustrious predecessor, Louis XIV.
Lo and behold, year after year went by without Louis tiring of his mis-
tress. In fact he made her a duchess, and her power and influence extended
well beyond culture into politics. For twenty years, Madame de Pompadour
ruled both the court and the king's heart, until her untimely death, in
1764, at the age of forty-three.
Louis XV had a powerful inferiority complex. The successor to Louis XIV,
the most powerful king in French history, he had been educated and
trained for the throne—yet who could follow his predecessor's act? Eventu-
ally he gave up trying, devoting himself instead to physical pleasures, which
came to define how he was seen; the people around him knew they could
sway him by appealing to the basest parts of his character.
Madame de Pompadour, genius of seduction, understood that inside
Louis XV was a great man yearning to come out, and that his obsession
with pretty young women indicated a hunger for a more lasting kind of
beauty. Her first step was to cure his incessant bouts of boredom. It is easy
for kings to be bored—everything they want is given to them, and they sel-
dom learn to be satisfied with what they have. The Marquise de Pom-
padour dealt with this by bringing all sorts of fantasies to life, and creating
constant suspense. She had many skills and talents, and just as important,
she deployed them so artfully that he never discovered their limits. Once
she had accustomed him to more refined pleasures, she appealed to the
crushed ideals within him; in the mirror she held up to him, he saw his as-
piration to be great, a desire that, in France, inevitably included leadership
in culture. His previous series of mistresses had tickled only his sensual de-
sires. In Madame de Pompadour he found a woman who made him feel
greatness in himself. The other mistresses could easily be replaced, but he
could never find another Madame de Pompadour.
Most people believe themselves to be inwardly greater than they out-
wardly appear to the world. They are full of unrealized ideals: they could
be artists, thinkers, leaders, spiritual figures, but the world has crushed
them, denied them the chance to let their abilities flourish. This is the key
to their seduction—and to keeping them seduced over time. The Ideal
Lover knows how to conjure up this kind of magic. Appeal only to people's
physical side, as many amateur seducers do, and they will resent you for
playing upon their basest instincts. But appeal to their better selves, to a
higher standard of beauty, and they will hardly notice that they have been
seduced. Make them feel elevated, lofty, spiritual, and your power over
them will be limitless.
36 
• The Art of Seduction
Love brings to light a lover's noble and hidden qualities—
his rare and exceptional traits: it is thus liable to be decep-
tive as to his normal character.
—FRIEDRICH 
NIETZSCHE
Keys to the Character
E
ach of us carries inside us an ideal, either of what we would like to be-
come, or of what we want another person to be for us. This ideal goes
back to our earliest years—to what we once felt was missing in our lives,
what others did not give to us, what we could not give to ourselves. Maybe
we were smothered in comfort, and we long for danger and rebellion. If we
want danger but it frightens us, perhaps we look for someone who seems at
home with it. Or perhaps our ideal is more elevated—we want to be more
creative, nobler, and kinder than we ever manage to be. Our ideal is some-
thing we feel is missing inside us.
Our ideal may be buried in disappointment, but it lurks underneath,
waiting to be sparked. If another person seems to have that ideal quality, or
to have the ability to bring it out in us, we fall in love. That is the response
to Ideal Lovers. Attuned to what is missing inside you, to the fantasy that
will stir you, they reflect your ideal—and you do the rest, projecting on to
them your deepest desires and yearnings. Casanova and Madame de Pom-
padour did not merely seduce their targets into a sexual affair, they made
them fall in love.
The key to following the path of the Ideal Lover is the ability to ob-
serve. Ignore your targets' words and conscious behavior; focus on the tone
of their voice, a blush here, a look there—those signs that betray what
their words won't say. Often the ideal is expressed in contradiction. King
Louis XV seemed to care only about chasing deer and young girls, but that
in fact covered up his disappointment in himself; he yearned to have his no-
bler qualities flattered.
Never has there been a better moment than now to play the Ideal
Lover. That is because we live in a world in which everything must seem
elevated and well-intentioned. Power is the most taboo topic of all: al-
though it is the reality we deal with every day in our struggles with people,
there is nothing noble, self-sacrificing, or spiritual about it. Ideal Lovers
make you feel nobler, make the sensual and sexual seem spiritual and aes-
thetic. Like all seducers, they play with power, but they disguise their ma-
nipulations behind the facade of an ideal. Few people see through them
and their seductions last longer.
Some ideals resemble Jungian archetypes—they go back a long way
in our culture, and their hold is almost unconscious. One such dream is
that of the chivalrous knight. In the courtly love tradition of the Middle
Ages, a troubadour/knight would find a lady, almost always a married one,
The Ideal Lover • 37
and would serve as her vassal. He would go through terrible trials on her
behalf, undertake dangerous pilgrimages in her name, suffer awful tortures
to prove his love. (This could include bodily mutilation, such as tearing off
of fingernails, the cutting of an ear, etc.) He would also write poems and
sing beautiful songs to her, for no troubadour could succeed without some
kind of aesthetic or spiritual quality to impress his lady. The key to the ar-
chetype is a sense of absolute devotion. A man who will not let matters of
warfare, glory, or money intrude into the fantasy of courtship has limitless
power. The troubadour role is an ideal because people who do not put
themselves and their own interests first are truly rare. For a woman to at-
tract the intense attention of such a man is immensely appealing to her
vanity.
In eighteenth-century Osaka, a man named Nisan took the courtesan
Dewa out walking, first taking care to sprinkle the clover bushes along the
path with water, which looked like morning dew. Dewa was greatly moved
by this beautiful sight. "I have heard," she said, "that loving couples of deer
are wont to lie behind clover bushes. How I should like to see this in real
life!" Nisan had heard enough. That very day he had a section of her house
torn down and ordered the planting of dozens of clover bushes in what had
once been a part of her bedroom. That night, he arranged for peasants to
round up wild deer from the mountains and bring them to the house. The
next day Dewa awoke to precisely the scene she had described. Once she
appeared overwhelmed and moved, he had the clover and deer taken away
and the house rebuilt.
One of history's most gallant lovers, Sergei Saltykov, had the misfortune
to fall in love with one of history's least available women: the Grand Duchess
Catherine, future empress of Russia. Catherine's every move was watched
over by her husband, Peter, who suspected her of trying to cheat on him
and appointed servants to keep an eye on her. She was isolated, unloved,
and unable to do anything about it. Saltykov, a handsome young army offi-
cer, was determined to be her rescuer. In 1752 he befriended Peter, and
also the couple in charge of watching over Catherine. In this way he was
able to see her and occasionally exchange a word or two with her that re-
vealed his intentions. He performed the most foolhardy and dangerous ma-
neuvers to be able to see her alone, including diverting her horse during a
royal hunt and riding off into the forest with her. He told her how much
he sympathized with her plight, and that he would do anything to help her.
To be caught courting Catherine would have meant death, and eventu-
ally Peter came to suspect that something was up between his wife and
Saltykov, though he was never sure. His enmity did not discourage the
dashing officer, who just put still more energy and ingenuity into finding
ways to arrange secret trysts. The couple were lovers for two years, and
Saltykov was undoubtedly the father of Catherine's son Paul, later the em-
peror of Russia. When Peter finally got rid of him by sending him off to
Sweden, news of his gallantry traveled ahead of him, and women swooned
38 
• 
The Art of Seduction
to be his next conquest. You may not have to go to as much trouble or risk,
but you will always be rewarded for actions that reveal a sense of self-
sacrifice or devotion.
The embodiment of the Ideal Lover for the 1920s was Rudolph Valen-
tino, or at least the image created of him in film. Everything he did—the
gifts, the flowers, the dancing, the way he took a woman's hand—showed a
scrupulous attention to the details that would signify how much he was
thinking of her. The image was of a man who made courtship take time,
transforming it into an aesthetic experience. Men hated Valentino, because
women now expected them to match the ideal of patience and attentive-
ness that he represented. Yet nothing is more seductive than patient atten-
tiveness. It makes the affair seem lofty, aesthetic, not really about sex. The
power of a Valentino, particularly nowadays, is that people like this are so
rare. The art of playing to a woman's ideal has almost disappeared—which
only makes it that much more alluring.
If the chivalrous lover remains the ideal for women, men often idealize
the Madonna/whore, a woman who combines sensuality with an air of
spirituality or innocence. Think of the great courtesans of the Italian Re-
naissance, such as Tullia d'Aragona—essentially a prostitute, like all courte-
sans, but able to disguise her social role by establishing a reputation as a poet
and philosopher. Tullia was what was then known as an "honest courtesan."
Honest courtesans would go to church, but they had an ulterior motive: for
men, their presence at Mass was exciting. Their houses were pleasure
palaces, but what made these homes so visually delightful was their art-
works and shelves full of books, volumes of Petrarch and Dante. For the
man, the thrill, the fantasy, was to sleep with a woman who was sexual yet
had the ideal qualities of a mother and the spirit and intellect of an artist.
Where the pure prostitute excited desire but also disgust, the honest cour-
tesan made sex seem elevated and innocent, as if it were happening in the
Garden of Eden. Such women held immense power over men. To this day
they remain an ideal, if for no other reason than that they offer such a range
of pleasures. The key is ambiguity—to combine the appearance of sensi-
tivity to the pleasures of the flesh with an air of innocence, spirituality, a
poetic sensibility. This mix of the high and the low is immensely seductive.
The dynamics of the Ideal Lover have limitless possibilities, not all of
them erotic. In politics, Talleyrand essentially played the role of the Ideal
Lover with Napoleon, whose ideal in both a cabinet minister and a friend
was a man who was aristocratic, smooth with the ladies—all the things that
Napoleon himself was not. In 1798, when Talleyrand was the French for-
eign minister, he hosted a party in Napoleon's honor after the great gen-
eral's dazzling military victories in Italy. To the day Napoleon died, he
remembered this party as the best he had ever attended. It was a lavish af-
fair, and Talleyrand wove a subtle message into it by placing Roman busts
around the house, and by talking to Napoleon of reviving the imperial glo-
ries of ancient Rome. This sparked a glint in the leader's eye, and indeed, a
few years later, Napoleon gave himself the title of emperor—a move that
The Ideal Lover • 
39
only made Talleyrand more powerful. The key to Talleyrand's power was
his ability to fathom Napoleon's secret ideal: his desire to be an emperor, a
dictator. Talleyrand simply held up a mirror to Napoleon and let him
glimpse that possibility. People are always vulnerable to insinuations like
this, which stroke their vanity, almost everyone's weak spot. Hint at some-
thing for them to aspire to, reveal your faith in some untapped potential
you see in them, and you will soon have them eating out of your hand.
If Ideal Lovers are masters at seducing people by appealing to their
higher selves, to something lost from their childhood, politicians can bene-
fit by applying this skill on a mass scale, to an entire electorate. This was
what John F. Kennedy quite deliberately did with the American public,
most obviously in creating the "Camelot" aura around himself. The word
"Camelot" was applied to his presidency only after his death, but the ro-
mance he consciously projected through his youth and good looks was fully
functioning during his lifetime. More subtly, he also played with America's
images of its own greatness and lost ideals. Many Americans felt that with
the wealth and comfort of the late 1950s had come great losses; ease and
conformity had buried the country's pioneer spirit. Kennedy appealed to
those lost ideals through the imagery of the New Frontier, which was ex-
emplified by the space race. The American instinct for adventure could
find outlets here, even if most of them were symbolic. And there were
other calls for public service, such as the creation of the Peace Corps.
Through appeals like these, Kennedy resparked the uniting sense of mission
that had gone missing in America during the years since World War II. He
also attracted to himself a more emotional response than presidents com-
monly got. People literally fell in love with him and the image.
Politicians can gain seductive power by digging into a country's past,
bringing images and ideals that have been abandoned or repressed back to
the surface. They only need the symbol; they do not really have to worry
about re-creating the reality behind it. The good feelings they stir up are
enough to ensure a positive response.
Symbol: The
Portrait Painter. Under his eye, all of
your physical imperfections disappear. He brings
out noble qualities in you, frames you in a myth, makes
you godlike, immortalizes you. For his ability to create
such fantasies, 
he 
is 
rewarded 
with great power.
40 
• 
The Art of Seduction
Dangers
T
he main dangers in the role of the Ideal Lover are the consequences
that arise if you let reality creep in. You are creating a fantasy that in-
volves an idealization of your own character. And this is a precarious task,
for you are human, and imperfect. If your faults are ugly enough, or intru-
sive enough, they will burst the bubble you have blown, and your target
will revile you. Whenever Tullia d'Aragona was caught acting like a com-
mon prostitute (when, for instance, she was caught having an affair just for
money), she would have to leave town and establish herself elsewhere. The
fantasy of her as a spiritual figure was broken. Casanova too faced this dan-
ger, but was usually able to surmount it by finding a clever way to break off
the relationship before the woman realized that he was not what she had
imagined: he would find some excuse to leave town, or, better still, he
would choose a victim who was herself leaving town soon, and whose
awareness that the affair would be short-lived would make her idealizing of
him all the more intense. Reality and long intimate exposure have a way of
dulling a person's perfection. The nineteenth-century poet Alfred de Mus-
set was seduced by the writer George Sand, whose larger-than-life charac-
ter appealed to his romantic nature. But when the couple visited Venice
together, and Sand came down with dysentery, she was suddenly no longer
an idealized figure but a woman with an unappealing physical problem. De
Musset himself showed a whiny, babyish side on this trip, and the lovers
separated. Once apart, however, they were able to idealize each other again,
and reunited a few months later. When reality intrudes, distance is often a
solution.
In politics the dangers are similar. Years after Kennedy's death, a string
of revelations (his incessant sexual affairs, his excessively dangerous
brinkmanship style of diplomacy, etc.) belied the myth he had created. His
image has survived this tarnishing; poll after poll shows that he is still
revered. Kennedy is a special case, perhaps, in that his assassination made
him a martyr, reinforcing the process of idealization that he had already set
in motion. But he is not the only example of an Ideal Lover whose attrac-
tion survives unpleasant revelations; these figures unleash such powerful
fantasies, and there is such a hunger for the myths and ideals they have to
sell, that they are often quickly forgiven. Still, it is always wise to be pru-
dent, and to keep people from glimpsing the less-than-ideal side of your
character.
Most
of us feel trapped within the
limited roles that the world expects us to
play. We are instantly attracted to those who are
more fluid, more ambiguous, than we are—those who
create their own persona. Dandies excite us because they can-
not be categorized, and hint at a freedom we want for ourselves.
They play with masculinity and femininity; they fashion their
own physical image, which is always startling; they are mysteri-
ous and elusive. They also appeal to the narcissism of each
sex: to a woman they are psychologically female, to a man
they are male. Dandies fascinate and seduce in large
numbers. Use the power of the Dandy to create
an ambiguous, alluring presence that
stirs repressed desires.
The Feminine Dandy
W
hen the eighteen-year-old Rodolpho Guglielmi emigrated from
Italy to the United States in 1913, he came with no particular skills
apart from his good looks and his dancing prowess. To put these qualities to
advantage, he found work in the thes dansants, the Manhattan dance halls
where young girls would go alone or with friends and hire a taxi dancer for
a brief thrill. The taxi dancer would expertly twirl them around the dance
floor, flirting and chatting, all for a small fee. Guglielmi soon made a name
as one of the best—so graceful, poised, and pretty.
In working as a taxi dancer, Guglielmi spent a great deal of time around
women. He quickly learned what pleased them—how to mirror them in
subtle ways, how to put them at ease (but not too much). He began to pay
attention to his clothes, creating his own dapper look: he danced with a
corset under his shirt to give himself a trim figure, sported a wristwatch
(considered effeminate in those days), and claimed to be a marquis. In 1915,
he landed a job demonstrating the tango in fancy restaurants, and changed
his name to the more evocative Rodolpho di Valentina. A year later he
moved to Los Angeles: he wanted to try to make it in Hollywood.
Now known as Rudolph Valentino, Guglielmi appeared as an extra in
several low-budget pictures. He eventually landed a somewhat larger role in
the 1919 film Eyes of Youth, in which he played a seducer, and caught
women's attention by how different a seducer he was: his movements were
graceful and delicate, his skin so smooth and his face so pretty that when
he swooped down on his victim and drowned her protests with a kiss, he
seemed more thrilling than sinister. Next came The Four Horsemen of the
Apocalypse, in which Valentino played the male lead, Julio the playboy, and
became an overnight sex symbol through a tango sequence in which he se-
duced a young woman by leading her through the dance. The scene encap-
sulated the essence of his appeal: his feet smooth and fluid, his poise almost
feminine, combined with an air of control. Female members of the audi-
ence literally swooned as he raised a married woman's hands to his lips, or
shared the fragrance of a rose with his lover. He seemed so much more at-
tentive to women than other men did; but mixed in with this delicacy was
a hint of cruelty and menace that drove women wild.
In his most famous film, The Sheik, Valentino played an Arab prince
(later revealed to be a Scottish lord abandoned in the Sahara as a baby) who
rescues a proud English lady in the desert, then conquers her in a manner
Once a son was born to
Mercury and the goddess
Venus, and he was brought
up by the naiads in Ida's
caves. In his features, it
was easy to trace
resemblance to his father
and to his mother. He was
called after them, too, for
his name was
Hermaphroditus. 
As soon
as he was fifteen, he left
his native hills, and Ida
where he had been brought
up, and for the sheer joy of
travelling visited remote
places. . . .He went as far
as the cities of Lycia, and
on to the Carians, who
dwell nearby. In this region
he spied a pool of water, so
clear that he could see right
to the bottom. . . . The
water was like crystal, and
the edges of the pool were
ringed with fresh turf and
grass that was always
green. A nymph
[Salmacis] dwelt
there. . . . Often she would
gather flowers, and it so
happened that she was
engaged in this pastime
when she caught sight of
the boy, Hermaphroditus.
As soon as she had seen
him, she longed to possess
him. . . .She addressed
him: "Fair boy, you surely
deserve to be thought a
43
44 • The Art of Seduction
that borders on rape. When she asks, "Why have you brought me here?,"
he replies, "Are you not woman enough to know?" Yet she ends up falling
in love with him, as indeed women did in movie audiences all over the
world, thrilling at his strange blend of the feminine and the masculine. In
one scene in The Sheik, the English lady points a gun at Valentino; his re-
sponse is to point a delicate cigarette holder back at her. She wears pants;
he wears long flowing robes and abundant eye makeup. Later films would
include scenes of Valentino dressing and undressing, a kind of striptease
showing glimpses of his trim body. In almost all of his films he played some
exotic period character—a Spanish bullfighter, an Indian rajah, an Arab
sheik, a French nobleman—and he seemed to delight in dressing up in jew-
els and tight uniforms.
In the 1920s, women were beginning to play with a new sexual free-
dom. Instead of waiting for a man to be interested in them, they wanted to
be able to initiate the affair, but they still wanted the man to end up sweep-
ing them off their feet. Valentino understood this perfectly. His off-screen
life corresponded to his movie image: he wore bracelets on his arm, dressed
impeccably, and reportedly was cruel to his wife, and hit her. (His adoring
public carefully ignored his two failed marriages and his apparently nonex-
istent sex life.) When he suddenly died—in New York in August 1926, at
the age of thirty-one, from complications after surgery for an ulcer—the
response was unprecedented: more than 100,000 people filed by his coffin,
many female mourners became hysterical, and the whole nation was spell-
bound. Nothing like this had happened before for a mere actor.
There is a film of Valentino's, Monsieur Beaucaire, in which he plays a total
fop, a much more effeminate role than he normally played, and without his
usual hint of dangerousness. The film was a flop. Women did not respond
to Valentino as a swish. They were thrilled by the ambiguity of a man who
shared many of their own feminine traits, yet remained a man. Valentino
dressed and played with his physicality like a woman, but his image was
masculine. He wooed as a woman would woo if she were a man—slowly,
attentively, paying attention to details, setting a rhythm instead of hurrying
to a conclusion. Yet when the time came for boldness and conquest, his
timing was impeccable, overwhelming his victim and giving her no chance
to protest. In his movies, Valentino practiced the same gigolo's art of leading
a woman on that he had mastered as a teenager on the dance floor—
chatting, flirting, pleasing, but always in control.
Valentino remains an enigma to this day. His private life and his charac-
ter are wrapped in mystery; his image continues to seduce as it did during
his lifetime. He served as the model for Elvis Presley, who was obsessed
with this star of the silents, and also for the modern male dandy who plays
with gender but retains an edge of danger and cruelty.
Seduction was and will always remain the female form of power and
warfare. It was originally the antidote to rape and violence. The man who
uses this form of power on a woman is in essence turning the game around,
god. If you are, perhaps
you may be Cupid? . . . If
there is such a girl [engaged
to you], let me enjoy your
love in secret: but if there is
not, then I pray that I may
be your bride, and that we
may enter upon marriage
together." The naiad said
no more; but a blush
stained the boy's cheeks, for
he did not know what love
was. Even blushing became
him: his cheeks were the
colour of ripe apples,
hanging in a sunny orchard,
like painted ivory or like
the moon when, in eclipse,
she shows a reddish hue
beneath her brightness. . . .
Incessantly the nymph
demanded at least sisterly
kisses, and tried to put her
arms round his ivory neck.
"Will you stop!" he cried,
"or I shall run away and
leave this place and you!"
Salmacis was afraid: "1
yield the spot to you,
stranger, I shall not
intrude," she said; and,
turning from him, pretended
to go away. . . . The boy,
meanwhile, thinking
himself unobserved and
alone, strolled this way and
that on the grassy sward,
and dipped his toes in the
lapping water—then his
feet, up to the ankles.
Then, tempted by the
enticing coolness of the
waters, he quickly stripped
his young body of its soft
garments. At the sight,
Salmacis was spell-bound.
She was on fire with
passion to possess his
naked beauty, and her very
eyes flamed with a
brilliance like that of the
dazzling sun, when his
bright disc is reflected in a
mirror. . . . She longed to
embrace him then, and
with difficulty restrained
her frenzy.
Hermaphroditus, clapping
his hollow palms against
The Dandy 
• 
45
employing feminine weapons against her; without losing his masculine
identity, the more subtly feminine he becomes the more effective the se-
duction. Do not be one of those who believe that what is most seductive is
being devastatingly masculine. The Feminine Dandy has a much more sin-
ister effect. He lures the woman in with exactly what she wants—a familiar,
pleasing, graceful presence. Mirroring feminine psychology, he displays at-
tention to his appearance, sensitivity to detail, a slight coquettishness—but
also a hint of male cruelty. Women are narcissists, in love with the charms
of their own sex. By showing them feminine charm, a man can mesmerize
and disarm them, leaving them vulnerable to a bold, masculine move.
The Feminine Dandy can seduce on a mass scale. No single woman
really possesses him—he is too elusive—but all can fantasize about doing so.
The key is ambiguity: your sexuality is decidedly heterosexual, but your
body and psychology float delightfully back and forth between the two
poles.
I am a woman. Every artist is a woman and should have a
taste for other women. Artists who are homosexual cannot
be true artists because they like men, and since they them-
selves are women they are reverting to normality.
—PABLO PICASSO
The Masculine Dandy
I
n the 1870s, Pastor Henrik Gillot was the darling of the St. Petersburg
intelligentsia. He was young, handsome, well-read in philosophy and lit-
erature, and he preached a kind of enlightened Christianity. Dozens of
young girls had crushes on him and would flock to his sermons just to look
at him. In 1878, however, he met a girl who changed his life. Her name
was Lou von Salomé (later known as Lou Andreas-Salomé), and she was
seventeen; he was forty-two.
Salomé was pretty, with radiant blue eyes. She had read a lot, particu-
larly for a girl her age, and was interested in the gravest philosophical and
religious issues. Her intensity, her intelligence, her responsiveness to ideas
cast a spell over Gillot. When she entered his office for her increasingly fre-
quent discussions with him, the place seemed brighter and more alive. Per-
haps she was flirting with him, in the unconscious manner of a young
girl—yet when Gillot admitted to himself that he was in love with her, and
proposed marriage, Salomé was horrified. The confused pastor never quite
got over Lou von Salomé, becoming the first of a long string of famous
men to be the victim of a lifelong unfulfilled infatuation with her.
In 1882, the German philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche was wandering
around Italy alone. In Genoa he received a letter from his friend Paul Rée,
a Prussian philosopher whom he admired, recounting his discussions with a
remarkable young Russian woman, Lou von Salomé, in Rome. Salomé was
his body, dived quickly into
the stream. As he raised
first one arm and then the
other, his body gleamed in
the clear water, as if
someone had encased
anivory statue or white
lilies in transparent glass.
"I have won! He is
mine!" cried the nymph,
and flinging aside her
garments, plunged into the
heart of the pool. The boy
fought against her, but she
held him, and snatched
kisses as he struggled,
placing her hands beneath
him, stroking
his unwilling breast, and
clinging to him, now on
this side, and now on that.
• Finally, in spite of ail his
efforts to slip from her
grasp, she twined around
him, like a serpent when it
is being carried off into the
air by the king of birds: for,
as it hangs from the eagle's
beak, the snake coils round
his head and talons and
with its tail hampers his
beating wings. . . ."You
may fight, you rogue, but
you will not escape. May
the gods grant me this, may
no time to come ever
separate him from me, or
me from him!" Her prayers
found favour with the gods:
for, as they lay together,
their bodies were united
and from being two persons
they became one. As when
a gardener grafts a branch
on to a tree, and sees the
two unite as they grow,
and come to maturity
together, so when their
limbs met in that clinging
embrace the nymph and the
boy were no longer two, but
a single form, possessed of
a dual nature, which could
not be called male or
female, but seemed to be at
once both and neither.
— O V I D , M E T A M O R P H O S E S ,
TRANSLATED BY MARY M. INNES
46 
• 
The Art of Seduction
there on holiday with her mother; Rée had managed to accompany her on
long walks through the city, unchaperoned, and they had had many conver-
sations. Her ideas on God and Christianity were quite similar to Nietz-
sche's, and when Rée had told her that the famous philosopher was a friend
of his, she had insisted that he invite Nietzsche to join them. In subsequent
letters Ree described how mysteriously captivating Salomé was, and how
anxious she was to meet Nietzsche. The philosopher soon went to Rome.
When Nietzsche finally met Salomé, he was overwhelmed. She had the
most beautiful eyes he had ever seen, and during their first long talk those
eyes lit up so intensely that he could not help feeling there was something
erotic about her excitement. Yet he was also confused: Salomé kept her dis-
tance, and did not respond to his compliments. What a devilish young
woman. A few days later she read him a poem of hers, and he cried; her
ideas about life were so like his own. Deciding to seize the moment, Nietz-
sche proposed marriage. (He did not know that Ree had done so as well.)
Salomé declined. She was interested in philosophy, life, adventure, not mar-
riage. Undaunted, Nietzsche continued to court her. On an excursion to
Lake Orta with Rée, Salomé, and her mother, he managed to get the girl
alone, accompanying her on a walk up Monte Sacro while the others stayed
behind. Apparently the views and Nietzsche's words had the proper pas-
sionate effect; in a later letter to her, he described this walk as "the most
beautiful dream of my life." Now he was a man possessed: all he could
think about was marrying Salomé and having her all to himself.
A few months later Salomé visited Nietzsche in Germany. They took
long walks together, and stayed up all night discussing philosophy. She mir-
rored his deepest thoughts, anticipated his ideas about religion. Yet when
he again proposed marriage, she scolded him as conventional: it was Nietz-
sche, after all, who had developed a philosophical defense of the superman,
the man above everyday morality, yet Salomé was by nature far less conven-
tional than he was. Her firm, uncompromising manner only deepened the
spell she cast over him, as did her hint of cruelty When she finally left him,
making it clear that she had no intention of marrying him, Nietzsche was
devastated. As an antidote to his pain, he wrote Thus Spake Zarathustra, a
book full of sublimated eroticism and deeply inspired by his talks with her.
From then on Salomé was known throughout Europe as the woman who
had broken Nietzsche's heart.
Salomé moved to Berlin. Soon the city's greatest intellectuals were
falling under the spell of her independence and free spirit. The playwrights
Gerhart Hauptmann and Franz Wedekind became infatuated with her; in
1897, the great Austrian poet Rainer Maria Rilke fell in love with her. By
that time her reputation was widely known, and she was a published novel-
ist. This certainly played a part in seducing Rilke, but he was also attracted
by a kind of masculine energy he found in her that he had never seen in a
woman. Rilke was then twenty-two, Salomé thirty-six. He wrote her love
letters and poems, followed her everywhere, and began an affair with her
that was to last several years. She corrected his poetry, imposed discipline
Dandyism is not even, as
many unthinking people
seem to suppose, an
immoderate interest in
personal appearance and
material elegance. For the
true dandy these things are
only a symbol oj the
aristocratic superiority of his
personality. . . . • What,
then, is this ruling passion
that has turned into a creed
and created its own skilled
tyrants? What is this
unwritten constitution that
has created so haughty a
caste? It is, above all, a
burning need to acquire
originality, within the
apparent bounds of
convention. It is a sort of
cult of oneself, which can
dispense even with what are
commonly called illusions. It
is the delight in causing
astonishment, 
and the
proud satisfaction of
never oneself being
astonished. . . .
—CHARLES BAUDELAIRE, THE
DANDY, QUOTED IN VICE: AN
ANTHOLOGY, 
EDITED 
BY
RICHARD DAVENPORT-HINES
In the midst of this display
of 
statesmanship,
eloquence, cleverness, and
exalted 
ambition,
Alcibiades lived a life of
prodigious 
luxury,
drunkenness, 
debauchery,
and insolence. He was
effeminate in his dress and
would walk through the
market-place trailing his
long purple robes, and he
spent extravagantly. 
He
had the decks of his
triremes cut away to allow
him to sleep more
comfortably, and his
bedding was slung on cords,
rather than spread on the
hard planks. He had a
golden shield made for
him, which was
emblazoned not with any
The Dandy 
• 
41
on his overly romantic verse, inspired ideas for new poems. But she was put
off by his childish dependence on her, his weakness. Unable to stand weak-
ness of any kind, she eventually left him. Consumed by her memory, Rilke
long continued to pursue her. In 1926, lying on his deathbed, he begged
his doctors, "Ask Lou what is wrong with me. She is the only one who
knows."
One man wrote of Salomé, "There was something terrifying about her
embrace. Looking at you with her radiant blue eyes, she would say, 'The
reception of the semen is for me the height of ecstasy.' And she had an in-
satiable appetite for it. She was completely amoral . . . a vampire." The
Swedish psychotherapist Poul Bjerre, one of her later conquests, wrote, "I
think Nietzsche was right when he said that Lou was a thoroughly evil
woman. Evil however in the Goethean sense: evil that produces good. . . .
She may have destroyed lives and marriages but her presence was exciting."
The two emotions that almost every male felt in the presence of Lou
Andreas-Salomé were confusion and excitement—the two prerequisite
feelings for any successful seduction. People were intoxicated by her strange
mix of the masculine and the feminine; she was beautiful, with a radiant
smile and a graceful, flirtatious manner, but her independence and her in-
tensely analytical nature made her seem oddly male. This ambiguity was
expressed in her eyes, which were both coquettish and probing. It was con-
fusion that kept men interested and curious: no other woman was like this.
They wanted to know more. The excitement stemmed from her ability to
stir up repressed desires. She was a complete nonconformist, and to be in-
volved with her was to break all kinds of taboos. Her masculinity made the
relationship seem vaguely homosexual; her slightly cruel, slightly domi-
neering streak could stir up masochistic yearnings, as it did in Nietzsche.
Salomé radiated a forbidden sexuality. Her powerful effect on men—the
lifelong infatuations, the suicides (there were several), the periods of intense
creativity, the descriptions of her as a vampire or a devil—attest to the ob-
scure depths of the psyche that she was able to reach and disturb.
The Masculine Dandy succeeds by reversing the normal pattern of
male superiority in matters of love and seduction. A man's apparent inde-
pendence, his capacity for detachment, often seems to give him the upper
hand in the dynamic between men and women. A purely feminine woman
will arouse desire, but is always vulnerable to the man's capricious loss of
interest; a purely masculine woman, on the other hand, will not arouse that
interest at all. Follow the path of the Masculine Dandy, however, and you
neutralize all a man's powers. Never give completely of yourself; while you
are passionate and sexual, always retain an air of independence and self-
possession. You might move on to the next man, or so he will think. You
have other, more important matters to concern yourself with, such as your
work. Men do not know how to fight women who use their own weapons
against them; they are intrigued, aroused, and disarmed. Few men can resist
the taboo pleasures offered up to them by the Masculine Dandy.
ancestral device, but with
the figure of Eros armed
with a thunderbolt. The
leading men of Athens
watched all this with
disgust and indignation
and they were deeply
disturbed by his
contemptuous and lawless
behaviour, which seemed to
them monstrous and
suggested the habits of a
tyrant. The people's feelings
towards him have been very
aptly expressed by
Aristophanes in the line:
"They long for him, they
hate him, they cannot do
without him. . . ." • The
fact was that his voluntary
donations, the public shows
he supported, his unrivalled
munificence to the state, the
fame of his ancestry, the
power of his oratory and
his physical strength and
beauty . . . all combined to
make the Athenians forgive
him everything else, and
they were constantly finding
euphemisms for his lapses
and putting them down to
youthful high spirits
and honourable 
ambition.
—PLUTARCH,"THE LIFE OF
ALCIBIADES," 
THE 
RISE AND
FALL OF 
ATHENS: 
NINE 
GREEK
LIVES, TRANSLATED BY IAN
SCOTT-KILVERT
Further light—a whole
flood of it—is thrown
upon this attraction of
the male in petticoats for
the female, in the diary
of the Abbé de Choisy, one
of the most brilliant men-
women of history, of whom
we shall hear a great deal
more later. The abbé, a
churchman of Paris, was a
constant masquerader in
female attire. He lived in
the days of Louis XIV, and
was a great friend of Louis'
brother, also addicted to
women's clothes. A young
48 
• The Art of Seduction
The seduction emanating from a person of uncertain or dis-
simulated sex is powerful.
—COLETTE
Keys to the Character
M
any of us today imagine that sexual freedom has progressed in recent
years—that everything has changed, for better or worse. This is
mostly an illusion; a reading of history reveals periods of licentiousness
(imperial Rome, late-seventeenth-century England, the "floating world" of
eighteenth-century Japan) far in excess of what we are currently experi-
encing. Gender roles are certainly changing, but they have changed before.
Society is in a state of constant flux, but there is something that does not
change: the vast majority of people conform to whatever is normal for the
time. They play the role allotted to them. Conformity is a constant because
humans are social creatures who are always imitating one another. At cer-
tain points in history it may be fashionable to be different and rebellious,
but if a lot of people are playing that role, there is nothing different or re-
bellious about it.
We should never complain about most people's slavish conformity,
however, for it offers untold possibilities of power and seduction to those
who are up for a few risks. Dandies have existed in all ages and cultures (Al-
cibiades in ancient Greece, Korechika in late-tenth-century Japan), and
wherever they have gone they have thrived on the conformist role playing
of others. The Dandy displays a true and radical difference from other peo-
ple, a difference of appearance and manner. Since most of us are secretly
oppressed by our lack of freedom, we are drawn to those who are more
fluid and flaunt their difference.
Dandies seduce socially as well as sexually; groups form around them,
their style is wildly imitated, an entire court or crowd will fall in love
with them. In adapting the Dandy character for your own purposes, re-
member that the Dandy is by nature a rare and beautiful flower. Be differ-
ent in ways that are both striking and aesthetic, never vulgar; poke fun at
current trends and styles, go in a novel direction, and be supremely uninter-
ested in what anyone else is doing. Most people are insecure; they will
wonder what you are up to, and slowly they will come to admire and imi-
tate you, because you express yourself with total confidence.
The Dandy has traditionally been defined by clothing, and certainly
most Dandies create a unique visual style. Beau Brummel, the most famous
Dandy of all, would spend hours on his toilette, particularly the inimitably
styled knot in his necktie, for which he was famous throughout early-
nineteenth-century England. But a Dandy's style cannot be obvious, for
Dandies are subtle, and never try hard for attention—attention comes to
them. The person whose clothes are flagrantly different has little imagina-
tion or taste. Dandies show their difference in the little touches that mark
girl, 
Mademoiselle
Charlotte, thrown much
into his company, fell
desperately in love with the
abbé, and when the affair
had progressed to a
liaison, the abbé asked her
how she came to be won . . .
• "I stood in no need of
caution as I should have
with a man. I saw nothing
but a beautiful woman,
and why should I be
forbidden to love you?
What 
advantages a
woman's dress gives you!
The heart of a man is
there, and that makes a
great impression upon us,
and on the other hand, all
the charms of the fair sex
fascinate us, and prevent us
from taking precautions. "
— C . J . B U L L I E T ,
VENUS 
CASTINA
Beau Brummell was
regarded as unbalanced in
his passion for daily
ablutions. His ritualistic
morning toilet took upward
of five hours, one hour
spent inching himself into
his skin-tight buckskin
breeches, an hour with the
hairdresser and another two
hours tying and "creasing
down" a series of starched
cravats until perfection was
achieved. But first of all
two hours were spent
scrubbing 
himself with
fetish zeal from head to toe
in milk, water and eau de
Cologne. . . . Beau
Brummell said he used
only the froth of
champagne to polish his
Hessian boots. He had
365 snuff boxes, those
suitable for summer wear
being quite unthinkable in
winter, and the fit of his
gloves was achieved by
entrusting their cut to two
firms—one 
for the fingers,
the other for the thumbs.
The Dandy • 49
their disdain for convention: Théophile Gautier's red vest, Oscar Wilde's
green velvet suit, Andy Warhol's silver wigs. The great English Prime Min-
ister Benjamin Disraeli had two magnificent canes, one for morning, one
for evening; at noon he would change canes, no matter where he was. The
female Dandy works similarly. She may adopt male clothing, say, but if she
does, a touch here or there will set her truly apart: no man ever dressed
quite like George Sand. The overtall hat, the riding boots worn on the
streets of Paris, made her a sight to behold.
Remember, there must be a reference point. If your visual style is to-
tally unfamiliar, people will think you at best an obvious attention-getter, at
worst crazy. Instead, create your own fashion sense by adapting and altering
prevailing styles to make yourself an object of fascination. Do this right and
you will be wildly imitated. The Count d'Orsay, a great London dandy of
the 1830s and 1840s, was closely watched by fashionable people; one day,
caught in a sudden London rainstorm, he bought a paltrok, a kind of heavy,
hooded duffle coat, off the back of a Dutch sailor. The paltrok immediately
became the coat to wear. Having people imitate you, of course, is a sign of
your powers of seduction.
The nonconformity of Dandies, however, goes far beyond appearances.
It is an attitude toward life that sets them apart; adopt that attitude and a
circle of followers will form around you.
Dandies are supremely impudent. They don't give a damn about other
people, and never try to please. In the court of Louis XIV, the writer La
Bruyere noticed that courtiers who tried hard to please were invariably on
the way down; nothing was more anti-seductive. As Barbey d'Aurevilly
wrote, "Dandies please women by displeasing them."
Impudence was fundamental to the appeal of Oscar Wilde. In a Lon-
don theater one night, after the first performance of one of Wilde's plays,
the ecstatic audience yelled for the author to appear onstage. Wilde made
them wait and wait, then finally emerged, smoking a cigarette and wearing
an expression of total disdain. "It may be bad manners to appear here
smoking, but it is far worse to disturb me when I am smoking," he scolded
his fans. The Count d'Orsay was equally impudent. At a London club one
night, a Rothschild who was notoriously cheap accidentally dropped a gold
coin on the floor, then bent down to look for it. The count immediately
whipped out a thousand-franc note (worth much more than the coin),
rolled it up, lit it like a candle, and got down on all fours, as if to help light
the way in the search. Only a Dandy could get away with such audacity.
The insolence of the Rake is tied up with his desire to conquer a woman;
he cares for nothing else. The insolence of the Dandy, on the other hand, is
aimed at society and its conventions. It is not a woman he cares to conquer
but a whole group, an entire social world. And since people are generally
oppressed by the obligation of always being polite and self-sacrificing, they
are delighted to spend time around a person who disdains such niceties.
Dandies are masters of the art of living. They live for pleasure, not for
work; they surround themselves with beautiful objects and eat and drink
Sometimes, however, the
tyranny of elegance became
altogether insupportable. A
Mr. 
Boothby committed
suicide and left a note
saying he could no longer
endure the ennui of
buttoning and 
unbuttoning.
— T H E 
GAME OF HEARTS:
HARRIETTE 
WILSON'S
MEMOIRS, EDITED BY LESLEY
BLANCH
This royal manner which
[the dandy] raises to the
height of true royalty, the
dandy has taken this from
women, who alone seem
naturally made for such a
role. It is a somewhat by
using the manner and the
method of women that
the dandy dominates. And
this usurpation of
femininity, 
he makes
women themselves approve
of this. . . . The dandy
has something antinatural
and androgynous about
him, which is precisely how
he is able to endlessly
seduce.
—JULES LEMAÎTRE,
LES 
CONTEMPORAINS
50 
• 
The Art of Seduction
with the same relish they show for their clothes. This was how the great
Roman writer Petronius, author of the Satyricon, was able to seduce the
emperor Nero. Unlike the dull Seneca, the great Stoic thinker and Nero's
tutor, Petronius knew how to make every detail of life a grand aesthetic ad-
venture, from a feast to a simple conversation. This is not an attitude you
should impose on those around you—you can't make yourself a nuisance—
but if you simply seem socially confident and sure of your taste, people will
be drawn to you. The key is to make everything an aesthetic choice. Your
ability to alleviate boredom by making life an art will make your company
highly prized.
The opposite sex is a strange country we can never know, and this ex-
cites us, creates the proper sexual tension. But it is also a source of annoy-
ance and frustration. Men do not understand how women think, and vice
versa; each tries to make the other act more like a member of their own
sex. Dandies may never try to please, but in this one area they have a pleas-
ing effect: by adopting psychological traits of the opposite sex, they appeal
to our inherent narcissism. Women identified with Rudolph Valentino's
delicacy and attention to detail in courtship; men identified with Lou
Andreas-Salomé's lack of interest in commitment. In the Heian court of
eleventh-century Japan, Sei Shonagon, the writer of The Pillow Book, was
powerfully seductive for men, especially literary types. She was fiercely in-
dependent, wrote poetry with the best, and had a certain emotional dis-
tance. Men wanted more from her than just to be her friend or companion,
as if she were another man; charmed by her empathy for male psychology,
they fell in love with her. This kind of mental transvestism—the ability to
enter the spirit of the opposite sex, adapt to their way of thinking, mirror
their tastes and attitudes—can be a key element in seduction. It is a way of
mesmerizing your victim.
According to Freud, the human libido is essentially bisexual; most peo-
ple are in some way attracted to people of their own sex, but social con-
straints (varying with culture and historical period) repress these impulses.
The Dandy represents a release from such constraints. In several of Shake-
speare's plays, a young girl (back then, the female roles in the theater were
actually played by male actors) has to go into disguise and dresses up as a
boy, eliciting all kinds of sexual interest from men, who later are delighted
to find out that the boy is actually a girl. (Think, for example, of Rosalind
in As You Like It.) Entertainers such as Josephine Baker (known as the
Chocolate Dandy) and Marlene Dietrich would dress up as men in their acts,
making themselves wildly popular—among men. Meanwhile the slightly
feminized male, the pretty boy, has always been seductive to women. Valen-
tino embodied this quality. Elvis Presley had feminine features (the face, the
hips), wore frilly pink shirts and eye makeup, and attracted the attention of
women early on. The filmmaker Kenneth Anger said of Mick Jagger that it
was "a bisexual charm which constituted an important part of the attrac-
tion he had over young girls . . . and which acted upon their unconscious."
In Western culture for centuries, in fact, feminine beauty has been far more
The Dandy 
• 51
fetishized than male beauty, so it is understandable that a feminine-looking
face like that of Montgomery Clift would have more seductive power than
that of John Wayne.
The Dandy figure has a place in politics as well. John F. Kennedy was a
strange mix of the masculine and feminine, virile in his toughness with the
Russians, and in his White House lawn football games, yet feminine in his
graceful and dapper appearance. This ambiguity was a large part of his ap-
peal. Disraeli was an incorrigible Dandy in dress and manner; some were
suspicious of him as a result, but his courage in not caring what people
thought of him also won him respect. And women of course adored him,
for women always adore a Dandy. They appreciated the gentleness of his
manner, his aesthetic sense, his love of clothes—in other words, his femi-
nine qualities. The mainstay of Disraeli's power was in fact a female fan:
Queen Victoria.
Do not be misled by the surface disapproval your Dandy pose may
elicit. Society may publicize its distrust of androgyny (in Christian the-
ology, Satan is often represented as androgynous), but this conceals its
fascination; what is most seductive is often what is most repressed. Learn a
playful dandyism and you will become the magnet for people's dark, unre-
alized yearnings.
The key to such power is ambiguity. In a society where the roles every-
one plays are obvious, the refusal to conform to any standard will excite in-
terest. Be both masculine and feminine, impudent and charming, subtle
and outrageous. Let other people worry about being socially acceptable;
those types are a dime a dozen, and you are after a power greater than they
can imagine.
Symbol: The
Orchid. Its shape and color oddly sug-
gest both sexes, its odor is sweet and decadent
—it is a tropical flower of evil. Delicate and highly cul-
tivated, it is prized for its rarity; it is unlike any other flower.
52 
• 
The Art of Seduction
Dangers
T
he Dandy's strength, but also the Dandy's problem, is that he or she
often works through transgressive feelings relating to sex roles. Al-
though this activity is highly charged and seductive, it is also dangerous,
since it touches on a source of great anxiety and insecurity. The greater
dangers will often come from your own sex. Valentino had immense appeal
for women, but men hated him. He was constantly dogged with accusa-
tions of being perversely unmasculine, and this caused him great pain. Sa-
lomé was equally disliked by women; Nietzsche's sister, and perhaps his
closest friend, considered her an evil witch, and led a virulent campaign
against her in the press long after the philosopher's death. There is little to
be done in the face of resentment like this. Some Dandies try to fight the
image they themselves have created, but this is unwise: to prove his mas-
culinity, Valentino would engage in a boxing match, anything to prove his
masculinity. He wound up looking only desperate. Better to accept society's
occasional gibes with grace and insolence. After all, the Dandies' charm is
that they don't really care what people think of them. That is how Andy
Warhol played the game: when people tired of his antics or some scandal
erupted, instead of trying to defend himself he would simply move on to
some new image—decadent bohemian, high-society portraitist, etc.—as if
to say, with a hint of disdain, that the problem lay not with him but with
other people's attention span.
Another danger for the Dandy is the fact that insolence has its limits.
Beau Brummel prided himself on two things: his trimness of figure and his
acerbic wit. His main social patron was the Prince of Wales, who, in later
years, grew plump. One night at dinner, the prince rang for the butler, and
Brummel snidely remarked, "Do ring, Big Ben." The prince did not ap-
preciate the joke, had Brummel shown out, and never spoke to him again.
Without royal patronage, Brummel fell into poverty and madness.
Even a Dandy, then, must measure out his impudence. A true Dandy
knows the difference between a theatrically staged teasing of the powerful
and a remark that will truly hurt, offend, or insult. It is particularly impor-
tant to avoid insulting those in a position to injure you. In fact the pose
may work best for those who can afford to offend—artists, bohemians, etc.
In the work world, you will probably have to modify and tone down your
Dandy image. Be pleasantly different, an amusement, rather than a person
who challenges the group's conventions and makes others feel insecure.
Child-
hood is the golden paradise we
are always consciously or unconsciously try-
ing to re-create. The Natural embodies the longed-
for qualities of childhood—spontaneity, sincerity, unpre-
tentiousness. In the presence of Naturals, we feel at ease,
caught up in their playful spirit, transported back to that
golden age. Naturals also make a virtue out of weakness, elicit-
ing our sympathy for their trials, making us want to protect
them and help them. As with a child, much of this is natu-
ral, but some of it is exaggerated, a conscious seductive
maneuver. 
Adopt the pose of the Natural to
neutralize people's 
natural 
defensiveness
and infect them with helpless
delight.
Psychological Traits of the Natural
C
hildren are not as guileless as we like to imagine. They suffer from
feelings of helplessness, and sense early on the power of their natural
charm to remedy their weakness in the adult world. They learn to play a
game: if their natural innocence can persuade a parent to yield to their de-
sires in one instance, then it is something they can use strategically in an-
other instance, laying it on thick at the right moment to get their way. If
their vulnerability and weakness is so attractive, then it is something they
can use for effect.
Why are we seduced by children's naturalness? First, because anything
natural has an uncanny effect on us. Since the beginning of time, natural
phenomena—such as lightning storms or eclipses—have instilled in human
beings an awe tinged with fear. The more civilized we become, the greater
the effect such natural events have on us; the modern world surrounds us
with so much that is manufactured and artificial that something sudden and
inexplicable fascinates us. Children also have this natural power, but be-
cause they are unthreatening and human, they are not so much awe inspir-
ing as charming. Most people try to please, but the pleasantness of the child
comes effortlessly, defying logical explanation—and what is irrational is
often dangerously seductive.
More important, a child represents a world from which we have been
forever exiled. Because adult life is full of boredom and compromise, we
harbor an illusion of childhood as a kind of golden age, even though it can
often be a period of great confusion and pain. It cannot be denied, how-
ever, that childhood had certain privileges, and as children we had a plea-
surable attitude to life. Confronted with a particularly charming child, we
often feel wistful: we remember our own golden past, the qualities we have
lost and wish we had again. And in the presence of the child, we get a little
of that goldenness back.
Natural seducers are people who somehow avoided getting certain
childish traits drummed out of them by adult experience. Such people can
be as powerfully seductive as any child, because it seems uncanny and mar-
velous that they have preserved such qualities. They are not literally like
children, of course; that would make them obnoxious or pitiful. Rather it
is the spirit that they have retained. Do not imagine that this childishness is
something beyond their control. Natural seducers learn early on the value
of retaining a particular quality, and the seductive power it contains; they
Long-past ages have a
great and often puzzling
attraction for men's
imagination. 
Whenever
they are dissatisfied with
their present surround-
ings—and 
this happens
often enough—they turn
back to the past and hope
that they will now be able
to prove the truth of the
inextinguishable dream of
a golden age. They are
probably still under the
spell of their childhood,
which is presented to them
by their not impartial
memory as a time of
uninterrupted bliss.
—SIGMUND 
FREUD, THE
S T A S D A R D E D I T I O N O F T H E
COMPLETE 
PSYCHOLOGICAL
WORKS 
OF 
SIGMUND 
FREUD,
VOLUME 23
When 
Hermes was born
on Mount Cyllene his
mother Maia laid him in
swaddling bands on a
winnowing fan, 
but he
grew with astonishing
quickness into a little boy,
and as soon as her back
was turned, slipped off and
went 
looking for adventure.
Arrived at Pieria, where
Apollo was tending a fine
herd of cows, he decided to
55
56 
• 
The Art of Seduction
adapt and build upon those childlike traits that they managed to preserve,
exactly as the child learns to play with its natural charm. This is the key. It
is within your power to do the same, since there is lurking within all of us a
devilish child straining to be let loose. To do this successfully, you have to
be able to let go to a degree, since there is nothing less natural than seeming
hesitant. Remember the spirit you once had; let it return, without self-
consciousness. People are much more forgiving of those who go all the
way, who seem uncontrollably foolish, than the halfhearted adult with a
childish streak. Remember who you were before you became so polite and
self-effacing. To assume the role of the Natural, mentally position yourself
in any relationship as the child, the younger one.
The following are the main types of the adult Natural. Keep in mind
that the greatest natural seducers are often a blend of more than one of
these qualities.
The innocent. The primary qualities of innocence are weakness and mis-
understanding of the world. Innocence is weak because it is doomed to
vanish in a harsh, cruel world; the child cannot protect or hold on to its in-
nocence. The misunderstandings come from the child's not knowing about
good and evil, and seeing everything through uncorrupted eyes. The weak-
ness of children elicits sympathy, their misunderstandings make us laugh,
and nothing is more seductive than a mixture of laughter and sympathy.
The adult Natural is not truly innocent—it is impossible to grow up in
this world and retain total innocence. Yet Naturals yearn so deeply to hold
on to their innocent outlook that they manage to preserve the illusion of
innocence. They exaggerate their weakness to elicit the proper sympathy.
They act like they still see the world through innocent eyes, which in an
adult proves doubly humorous. Much of this is conscious, but to be effec-
tive, adult Naturals must make it seem subtle and effortless—if they are
seen as trying to act innocent, it will come across as pathetic. It is better for
them to communicate weakness indirectly, through looks and glances, or
through the situations they get themselves into, rather than anything obvi-
ous. Since this type of innocence is mostly an act, it is easily adaptable for
your own purposes. Learn to play up any natural weaknesses or flaws.
The imp. Impish children have a fearlessness that we adults have lost. That
is because they do not see the possible consequences of their actions—how
some people might be offended, how they might physically hurt themselves
in the process. Imps are brazen, blissfully uncaring. They infect you with
their lighthearted spirit. Such children have not yet had their natural energy
and spirit scolded out of them by the need to be polite and civil. Secretly,
we envy them; we want to be naughty too.
Adult imps are seductive because of how different they are from the rest
of us. Breaths of fresh air in a cautious world, they go full throttle, as if
steal them. But, fearing to
be betrayed by their tracks,
he quickly made a number
oj shoes from the bark of a
fallen oak and tied them
until plaited grass to the
feet of the cows, which he
then drove off by night
along the road. Apollo
discovered the loss, but
Hermes's trick deceived
him, and though he went
as far as Pylus in his
westward search, and to
Onchestus in his eastern,
he was forced, in the end,
to offer a reward for the
apprehension of the thief.
Silenus and his satyrs,
greedy of reward, spread
out in different directions to
track him down but, for a
long while, without success.
At last, as a party of them
passed through Arcadia,
they heard the muffled
sound of music such as
they had never heard
before, and the nymph
Cyllene, from the mouth of
a cave, told them that a
most gifted child had
recently been born there, to
whom she was acting as
nurse: he had constructed
an ingenious musical toy
from the shell of a tortoise
and some cow-gut, with
which he had lulled his
mother to sleep. • "And
from whom did he get the
cow-gut?" asked the alert
satyrs, noticing two hides
stretched outside the cave.
"Do you charge the poor
child with theft?" asked
Cyllene. Harsh words were
exchanged. • At that
moment Apollo came up,
having discovered the
thief's identity by observing
the suspicious behaviour of
a long-winged bird.
Entering the cave, he
awakened Maia and told
her severely that Hermes
must restore the stolen
cows. Maia pointed to the
child, still wrapped in his
The Natural • 57
their impishness were uncontrollable, and thus natural. If you play the part,
do not worry about offending people now and then—you are too lovable
and inevitably they will forgive you. Just don't apologize or look contrite,
for that would break the spell. Whatever you say or do, keep a glint in your
eye to show that you do not take anything seriously.
The wonder. A wonder child has a special, inexplicable talent: a gift for
music, for mathematics, for chess, for sport. At work in the field in which
they have such prodigal skill, these children seem possessed, and their ac-
tions effortless. If they are artists or musicians, Mozart types, their work
seems to spring from some inborn impulse, requiring remarkably little
thought. If it is a physical talent that they have, they are blessed with un-
usual energy, dexterity, and spontaneity. In both cases they seem talented
beyond their years. This fascinates us.
Adult wonders are often former wonder children who have managed,
remarkably, to retain their youthful impulsiveness and improvisational skills.
True spontaneity is a delightful rarity, for everything in life conspires to rob
us of it—we have to learn to act carefully and deliberately, to think about
how we look in other people's eyes. To play the wonder you need some
skill that seems easy and natural, along with the ability to improvise. If in
fact your skill takes practice, you must hide this and learn to make your
work appear effortless. The more you hide the sweat behind what you do,
the more natural and seductive it will appear.
The undefensive lover. As people get older, they protect themselves against
painful experiences by closing themselves off. The price for this is that they
grow rigid, physically and mentally. But children are by nature unprotected
and open to experience, and this receptiveness is extremely attractive. In
the presence of children we become less rigid, infected with their open-
ness. That is why we want to be around them.
Undefensive lovers have somehow circumvented the self-protective
process, retaining the playful, receptive spirit of the child. They often
manifest this spirit physically: they are graceful, and seem to age less rapidly
than other people. Of all the Natural's character qualities, this one is the
most useful. Defensiveness is deadly in seduction; act defensive and you'll
bring out defensiveness in other people. The undefensive lover, on the
other hand, lowers the inhibitions of his or her target, a critical part of se-
duction. It is important to learn to not react defensively: bend instead of
resist, be open to influence from others, and they will more easily fall under
your spell.
swaddling bands and
feigning sleep. "What an
absurd charge!" she cried.
But Apollo had already
recognized the hides. He
picked up Hermes, carried
him to Olympus, and there
formally accused him of
theft, offering the hides as
evidence. Zeus, loth to
believe that his own new-
born son was a thief
encouraged him to plead
not guilty, but Apollo
would not be put off and
Hermes, at last, weakened
and confessed. • "Very
well, come with me," he
said, "and you may have
your herd. I slaughtered
only two, and those I cut
up into twelve equal
portions as a sacrifice to the
twelve gods" • "Twelve
gods?" asked Apollo.
"Who is the twelfth?" •
"Your servant, sir" replied
Hermes modestly. "I ate
no more than my share,
though I was very hungry,
and duly burned the rest. "
• The two gods [ Hermes
and Apollo] returned to
Mount Cyllene, where
Hermes greeted his mother
and retrieved something
that he had hidden
underneath a sheepskin. •
"What have you there?"
asked Apollo. • In answer,
Hermes showed his newly-
invented tortoise-shell lyre,
and played such a
ravishing tune on it with
the plectrum he had also
invented, at the same time
singing in praise of
Apollo's 
nobility,
intelligence, and generosity,
that he was forgiven at
once. He led the surprised
and delighted Apollo to
Pylus, playing all the way,
and there gave him the
remainder of the cattle,
which he had hidden in a
cave. • "A bargain!" cried
Apollo. 
"You keep the
cows, and I take the lyre. "
58 • The Art of Seduction
Examples of Natural Seducers
1. As a child growing up in England, Charlie Chaplin spent years in dire
poverty, particularly after his mother was committed to an asylum. In his
early teens, forced to work to live, he landed a job in vaudeville, eventually
gaining some success as a comedian. But Chaplin was wildly ambitious, and
so, in 1910, when he was only nineteen, he emigrated to the United States,
hoping to break into the film business. Making his way to Hollywood, he
found occasional bit parts, but success seemed elusive: the competition was
fierce, and although Chaplin had a repertoire of gags that he had learned in
vaudeville, he did not particularly excel at physical humor, a critical part of
silent comedy. He was not a gymnast like Buster Keaton.
In 1914, Chaplin managed to get the lead in a film short called Making
a Living. His role was that of a con artist. In playing around with the cos-
tume for the part, he put on a pair of pants several sizes too large, then
added a derby hat, enormous boots that he wore on the wrong feet, a walk-
ing cane, and a pasted-on mustache. With the clothes, a whole new charac-
ter seemed to come to life—first the silly walk, then the twirling of the
cane, then all sorts of gags. Mack Sennett, the head of the studio, did not
find Making a Living very funny, and doubted whether Chaplin had a future
in the movies, but a few critics felt otherwise. A review in a trade magazine
read, "The clever player who takes the role of a nervy and very nifty
sharper in this picture is a comedian of the first water, who acts like one of
Nature's own naturals." And audiences also responded—the film made
money.
What seemed to touch a nerve in Making a Living, setting Chaplin apart
from the horde of other comedians working in silent film, was the almost
pathetic naiveté of the character he played. Sensing he was onto something,
Chaplin shaped the role further in subsequent movies, rendering him more
and more naive. The key was to make the character seem to see the world
through the eyes of a child. In The Bank, he is the bank janitor who day-
dreams of great deeds while robbers are at work in the building; in The
Pawnbroker, he is an unprepared shop assistant who wreaks havoc on a
grandfather clock; in Shoulder Arms, he is a soldier in the bloody trenches of
World War I, reacting to the horrors of war like an innocent child. Chaplin
made sure to cast actors in his films who were physically larger than he was,
subliminally positioning them as adult bullies and himself as the helpless in-
fant. And as he went deeper into his character, something strange hap-
pened: the character and the real-life man began to merge. Although he
had had a troubled childhood, he was obsessed with it. (For his film Easy
Street he built a set in Hollywood that duplicated the London streets he had
known as a boy.) He mistrusted the adult world, preferring the company of
the young, or the young at heart: three of his four wives were teenagers
when he married them.
More than any other comedian, Chaplin aroused a mix of laughter and
sentiment. He made you empathize with him as the victim, feel sorry for
• "Agreed," said Hermes,
and they shook hands on
it. • . . . Apollo, taking
the child back to Olympus,
told Zeus all that had
happened. Zeus warned
Hermes that henceforth he
must respect the rights oj
property and refrain from
telling downright lies; but
he could not help being
amused. "You seem to be a
very ingenious, eloquent,
and persuasive godling," he
said. • "Then make me
your herald, Father,"
Hermes answered, "and I
will he responsible for the
safety of all divine
property, and never tell lies,
though I cannot promise
always to tell the whole
truth." • "That would not
be expected of you," said
Zeus with a smile. . . .
Zeus gave him a herald's
staff with white ribbons,
which everyone was ordered
to respect; a round hat
against the rain, and
winged golden sandals
which carried him about
with the swiftness of the
wind.
—ROBERT 
GRAVES,
THE GREEK MYTHS, VOLUME I
A man may meet a woman
and be shocked by her
ugliness. Soon, if she is
natural and unaffected, her
expression makes him
overlook the fault of her
features. He begins to find
her charming, it enters his
head that she might be
loved, and a week later he
is living in hope. The
following week he has been
snubbed into despair, and
the week afterwards he has
gone mad.
—STENDHAL, 
LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND
SUZANNE SALE
The Natural • 
59
him the way you would for a lost dog. You both laughed and cried. And
audiences sensed that the role Chaplin played came from somewhere deep
inside—that he was sincere, that he was actually playing himself. Within
a few years after Making a Living, Chaplin was the most famous actor
in the world. There were Chaplin dolls, comic books, toys; popular songs
and short stories were written about him; he became a universal icon. In
1921, when he returned to London for the first time since he had left it, he
was greeted by enormous crowds, as if at the triumphant return of a great
general.
The greatest seducers, those who seduce mass audiences, nations, the
world, have a way of playing on people's unconscious, making them react
in a way they can neither understand nor control. Chaplin inadvertently hit
on this power when he discovered the effect he could have on audiences by
playing up his weakness, by suggesting that he had a child's mind in an adult
body. In the early twentieth century, the world was radically and rapidly
changing. People were working longer and longer hours at increasingly
mechanical jobs; life was becoming steadily more inhuman and heartless, as
the ravages of World War I made clear. Caught in the midst of revolution-
ary change, people yearned for a lost childhood that they imagined as a
golden paradise.
An adult child like Chaplin has immense seductive power, for he offers
the illusion that life was once simpler and easier, and that for a moment, or
for as long as the movie lasts, you can win that life back. In a cruel, amoral
world, naivete has enormous appeal. The key is to bring it off with an air
of total seriousness, as the straight man does in stand-up comedy. More im-
portant, however, is the creation of sympathy. Overt strength and power is
rarely seductive—it makes us afraid, or envious. The royal road to seduction
is to play up your vulnerability and helplessness. You cannot make this ob-
vious; to seem to be begging for sympathy is to seem needy, which is en-
tirely anti-seductive. Do not proclaim yourself a victim or underdog, but
reveal it in your manner, in your confusion. A display of "natural" weak-
ness will make you instantly lovable, both lowering people's defenses and
making them feel delightfully superior to you. Put yourself in situations
that make you seem weak, in which someone else has the advantage; they
are the bully, you are the innocent lamb. Without any effort on your part,
people will feel sympathy for you. Once people's eyes cloud over with
sentimental mist, they will not see how you are manipulating them.
2. Emma Crouch, born in 1842 in Plymouth, England, came from a re-
spectable middle-class family. Her father was a composer and music profes-
sor who dreamed of success in the world of light opera. Among his many
children, Emma was his favorite: she was a delightful child, lively and flirta-
tious, with red hair and a freckled face. Her father doted on her, and prom-
ised her a brilliant future in the theater. Unfortunately Mr. Crouch had a
"Geographical" escapism
has been rendered
ineffective by the spread of
air routes. What remains is
"evolutionary" 
escapism—
a downward course in one's
development, back to the
ideas and emotions of
"golden childhood," which
may well be defined as
"regress towards
infantilism," escape to a
personal world of childish
ideas. • In a strictly-
regulated society, where life
follows 
strictly-defined
canons, the urge to escape
from the chain of things
"established once and for
all" must be felt
particularly strongly. . . . •
And the most perfect of
them [comedians] does this
with utmost perfection, for
he [Chaplin] serves this
principle . . . through the
subtlety of his method
which, offering the
spectactor an infantile
pattern to be imitated,
pscyhologically infects him
with infantilism and draws
him into the "golden age"
of the infantile paradise of
childhood.
—SERGEI EISENSTEIN, "CHARLIE
THE KID," FROM NOTES OF A
FILM 
DIRECTOR
60 
• 
The Art of Seduction
dark side: he was an adventurer, a gambler, and a rake, and in 1849 he
abandoned his family and left for America. The Crouches were now in dire
straits. Emma was told that her father had died in an accident and she was
sent off to a convent. The loss of her father affected her deeply, and as the
years went by she seemed lost in the past, acting as if he still doted on her.
One day in 1856, when Emma was walking home from church, a well-
dressed gentleman invited her home for some cakes. She followed him to
his house, where he proceeded to take advantage of her. The next morning
this man, a diamond merchant, promised to set her up in a house of her
own, treat her well, and give her plenty of money. She took the money but
left him, determined to do what she had always wanted: never see her
family again, never depend on anyone, and lead the grand life that her fa-
ther had promised her.
With the money the diamond merchant had given her, Emma bought
nice clothes and rented a cheap flat. Adopting the flamboyant name of
Cora Pearl, she began to frequent London's Argyll Rooms, a fancy gin
palace where harlots and gentlemen rubbed elbows. The proprietor of the
Argyll, a Mr. Bignell, took note of this newcomer to his establishment—
she was so brazen for a young girl. At forty-five, he was much older
than she was, but he decided to be her lover and protector, lavishing her
with money and attention. The following year he took her to Paris, which
was at the height of its Second Empire prosperity. Cora was enthralled by
Paris, and of all its sights, but what impressed her the most was the parade
of rich coaches in the Bois de Boulogne. Here the fashionable came to take
the air—the empress, the princesses, and, not least the grand courtesans,
who had the most opulent carriages of all. This was the way to lead the
kind of life Cora's father had wanted for her. She promptly told Bignell that
when he went back to London, she would stay on alone.
Frequenting all the right places, Cora soon came to the attention of
wealthy French gentlemen. They would see her walking the streets in a
bright pink dress, to complement her flaming red hair, pale face, and freck-
les. They would glimpse her riding wildly through the Bois de Boulogne,
cracking her whip left and right. They would see her in cafes surrounded
by men, her witty insults making them laugh. They also heard of her
exploits—of her delight in showing her body to one and all. The elite of
Paris society began to court her, particularly the older men who had grown
tired of the cold and calculating courtesans, and who admired her girlish
spirit. As money began to pour in from her various conquests (the Duc de
Mornay, heir to the Dutch throne; Prince Napoleon, cousin to the Em-
peror), Cora spent it on the most outrageous things—a multicolored car-
riage pulled by a team of cream-colored horses, a rose-marble bathtub with
her initials inlaid in gold. Gentlemen vied to be the one who would spoil
her the most. An Irish lover wasted his entire fortune on her, in only eight
weeks. But money could not buy Cora's loyalty; she would leave a man on
the slightest whim.
Cora Pearl's wild behavior and disdain for etiquette had all of Paris on
Prince Gortschakoff used
to say that she [Cora
Pearl] was the last word in
luxury, and that he would
have tried to steal the sun
to satisfy one of her whims.
—GUSTAVE 
CLAUDIN, CORA
PEARL CONTEMPORARY
Apparently the possession of
humor implies the
possession of a number of
typical habit-systems. The
first is an emotional one: the
habit of playfulness. 
Why
should one be proud of
being playful? For a double
reason. First, playfulness
connotes childhood and
youth. If one can be playful,
one still possesses something
of the vigor and the joy of
young life . . . • But there
is a deeper implication. To
be playful is, in a sense, to
be free. When a person is
playful, he momentarily
disregards the binding
necessities which compel
him, in business and morals,
in domestic and community
life. . . . • What galls us is
that the binding necessities
do not permit us to shape
our world as we please. . . .
What we most deeply
desire, however, is to create
our world for ourselves.
Whenever we can do
that, even in the slightest
degree, we are happy. Now
in play we create our own
world. . . .
—PROFESSOR H . A .
OVERSTREET, INFLUENCING
HUMAN 
BEHAVIOR
The Natural • 
61
edge. In 1864, she was to appear as Cupid in the Offenbach operetta Or-
pheus in the Underworld. Society was dying to see what she would do to
cause a sensation, and soon found out: she came on stage practically naked,
except for expensive diamonds here and there, barely covering her. As she
pranced on stage, the diamonds fell off, each one worth a fortune; she did
not stoop to pick them up, but let them roll off into the footlights. The
gentlemen in the audience, some of whom had given her those diamonds,
applauded her wildly. Antics like this made Cora the toast of Paris, and she
reigned as the city's supreme courtesan for over a decade, until the Franco-
Prussian War of 1870 put an end to the Second Empire.
People often mistakenly believe that what makes a person desirable and se-
ductive is physical beauty, elegance, or overt sexuality. Yet Cora Pearl was
not dramatically beautiful; her body was boyish, and her style was garish
and tasteless. Even so, the most dashing men of Europe vied for her favors,
often ruining themselves in the process. It was Cora's spirit and attitude that
enthralled them. Spoiled by her father, she imagined that spoiling her was
natural—that all men should do the same. The consequence was that, like a
child, she never felt she had to try to please. It was Cora's powerful air of
independence that made men want to possess her, tame her. She never pre-
tended to be anything more than a courtesan, so the brazenness that in a
lady would have been uncivil in her seemed natural and fun. And as with a
spoiled child, a man's relationship with her was on her terms. The moment
he tried to change that, she lost interest. This was the secret of her astound-
ing success.
Spoiled children have an undeservedly bad reputation: while those who
are spoiled with material things are indeed often insufferable, those who are
spoiled with affection know themselves to be deeply seductive. This be-
comes a distinct advantage when they grow up. According to Freud (who
was speaking from experience, since he was his mother's darling), spoiled
children have a confidence that stays with them all their lives. This quality
radiates outward, drawing others to them, and, in a circular process, making
people spoil them still more. Since their spirit and natural energy were
never tamed by a disciplining parent, as adults they are adventurous and
bold, and often impish or brazen.
The lesson is simple: it may be too late to be spoiled by a parent, but it
is never too late to make other people spoil you. It is all in your attitude.
People are drawn to those who expect a lot out of life, whereas they tend
to disrespect those who are fearful and undemanding. Wild independence
has a provocative effect on us: it appeals to us, while also presenting us with
a challenge—we want to be the one to tame it, to make the spirited person
dependent on us. Half of seduction is stirring such competitive desires.
3. In October of 1925, Paris society was all excited about the opening of
the Revue Negre. Jazz, or in fact anything that came from black America,
All was quiet again. (Genji
slipped the latch open and
tried the doors. They had
not been bolted. A curtain
had been set up just inside,
and in the dim light he
could make out Chinese
chests and other furniture
scattered in some disorder.
He made his way through
to her side. She lay by
herself, a slight little figure.
Though vaguely annoyed
at being disturbed, she
evidently took him for
the woman Chujo until he
pulled back the covers.
• . . . His manner was so
gently persuasive that
devils and demons could
not have gainsaid him.
• . . . She was so small
that he lifted her easily. As
he passed through the doors
to his own room, he came
upon Chujo who had been
summoned earlier. He
called out in surprise.
Surprised in turn, Chujo
peered into the darkness.
The perfume that came
from his robes like a cloud
of smoke told her who he
was. . . . [Chujo] followed
after, but Genji was quite
unmoved by her pleas. •
"Come for her in the
morning," he said, sliding
the doors closed. • The
lady was bathed in
perspiration and quite
beside herself at the
thought of what Chujo,
and the others too, would
be thinking. Genji had to
feel sorry for her. Yet the
sweet words poured forth,
the whole gamut of pretty
devices for making a
woman surrender. . . . •
One may imagine that
he found many kind
promises with which to
comfort her. . . .
—MURASAKI 
SHIKIBU,
THE TALE 
OF 
GENJI,
TRANSLATED BY EDWARD G.
SEIDENSTICKER
62 
• The Art of Seduction
was the latest fashion, and the Broadway dancers and performers who made
up the Revue Nègre were African-American. On opening night, artists
and high society packed the hall. The show was spectacular, as they ex-
pected, but nothing prepared them for the last number, performed by a
somewhat gawky long-legged woman with the prettiest face: Josephine
Baker, a twenty-year-old chorus girl from East St. Louis. She came onstage
bare-breasted, wearing a skirt of feathers over a satin bikini bottom, with
feathers around her neck and ankles. Although she performed her number,
called "Danse Sauvage," with another dancer, also clad in feathers, all eyes
were riveted on her: her whole body seemed to come alive in a way the au-
dience had never seen before, her legs moving with the litheness of a cat,
her rear end gyrating in patterns that one critic likened to a hummingbird's.
As the dance went on, she seemed possessed, feeding off the crowd's ecsta-
tic reaction. And then there was the look on her face: she was having such
fun. She radiated a joy that made her erotic dance oddly innocent, even
slightly comic.
By the following day, word had spread: a star was born. Josephine be-
came the heart of the Revue Nègre, and Paris was at her feet. Within a
year, her face was on posters everywhere; there were Josephine Baker per-
fumes, dolls, clothes; fashionable Frenchwomen were slicking their hair
back a la Baker, using a product called Bakerfix. They were even trying to
darken their skin.
Such sudden fame represented quite a change, for just a few years ear-
lier, Josephine had been a young girl growing up in East St. Louis, one of
America's worst slums. She had gone to work at the age of eight, cleaning
houses for a white woman who beat her. She had sometimes slept in a rat-
infested basement; there had never been heat in the winter. (She had taught
herself to dance in her wild fashion to help keep herself warm.) In 1919,
Josephine had run away and become a part-time vaudeville performer,
landing in New York two years later without money or connections. She
had had some success as a clowning chorus girl, providing comic relief with
her crossed eyes and screwed-up face, but she hadn't stood out. Then she
was invited to Paris. Some other black performers had declined, fearing
things might be still worse for them in France than in America, but
Josephine jumped at the chance.
Despite her success with the Revue Nègre, Josephine did not delude
herself: Parisians were notoriously fickle. She decided to turn the relation-
ship around. First, she refused to be aligned with any club, and developed a
reputation for breaking contracts at will, making it clear that she was ready
to leave in an instant. Since childhood she had been afraid of dependence
on anyone; now no one could take her for granted. This only made impre-
sarios chase her and the public appreciate her the more. Second, she was
aware that although black culture had become the vogue, what the French
had fallen in love with was a kind of caricature. If that was what it took
to be successful, so be it, but Josephine made it clear that she did not take
the caricature seriously; instead she reversed it, becoming the ultimate
The Natural • 
63
Frenchwoman of fashion, a caricature not of blackness but of whiteness.
Everything was a role to play—the comedienne, the primitive dancer, the
ultrastylish Parisian. And everything Josephine did, she did with such a light
spirit, such a lack of pretension, that she continued to seduce the jaded
French for years. Her funeral, in 1975, was nationally televised, a huge cul-
tural event. She was buried with the kind of pomp normally reserved only
for heads of state.
From very early on, Josephine Baker could not stand the feeling of having
no control over the world. Yet what could she do in the face of her un-
promising circumstances? Some young girls put all their hopes on a hus-
band, but Josephine's father had left her mother soon after she was born,
and she saw marriage as something that would only make her more misera-
ble. Her solution was something children often do: confronted with a
hopeless environment, she closed herself off in a world of her own making,
oblivious to the ugliness around her. This world was filled with dancing,
clowning, dreams of great things. Let other people wail and moan; Jose-
phine would smile, remain confident and self-reliant. Almost everyone who
met her, from her earliest years to her last, commented on how seductive
this quality was. Her refusal to compromise, or to be what she was expected
to be, made everything she did seem authentic and natural.
A child loves to play, and to create a little self-contained world. When
children are absorbed in make believe, they are hopelessly charming. They
infuse their imaginings with such seriousness and feeling. Adult Naturals do
something similar, particularly if they are artists: they create their own fan-
tasy world, and live in it as if it were the real one. Fantasy is so much more
pleasant than reality, and since most people do not have the power or
courage to create such a world, they enjoy being around those who do. Re-
member: the role you were given in life is not the role you have to accept.
You can always live out a role of your own creation, a role that fits your
fantasy. Learn to play with your image, never taking it too seriously. The
key is to infuse your play with the conviction and feeling of a child, making
it seem natural. The more absorbed you seem in your own joy-filled world,
the more seductive you become. Do not go halfway: make the fantasy you
inhabit as radical and exotic as possible, and you will attract attention like a
magnet.
4. It was the Festival of the Cherry Blossom at the Heian court, in late-
tenth-century Japan. In the emperor's palace, many of the courtiers were
drunk, and others were fast asleep, but the young princess Oborozukiyo,
the emperor's sister-in-law, was awake and reciting a poem: "What can
compare with a misty moon of spring?" Her voice was smooth and deli-
cate. She moved to the door of her apartment to look at the moon. Then,
suddenly, she smelled something sweet, and a hand clutched the sleeve of
her robe. "Who are you?" she said, frightened. "There is nothing to be
64 
• 
The Art of Seduction
afraid of," came a man's voice, and continued with a poem of his own:
"Late in the night we enjoy a misty moon. There is nothing misty about
the bond between us." Without another word, the man pulled the princess
to him and picked her up, carrying her into a gallery outside her room,
sliding the door closed behind him. She was terrified, and tried to call for
help. In the darkness she heard him say, a little louder now, "It will do you
no good. I am always allowed my way. Just be quiet, if you will, please."
Now the princess recognized the voice, and the scent: it was Genji, the
young son of the late emperor's concubine, whose robes bore a distinctive
perfume. This calmed her somewhat, since the man was someone she
knew, but on the other hand she also knew of his reputation: Genji was the
court's most incorrigible seducer, a man who stopped at nothing. He was
drunk, it was near dawn, and the watchmen would soon be on their
rounds; she did not want to be discovered with him. But then she began to
make out the outlines of his face—so pretty, his look so sincere, without a
trace of malice. Then came more poems, recited in that charming voice,
the words so insinuating. The images he conjured filled her mind, and dis-
tracted her from his hands. She could not resist him.
As the light began to rise, Genji got to his feet. He said a few tender
words, they exchanged fans, and then he quickly left. The serving women
were coming through the emperor's rooms by now, and when they saw
Genji scurrying away, the perfume of his robes lingering after him, they
smiled, knowing he was up to his usual tricks; but they never imagined he
would dare approach the sister of the emperor's wife.
In the days that followed, Oborozukiyo could only think of Genji. She
knew he had other mistresses, but when she tried to put him out of her
mind, a letter from him would arrive, and she would be back to square one.
In truth, she had started the correspondence, haunted by his midnight visit.
She had to see him again. Despite the risk of discovery, and the fact that
her sister Kokiden, the emperor's wife, hated Genji, she arranged for fur-
ther trysts in her apartment. But one night an envious courtier found them
together. Word reached Kokiden, who naturally was furious. She de-
manded that Genji be banished from court and the emperor had no choice
but to agree.
Genji went far away, and things settled down. Then the emperor died
and his son took over. A kind of emptiness had come to the court: the
dozens of women whom Genji had seduced could not endure his absence,
and flooded him with letters. Even women who had never known him in-
timately would weep over any relic he had left behind—a robe, for in-
stance, in which his scent still lingered. And the young emperor missed his
jocular presence. And the princesses missed the music he had played on the
koto. And Oborozukiyo pined for his midnight visits. Finally even Kokiden
broke down, realizing that she could not resist him. So Genji was sum-
moned back to the court. And not only was he forgiven, he was given a
hero's welcome; the young emperor himself greeted the scoundrel with
tears in his eyes.
The Natural • 
65
The story of Genji's life is told in the eleventh-century novel The Tale of
Genji, written by Murasaki Shikibu, a woman of the Heian court. The
character was most likely based on a real-life man, Fujiwara no Korechika.
Indeed another book of the period, The Pillow Book of Sei Shonagon, de-
scribes an encounter between the female author and Korechika, and reveals
his incredible charm and his almost hypnotic effect on women. Genji is a
Natural, an undefensive lover, a man who has a lifelong obsession with
women but whose appreciation of and affection for them makes him irre-
sistible. As he says to Oborozukiyo in the novel, "I am always allowed my
way." This self-belief is half of Genji's charm. Resistance does not make
him defensive; he retreats gracefully, reciting a little poetry, and as he leaves,
the perfume of his robes trailing behind him, his victim wonders why she
has been so afraid, and what she is missing by spurning him, and she finds a
way to let him know that the next time things will be different. Genji takes
nothing seriously or personally, and at the age of forty, an age at which
most men of the eleventh century were already looking old and worn, he
still seems like a boy. His seductive powers never leave him.
Human beings are immensely suggestible; their moods will easily spread
to the people around them. In fact seduction depends on mimesis, on the
conscious creation of a mood or feeling that is then reproduced by the
other person. But hesitation and awkwardness are also contagious, and
are deadly to seduction. If in a key moment you seem indecisive or self-
conscious, the other person will sense that you are thinking of yourself, in-
stead of being overwhelmed by his or her charms. The spell will be broken.
As an undefensive lover, though, you produce the opposite effect: your vic-
tim might be hesitant or worried, but confronted with someone so sure and
natural, he or she will be caught up in the mood. Like dancing with some-
one you lead effortlessly across the dance floor, it is a skill you can learn. It
is a matter of rooting out the fear and awkwardness that have built up in
you over the years, of becoming more graceful with your approach, less de-
fensive when others seem to resist. Often people's resistance is a way of
testing you, and if you show any awkwardness or hesitation, you not only
will fail the test, but you will risk infecting them with your doubts.
Symbol: 
The
Lamb. So soft and endearing. At
two days old the lamb can gambol gracefully;
within a week it is playing "Follow the Leader."
Its weakness is part of its charm. The Lamb is pure inno-
cence, so innocent we want to possess it, even devour it.
66 • The Art of Seduction
Dangers
A
childish quality can be charming but it can also be irritating; the inno-
cent have no experience of the world, and their sweetness can prove
cloying. In Milan Kundera's novel The Book of Laughter and Forgetting, the
hero dreams that he is trapped on an island with a group of children. Soon
their wonderful qualities become intensely annoying to him; after a few
days of exposure to them he cannot relate to them at all. The dream turns
into a nightmare, and he longs to be back among adults, with real things to
do and talk about. Because total childishness can quickly grate, the most se-
ductive Naturals are those who, like Josephine Baker, combine adult expe-
rience and wisdom with a childlike manner. It is this mixture of qualities
that is most alluring.
Society cannot tolerate too many Naturals. Given a crowd of Cora
Pearls or Charlie Chaplins, their charm would quickly wear off. In any case
it is usually only artists, or people with abundant leisure time, who can af-
ford to go all the way. The best way to use the Natural character type is in
specific situations when a touch of innocence or impishness will help lower
your target's defenses. A con man plays dumb to make the other person
trust him and feel superior. This kind of feigned naturalness has countless
applications in daily life, where nothing is more dangerous than looking
smarter than the next person; the Natural pose is the perfect way to disguise
your cleverness. But if you are uncontrollably childish and cannot turn it
off, you run the risk of seeming pathetic, earning not sympathy but pity
and disgust.
Similarly, the seductive traits of the Natural work best in one who is
still young enough for them to seem natural. They are much harder for an
older person to pull off. Cora Pearl did not seem so charming when she
was still wearing her pink flouncy dresses in her fifties. The Duke of Buck-
ingham, who seduced everyone in the English court in the 1620s (includ-
ing the homosexual King James I himself), was wondrously childish in
looks and manner; but this became obnoxious and off-putting as he grew
older, and he eventually made enough enemies that he ended up being mur-
dered. As you age, then, your natural qualities should suggest more the
child's open spirit, less an innocence that will no longer convince anyone.
The
ability to delay satisfaction is
the ultimate art of seduction—while
waiting, the victim is held in thrall. Coquettes
are the grand masters of this game, orchestrating a
back-and-forth movement between hope and frustration.
They bait with the promise of reward—the hope of physical
pleasure, happiness, fame by association, power—all of which,
however, proves elusive; yet this only makes their targets pursue
them the more. Coquettes seem totally self-sufficient: they do
not need you, they seem to say, and their narcissism proves devil-
ishly attractive. You want to conquer them but they hold the cards.
The strategy of the Coquette is never to offer total satisfaction.
Imitate the alternating heat and coolness of the Coquette
and 
you 
will 
keep 
the 
seduced 
at 
your 
heels.
The Hot and Cold Coquette
I
n the autumn of 1795, Paris was caught up in a strange giddiness. The
Reign of Terror that had followed the French Revolution had ended; the
sound of the guillotine was gone. The city breathed a collective sigh of re-
lief, and gave way to wild parties and endless festivals.
The young Napoleon Bonaparte, twenty-six at the time, had no inter-
est in such revelries. He had made a name for himself as a bright, audacious
general who had helped quell rebellion in the provinces, but his ambition
was boundless and he burned with desire for new conquests. So when, in
October of that year, the infamous thirty-three-year-old widow Josephine
de Beauharnais visited his offices, he couldn't help but be confused. Jose-
phine was so exotic, and everything about her was languorous and sensual.
(She capitalized on her foreignness—she came from the island of Mar-
tinique.) On the other hand she had a reputation as a loose woman, and the
shy Napoleon believed in marriage. Even so, when Josephine invited him
to one of her weekly soirees, he found himself accepting.
At the soiree he felt totally out of his element. All of the city's great
writers and wits were there, as well as the few of the nobility who had
survived—Josephine herself was a vicomtesse, and had narrowly escaped
the guillotine. The women were dazzling, some of them more beautiful
than the hostess, but all the men congregated around Josephine, drawn by
her graceful presence and queenly manner. Several times she left the men
behind and went to Napoleon's side; nothing could have flattered his inse-
cure ego more than such attention.
He began to pay her visits. Sometimes she would ignore him, and he
would leave in a fit of anger. Yet the next day a passionate letter would ar-
rive from Josephine, and he would rush to see her. Soon he was spending
most of his time with her. Her occasional shows of sadness, her bouts of
anger or of tears, only deepened his attachment. In March of 1796, Napo-
leon married Josephine.
Two days after his wedding, Napoleon left to lead a campaign in northern
Italy against the Austrians. "You are the constant object of my thoughts,"
he wrote to his wife from abroad. "My imagination exhausts itself in guess-
ing what you are doing." His generals saw him distracted: he would leave
meetings early, spend hours writing letters, or stare at the miniature of
Josephine he wore around his neck. He had been driven to this state by the
unbearable distance between them and by a slight coldness he now detected
There are indeed men who
are attached more by
resistance than by yielding
and who unwittingly prefer
a variable sky, now
splendid, now black and
vexed by lightnings, to
love's unclouded blue. Let
us not forget that Josephine
had to deal with a
conqueror and that love
resembles war. She did not
surrender, she let herself be
conquered. Had she been
more tender, more
attentive, more loving,
perhaps Bonaparte would
have loved her less.
—IMBERT DE SAINT-AMAND,
QUOTED IN 
THE EMPRESS
JOSEPHINE: 
NAPOLEON'S
ENCHANTRESS, PHILIP W.
SERGEANT
Coquettes know how to
please; not how to love,
which is why men love
them so much.
—PIERRE MARIVAUX
69
70 
• 
The Art of Seduction
in her—she wrote infrequently, and her letters lacked passion; nor did she
join him in Italy. He had to finish his war fast, so that he could return to
her side. Engaging the enemy with unusual zeal, he began to make mis-
takes. "To live for Josephine!" he wrote to her. "I work to get near you; I
kill myself to reach you." His letters became more passionate and erotic; a
friend of Josephine's who saw them wrote, "The handwriting [was] almost
indecipherable, the spelling shaky, the style bizarre and confused . . . . What
a position for a woman to find herself in—being the motivating force be-
hind the triumphal march of an entire army."
Months went by in which Napoleon begged Josephine to come to Italy
and she made endless excuses. But finally she agreed to come, and left Paris
for Brescia, where he was headquartered. A near encounter with the enemy
along the way, however, forced her to detour to Milan. Napoleon was away
from Brescia, in battle; when he returned to find her still absent, he blamed
his foe General Würmser and swore revenge. For the next few months he
seemed to pursue two targets with equal energy: Wiirmser and Josephine.
His wife was never where she was supposed to be: "I reach Milan, rush to
your house, having thrown aside everything in order to clasp you in my
arms. You are not there!" Napoleon would turn angry and jealous, but
when he finally caught up with Josephine, the slightest of her favors melted
his heart. He took long rides with her in a darkened carriage, while his
generals fumed—meetings were missed, orders and strategies improvised.
"Never," he later wrote to her, "has a woman been in such complete mas-
tery of another's heart." And yet their time together was so short. During a
campaign that lasted almost a year, Napoleon spent a mere fifteen nights
with his new bride.
Napoleon later heard rumors that Josephine had taken a lover while he
was in Italy. His feelings toward her cooled, and he himself took an endless
series of mistresses. Yet Josephine was never really concerned about this
threat to her power over her husband; a few tears, some theatrics, a little
coldness on her part, and he remained her slave. In 1804, he had her
crowned empress, and had she born him a son, she would have remained
empress to the end. When Napoleon lay on his deathbed, the last word he
uttered was "Josephine."
During the French Revolution, Josephine had come within minutes of los-
ing her head on the guillotine. The experience left her without illusions,
and with two goals in mind: to live a life of pleasure, and to find the man
who could best supply it. She set her sights on Napoleon early on. He was
young, and had a brilliant future. Beneath his calm exterior, Josephine
sensed, he was highly emotional and aggressive, but this did not intimidate
her—it only revealed his insecurity and weakness. He would be easy to en-
slave. First, Josephine adapted to his moods, charmed him with her femi-
nine grace, warmed him with her looks and manner. He wanted to possess
her. And once she had aroused this desire, her power lay in postponing its
satisfaction, withdrawing from him, frustrating him. In fact the torture of
An absence, the declining
of an invitation to dinner,
an 
unintentional,
unconscious harshness are
of more service than all
the cosmetics and fine
clothes in the world.
—MARCEL PROUST
There's also nightly, to the
unintiated, 
\ A peril—not
indeed like love or
marriage, \ But not the less
for this to he depreciated: \
It is—I meant and mean
not to disparage \ The
show of virtue even in the
vitiated— 
\ It adds an
outward grace unto their
carriage— \ But to
denounce the amphibious
sort of harlot, \ Couleur
de rose, who's neither
white nor scarlet. \ Such is
your cold coquette, who
can't say say "no," \And
won't say "yes," and keeps
you on- and off-ing \ On a
lee shore, till it begins to
blow— 
\ Then sees your
heart wreck'd with an
inward scoffing. \ This
works a world of
sentimental woe, 
\ And
sends new Werters yearly
to the coffin; \ But yet is
merely innocent flirtation, 
\
Not quite adultery, but
adulteration.
— L O R D B Y R O N ,
THE 
COLD 
COQUETTE
There is a way to represent
one's cause and in doing so
to treat the audience in
such a cool and
condescending manner that
they are bound to notice
one is not doing it to please
them. 
The principle should
always be not to make
concessions to those who
don't have anything to give
but who have everything to
gain from us. We can wait
The Coquette 
• 
71
the chase gave Napoleon a masochistic pleasure. He yearned to subdue her
independent spirit, as if she were an enemy in battle.
People are inherently perverse. An easy conquest has a lower value than
a difficult one; we are only really excited by what is denied us, by what we
cannot possess in full. Your greatest power in seduction is your ability to
turn away, to make others come after you, delaying their satisfaction. Most
people miscalculate and surrender too soon, worried that the other person
will lose interest, or that giving the other what he or she wants will grant
the giver a kind of power. The truth is the opposite: once you satisfy some-
one, you no longer have the initiative, and you open yourself to the possi-
bility that he or she will lose interest at the slightest whim. Remember:
vanity is critical in love. Make your targets afraid that you may be with-
drawing, that you may not really be interested, and you arouse their innate
insecurity, their fear that as you have gotten to know them they have be-
come less exciting to you. These insecurities are devastating. Then, once
you have made them uncertain of you and of themselves, reignite their
hope, making them feel desired again. Hot and cold, hot and cold—such
coquetry is perversely pleasurable, heightening interest and keeping the ini-
tiative on your side. Never be put off by your target's anger; it is a sure sign
of enslavement.
She who would long retain her power must use her lover ill.
—OVID
The Cold Coquette
I
n 1952, the writer Truman Capote, a recent success in literary and social
circles, began to receive an almost daily barrage of fan mail from a young
man named Andy Warhol. An illustrator for shoe designers, fashion maga-
zines, and the like, Warhol made pretty, stylized drawings, some of which
he sent to Capote, hoping the author would include them in one of his
books. Capote did not respond. One day he came home to find Warhol
talking to his mother, with whom Capote lived. And Warhol began to tele-
phone almost daily. Finally Capote put an end to all this: "He seemed one
of those hopeless people that you just know nothing's ever going to happen
to. Just a hopeless, born loser," the writer later said.
Ten years later, Andy Warhol, aspiring artist, had his first one-man
show at the Stable Gallery in Manhattan. On the walls were a series of
silkscreened paintings based on the Campbell's soup can and the Coca-Cola
bottle. At the opening and at the party afterward, Warhol stood to the side,
staring blankly, talking little. What a contrast he was to the older generation
of artists, the abstract expressionists—mostly hard-drinking womanizers full
of bluster and aggression, big talkers who had dominated the art scene for
the previous fifteen years. And what a change from the Warhol who had
badgered Capote, and art dealers and patrons as well. The critics were both
until they are begging on
their knees even if it takes
a very long time.
—SIGMUND FREUD, IN A LETTER
TO A PUPIL, QUOTED IN PAUL
ROAZEN, FREUD AND HIS
FOLLOWERS
When 
her time was come,
that 
nymph 
most fair
brought forth a child with
whom one could have
fallen in love even in his
cradle, and she called him
Narcissus. . . . Cephisus's
child had reached his
sixteenth year, and could
be counted as at once boy
and man. Many lads and
many girls fell in love with
him, but his soft young
body housed a pride so
unyielding that none of
those boys or girls dared to
touch him. One day, as he
was driving timid deer into
his nets, he was seen by
that talkative nymph who
cannot stay silent when
another speaks, but yet has
not learned to speak first
herself. Her name is Echo,
and she always answers
back. . . . • So when she
saw 
Narcissus 
wandering
through the lonely
countryside, 
Echo fell in
love with him and followed
secretly in his steps. The
more closely she followed,
the nearer was the fire
which scorched her: just as
sulphur, smeared round the
tops of torches, is quickly
kindled when aflame is
brought near it. How often
she wished to make
flattering overtures to him,
to approach him with
tender pleas! • The boy, by
chance, 
had wandered
away from 
his faithful 
band
of comrades, and he called
out: 
"Is there anybody
here?" Echo answered:
"Here!" 
Narcissus stood
still in astonishment,
72 
• The Art of Seduction
baffled and intrigued by the coldness of Warhol's work; they could not fig-
ure out how the artist felt about his subjects. What was his position? What
was he trying to say? When they asked, he would simply reply, "I just do it
because I like it," or, "I love soup." The critics went wild with their inter-
pretations: "An art like Warhol's is necessarily parasitic upon the myths of
its time," one wrote; another, "The decision not to decide is a paradox that
is equal to an idea which expresses nothing but then gives it dimension."
The show was a huge success, establishing Warhol as a leading figure in a
new movement, pop art.
In 1963, Warhol rented a large Manhattan loft space that he called the
Factory, and that soon became the hub of a large entourage—hangers-on,
actors, aspiring artists. Here, particularly at night, Warhol would simply
wander about, or stand in a corner. People would gather around him, fight
for his attention, throw questions at him, and he would answer, in his non-
committal way. But no one could get close to him, physically or mentally;
he would not allow it. At the same time, if he walked by you without giv-
ing you his usual "Oh, hi," you were devastated. He hadn't noticed you;
perhaps you were on the way out.
Increasingly interested in filmmaking, Warhol cast his friends in his
movies. In effect he was offering them a kind of instant celebrity (their
"fifteen minutes of fame"—the phrase is Warhol's). Soon people were
competing for roles. He groomed women in particular for stardom: Edie
Sedgwick, Viva, Nico. Just being around him offered a kind of celebrity by
association. The Factory became the place to be seen, and stars like Judy
Garland and Tennessee Williams would go to parties there, rubbing elbows
with Sedgwick, Viva, and the bohemian lower echelons whom Warhol had
befriended. People began sending limos to bring him to parties of their
own; his presence alone was enough to turn a social evening into a scene—
even though he would pass through in near silence, keeping to himself and
leaving early.
In 1967, Warhol was asked to lecture at various colleges. He hated to
talk, particularly about his own art; "The less something has to say," he felt,
"the more perfect it is." But the money was good and Warhol always found
it hard to say no. His solution was simple: he asked an actor, Allen
Midgette, to impersonate him. Midgette was dark-haired, tan, part Chero-
kee Indian. He did not resemble Warhol in the least. But Warhol and
friends covered his face with powder, sprayed his brown hair silver, gave
him dark glasses, and dressed him in Warhol's clothes. Since Midgette knew
nothing about art, his answers to students' questions tended to be as short
and enigmatic as Warhol's own. The impersonation worked. Warhol may
have been an icon, but no one really knew him, and since he often wore
dark glasses, even his face was unfamiliar in any detail. The lecture audi-
ences were far enough away to be teased by the thought of his presence,
and no one got close enough to catch the deception. He remained elusive.
* 
* 
*
looking round in every
direction. . . . He looked
behind him, and when no
one appeared, cried again:
"Why 
are you avoiding
me?" But all he heard
were his own words echoed
back. Still he persisted,
deceived by what he took to
be another's voice, and
said, "Come here, and let
us meet!" Echo answered:
"Let us meet!" Never
again would she reply more
willingly to any sound. To
make good her words she
came out of the wood and
made to throw her arms
round the neck she loved:
but he fled from her, crying
as he did so, "Away with
these embraces! I would die
before I would have you
touch me!" . . . Thus
scorned, she concealed
herself in the woods, hiding
her shamed face in the
shelter of the leaves, and
ever since that day she
dwells in lonely caves. Yet
still her love remained
firmly rooted in her heart,
and was increased by the
pain of having been
rejected. . . . • Narcissus
had played with her
affections, treating her as he
had previously treated other
spirits of the waters and
the woods, and his male
admirers too. Then one of
those he had scorned raised
up his hands to heaven
and prayed: "May he
himself fall in love with
another, as we have done
with him! May he too be
unable to gain his loved
one!" Nemesis heard and
granted his righteous
prayer. . . . • Narcissus,
wearied with hunting in
the heat of the day, lay
down here [by a clear
pool]: for he was attracted
by the beauty of the place,
and by the spring. While
he sought to quench his
thirst, another thirst grew
The Coquette • 73
Early on in life, Andy Warhol was plagued by conflicting emotions: he des-
perately wanted fame, but he was naturally passive and shy "I've always had
a conflict," he later said, "because I'm shy and yet I like to take up a lot of
personal space. Mom always said, 'Don't be pushy, but let everyone know
you're around.' " At first Warhol tried to make himself more aggressive,
straining to please and court. It didn't work. After ten futile years he
stopped trying and gave in to his own passivity—only to discover the power
that withdrawal commands.
Warhol began this process in his artwork, which changed dramatically
in the early 1960s. His new paintings of soup cans, green stamps, and other
widely known images did not assault you with meaning; in fact their mean-
ing was totally elusive, which only heightened their fascination. They drew
you in by their immediacy, their visual power, their coldness. Having trans-
formed his art, Warhol also transformed himself: like his paintings, he be-
came pure surface. He trained himself to hold himself back, to stop talking.
The world is full of people who try, people who impose themselves ag-
gressively. They may gain temporary victories, but the longer they are
around, the more people want to confound them. They leave no space
around themselves, and without space there can be no seduction. Cold Co-
quettes create space by remaining elusive and making others pursue them.
Their coolness suggests a comfortable confidence that is exciting to be
around, even though it may not actually exist; their silence makes you want
to talk. Their self-containment, their appearance of having no need for
other people, only makes us want to do things for them, hungry for the
slightest sign of recognition and favor. Cold Coquettes may be maddening
to deal with—never committing but never saying no, never allowing close-
ness—but more often than not we find ourselves coming back to them, ad-
dicted to the coldness they project. Remember: seduction is a process of
drawing people in, making them want to pursue and possess you. Seem dis-
tant and people will go mad to win your favor. Humans, like nature, hate a
vacuum, and emotional distance and silence make them strain to fill up the
empty space with words and heat of their own. Like Warhol, stand back
and let them fight over you.
[Narcissistic] women have the greatest fascination for
men. . . . The charm of a child lies to a great extent in his
narcissism, his self-sufficiency and inaccessibility, just as
does the charm of certain animals which seem not to con-
cern themselves about us, such as cats. . . . It is as if we
envied them their power of retaining a blissful state of
mind—an unassailable libido-position which we ourselves
have since abandoned.
—SIGMUND FREUD
in him, and as he drank,
he was enchanted by the
beautiful reflection that he
saw. He fell in love with
an insubstantial hope,
mistaking a mere shadow
for a real body. Spellbound
by his own self, he
remained there motionless,
with fixed gaze, like a
statue carved from Parian
marble. . . . Unwittingly,
he desired himself, and was
himself the object of his
own approval, at once
seeking and sought, himself
kindling the flame with
which he burned. How
often did he vainly kiss the
treacherous pool, how often
plunge his arms deep in the
waters, as he tried to clasp
the neck he saw! But he
could not lay hold upon
himself. He did not know
what he was looking at,
but was fired by the sight,
and excited by the very
illusion that deceived his
eyes. Poor foolish boy, why
vainly grasp at the fleeting
image that eludes you?
The thing you are seeking
does not exist: only turn
aside and you will lose
what you love. What you
see is but the shadow cast
by your reflection; in itself
it is nothing. It comes with
you, and lasts while you
are there; it will go when
you go, if go you can. . . .
• He laid down his weary
head on the green grass,
and death closed the eyes
which so admired their
owner's beauty. Even then,
when he was received into
the abode of the dead, he
kept looking at himself in
the waters of the Styx. His
sisters, the nymphs of the
spring, mourned for him,
and cut off their hair in
tribute to their brother. The
wood nymphs mourned
him too, and Echo sang her
refrain 
to their lament. •
The pyre, the tossing
74 
• 
The Art of Seduction
Keys to the Character
A
ccording to the popular concept, Coquettes are consummate teases,
experts at arousing desire through a provocative appearance or an al-
luring attitude. But the real essence of Coquettes is in fact their ability to
trap people emotionally, and to keep their victims in their clutches long af-
ter that first titillation of desire. This is the skill that puts them in the ranks
of the most effective seducers. Their success may seem somewhat odd,
since they are essentially cold and distant creatures; should you ever get to
know one well, you will sense his or her inner core of detachment and self-
love. It may seem logical that once you become aware of this quality you
will see through the Coquette's manipulations and lose interest, but more
often we see the opposite. After years of Josephine's coquettish games,
Napoleon was well aware of how manipulative she was. Yet this conqueror
of kingdoms, this skeptic and cynic, could not leave her.
To understand the peculiar power of the Coquette, you must first
understand a critical property of love and desire: the more obviously you
pursue a person, the more likely you are to chase them away. Too much at-
tention can be interesting for a while, but it soon grows cloying and finally
becomes claustrophobic and frightening. It signals weakness and neediness,
an unseductive combination. How often we make this mistake, thinking
our persistent presence will reassure. But Coquettes have an inherent un-
derstanding of this particular dynamic. Masters of selective withdrawal,
they hint at coldness, absenting themselves at times to keep their victim off
balance, surprised, intrigued. Their withdrawals make them mysterious,
and we build them up in our imaginations. (Familiarity, on the other hand,
undermines what we have built.) A bout of distance engages the emotions
further; instead of making us angry, it makes us insecure. Perhaps they
don't really like us, perhaps we have lost their interest. Once our vanity is at
stake, we succumb to the Coquette just to prove we are still desirable. Re-
member: the essence of the Coquette lies not in the tease and temptation
but in the subsequent step back, the emotional withdrawal. That is the key
to enslaving desire.
To adopt the power of the Coquette, you must understand one other
quality: narcissism. Sigmund Freud characterized the "narcissistic woman"
(most often obsessed with her appearance) as the type with the greatest ef-
fect on men. As children, he explains, we pass through a narcissistic phase
that is immensely pleasurable. Happily self-contained and self-involved, we
have little psychic need of other people. Then, slowly, we are socialized and
taught to pay attention to others—but we secretly yearn for those blissful
early days. The narcissistic woman reminds a man of that period, and makes
him envious. Perhaps contact with her will restore that feeling of self-
involvement.
A man is also challenged by the female Coquette's independence—he
wants to be the one to make her dependent, to burst her bubble. It is far
more likely, though, that he will end up becoming her slave, giving her in-
torches, and the bier, were
now being prepared, but
his body was nowhere to be
found. Instead of his
corpse, they discovered a
flower with a circle of white
petals round a yellow
centre.
— O V I D , M E T A M O R P H O S E S ,
TRANSLATED BY
MARY M. INNES
Selfishness is one of the
qualities apt to inspire love.
—NATHANIEL HAWTHORNE
The Socrates whom you
see has a tendency to fall in
love with good-looking
young men, and is always
in their society and in an
ecstasy about them...but
once you see beneath the
surface you will discover a
degree of self-control of
which you can hardly form
a notion, gentlemen. . . .
He spends his whole life
pretending 
and playing
with people, and I doubt
whether anyone has ever
seen the treasures which are
revealed when he grows
serious and exposes what
he keeps inside. •
. . . Believing that he was
serious in his admiration of
my charms, I supposed that
a wonderful piece of good
luck had befallen me; I
should now be able, in
return for my favours, 
to
find out all that Socrates
knew; for you must know
that there was no limit to
the pride that I felt in my
good looks. With this end
in view I sent away my
attendant, whom hitherto I
had always kept with me
in my encounters with
Socrates, and left myself
alone with him. I must tell
you the whole truth; attend
carefully, and do you,
The Coquette • 
75
cessant attention to gain her love, and failing. For the narcissistic woman is
not emotionally needy; she is self-sufficient. And this is surprisingly seduc-
tive. Self-esteem is critical in seduction. (Your attitude toward yourself is
read by the other person in subtle and unconscious ways.) Low self-esteem
repels, confidence and self-sufficiency attract. The less you seem to need
other people, the more likely others will be drawn to you. Understand the
importance of this in all relationships and you will find your neediness
easier to suppress. But do not confuse self-absorption with seductive narcis-
sism. Talking endlessly about yourself is eminently anti-seductive, revealing
not self-sufficiency but insecurity.
The Coquette is traditionally thought of as female, and certainly the
strategy was for centuries one of the few weapons women had to engage
and enslave a man's desire. One ploy of the Coquette is the withdrawal of
sexual favors, and we see women using this trick throughout history: the
great seventeenth-century French courtesan Ninon de l'Enclos was desired
by all the preeminent men of France, but only attained real power when
she made it clear that she would no longer sleep with a man as part of her
duty. This drove her admirers to despair, which she knew how to make
worse by favoring a man temporarily, granting him access to her body for a
few months, then returning him to the pack of the unsatisfied. Queen
Elizabeth I of England took coquettishness to the extreme, deliberately
arousing the desires of her courtiers but sleeping with none of them.
Long a tool of social power for women, coquettishness was slowly adapted
by men, particularly the great seducers of the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries who envied the power of such women. One seventeenth-century
seducer, the Duc de Lauzun, was a master at exciting a woman, then sud-
denly acting aloof. Women went wild over him. Today, coquetry is gender-
less. In a world that discourages direct confrontation, teasing, coldness, and
selective aloofness are a form of indirect power that brilliantly disguises its
own aggression.
The Coquette must first and foremost be able to excite the target of his
or her attention. The attraction can be sexual, the lure of celebrity, what-
ever it takes. At the same time, the Coquette sends contrary signals that
stimulate contrary responses, plunging the victim into confusion. The
eponymous heroine of Marivaux's eighteenth-century French novel Mari-
anne is the consummate Coquette. Going to church, she dresses tastefully,
but leaves her hair slightly uncombed. In the middle of the service she
seems to notice this error and starts to fix it, revealing her bare arm as she
does so; such things were not to be seen in an eighteenth-century church,
and all male eyes fix on her for that moment. The tension is much more
powerful than if she were outside, or were tartily dressed. Remember: ob-
vious flirting will reveal your intentions too clearly. Better to be ambiguous
and even contradictory, frustrating at the same time that you stimulate.
The great spiritual leader Jiddu Krishnamurti was an unconscious co-
quette. Revered by theosophists as their "World Teacher," Krishnamurti was
also a dandy. He loved elegant clothing and was devilishly handsome. At the
Socrates, pull me up if
anything I say is false. I
allowed myself to be alone
with him, I say,
gentlemen, and I naturally
supposed that he would
embark on conversation of
the type that a lover
usually addresses to his
darling when they are
tête-à-tête, and I was
glad. Nothing of the kind;
he spent the day with me
in the sort of talk which is
habitual with him, and
then left me and went
away. Next I invited him
to train with me in the
gymnasium, 
and I
accompanied him there,
believing that I should
succeed with him now. He
took exercise and wrestled
with me frequently, with
no one else present, but I
need hardly say that I was
no nearer my goal. Finding
that this was no good
either, I resolved to make a
direct assault on him, and
not to give up what I had
once undertaken; I felt that
I must get to the bottom of
the matter. So I invited
him to dine with me,
behaving just like a lover
who has designs upon his
favourite. He was in no
hurry to accept this
invitation, but at last he
agreed to come. The first
time he came he rose to go
away immediately after
dinner, and on that occasion
I was ashamed and let him
go. But I returned to the
attack, and this time I kept
him in conversation after
dinner far into the night,
and then, when he wanted
to be going, I compelled
him to stay, on the plea
that it was too late for him
to go. • So he betook
himself to rest, using as a
bed the couch on which he
had reclined at dinner, next
to mine, and there was
nobody sleeping in the
76 
• 
The Art of Seduction
same time, he practiced celibacy, and had a horror of being touched. In
1929 he shocked theosophists around the world by proclaiming that he was
not a god or even a guru, and did not want any followers. This only height-
ened his appeal: women fell in love with him in great numbers, and his ad-
visers grew even more devoted. Physically and psychologically, Krishnamurti
was sending contrary signals. While preaching a generalized love and accep-
tance, in his personal life he pushed people away His attractiveness and his
obsession with his appearance might have gained him attention but by
themselves would not have made women fall in love with him; his lessons of
celibacy and spiritual virtue would have created disciples but not physical
love. The combination of these traits, however, both drew people in and
frustrated them, a coquettish dynamic that created an emotional and physical
attachment to a man who shunned such things. His withdrawal from the
world had the effect of only heightening the devotion of his followers.
Coquetry depends on developing a pattern to keep the other person off
balance. The strategy is extremely effective. Experiencing a pleasure once,
we yearn to repeat it; so the Coquette gives us pleasure, then withdraws it.
The alternation of heat and cold is the most common pattern, and has sev-
eral variations. The eighth-century Chinese Coquette Yang Kuei-Fei to-
tally enslaved the Emperor Ming Huang through a pattern of kindness and
bitterness: having charmed him with kindness, she would suddenly get an-
gry, blaming him harshly for the slightest mistake. Unable to live without
the pleasure she gave him, the emperor would turn the court upside down
to please her when she was angry or upset. Her tears had a similar effect:
what had he done, why was she so sad? He eventually ruined himself and
his kingdom trying to keep her happy. Tears, anger, and the production of
guilt are all the tools of the Coquette. A similar dynamic appears in a lover's
quarrel: when a couple fights, then reconciles, the joys of reconciliation
only make the attachment stronger. Sadness of any sort is also seductive,
particularly if it seems deep-rooted, even spiritual, rather than needy or
pathetic—it makes people come to you.
Coquettes are never jealous—that would undermine their image of
fundamental self-sufficiency. But they are masters at inciting jealousy: by
paying attention to a third party, creating a triangle of desire, they signal to
their victims that they may not be that interested. This triangulation is ex-
tremely seductive, in social contexts as well as erotic ones. Interested in nar-
cissistic women, Freud was a narcissist himself, and his aloofness drove his
disciples crazy. (They even had a name for it—his "god complex.") Behav-
ing like a kind of messiah, too lofty for petty emotions, Freud always main-
tained a distance between himself and his students, hardly ever inviting
them over for dinner, say, and keeping his private life shrouded in mystery.
Yet he would occasionally choose an acolyte to confide in—Carl Jung,
Otto Rank, Lou Andreas-Salomé. The result was that his disciples went
berserk trying to win his favor, to be the one he chose. Their jealousy
when he suddenly favored one of them only increased his power over
them. People's natural insecurities are heightened in group settings; by
room but ourselves. • . . . I
swear by all the gods in
heaven that for anything
that had happened between
us when I got up after
sleeping with Socrates, I
might have been sleeping
with my father or elder
brother. • What do you
suppose to have been my
state of mind after that?
On the one hand I
realized that I had been
slighted, but on the other I
felt a reverence for Socrates'
character, his self-control
and courage . . . The result
was that I could neither
bring myself to be angry
with him and tear myself
away from his society, nor
find a way of subduing
him to my will. . . . I was
utterly disconcerted, and
wandered about in a state
of enslavement to the man
the like of which has never
been known.
—ALCIBIADES, QUOTED IN
PLATO, 
THE SYMPOSIUM
The Coquette • 
77
maintaining aloofness, Coquettes start a competition to win their favor. If
the ability to use third parties to make targets jealous is a critical seductive
skill, Sigmund Freud was a grand Coquette.
All of the tactics of the Coquette have been adapted by political leaders
to make the public fall in love. While exciting the masses, these leaders re-
main inwardly detached, which keeps them in control. The political scientist
Roberto Michels has even referred to such politicians as Cold Coquettes.
Napoleon played the Coquette with the French: after the grand successes of
the Italian campaign had made him a beloved hero, he left France to con-
quer Egypt, knowing that in his absence the government would fall apart,
the people would hunger for his return, and their love would serve as the
base for an expansion of his power. After exciting the masses with a rousing
speech, Mao Zedong would disappear from sight for days on end, making
himself an object of cultish worship. And no one was more of a Coquette
than Yugoslav leader Josef Tito, who alternated between distance from and
emotional identification with his people. All of these political leaders were
confirmed narcissists. In times of trouble, when people feel insecure, the ef-
fect of such political coquetry is even more powerful. It is important to real-
ize that coquetry is extremely effective on a group, stimulating jealousy, love,
and intense devotion. If you play such a role with a group, remember to
keep an emotional and physical distance. This will allow you to cry and
laugh on command, project self-sufficiency, and with such detachment you
will be able play people's emotions like a piano.
Symbol: The
Shadow. It cannot be grasped. Chase
your shadow and it will flee; turn your back on
it and it will follow you. It is also a person's dark side,
the thing that makes them mysterious. After they have given
us pleasure, the shadow of their withdrawal makes us yearn
for their return, much as clouds make us yearn for the sun.
78 
• 
The Art of Seduction
Dangers
C
oquettes face an obvious danger: they play with volatile emotions.
Every time the pendulum swings, love shifts to hate. So they must or-
chestrate everything carefully. Their absences cannot be too long, their
bouts of anger must be quickly followed by smiles. Coquettes can keep
their victims emotionally entrapped for a long time, but over months or
years the dynamic can begin to prove tiresome. Jiang Qing, later known as
Madame Mao, used coquettish skills to capture the heart of Mao Tse-tung,
but after ten years the quarreling, the tears and the coolness became in-
tensely irritating, and once irritation proved stronger than love, Mao was
able to detach. Josephine, a more brilliant Coquette, was able to adapt, by
spending a whole year without playing coy or withdrawing from Napoleon.
Timing is everything. On the other hand, though, the Coquette stirs up
powerful emotions, and breakups often prove temporary. The Coquette is
addictive: after the failure of the social plan Mao called the Great Leap For-
ward, Madame Mao was able to reestablish her power over her devastated
husband.
The Cold Coquette can stimulate a particularly deep hatred. Valerie
Solanas was a young woman who fell under Andy Warhol's spell. She had
written a play that amused him, and she was given the impression he might
turn it into a film. She imagined becoming a celebrity. She also got in-
volved in the feminist movement, and when, in June 1968, it dawned on
her that Warhol was toying with her, she directed her growing rage at men
on him and shot him three times, nearly killing him. Cold Coquettes may
stimulate feelings that are not so much erotic as intellectual, less passion and
more fascination. The hatred they can stir up is all the more insidious and
dangerous, for it may not be counterbalanced by a deep love. They must
realize the limits of the game, and the disturbing effects they can have on
less stable people.
Charm is seduction without sex. Charmers are consummate manipulators,
masking their cleverness by creating a mood of pleasure and comfort. Their
method is simple: they deflect attention from themselves and focus it on their
target. They understand your spirit, feel your pain, adapt to your moods.
In the presence of a Charmer you feel better about yourself. Charmers
do not argue or fight, complain, or pester—what could be more se-
ductive? By drawing you in with their indulgence they make
you dependent on them, and their power grows. Learn to
cast the Charmer's spell by aiming at people's
primary 
weaknesses: 
vanity 
and
self-esteem.
The Art of Charm
S
exuality is extremely disruptive. The insecurities and emotions it stirs
up can often cut short a relationship that would otherwise be deeper
and longer lasting. The Charmer's solution is to fulfill the aspects of
sexuality that are so alluring and addictive—the focused attention, the
boosted self-esteem, the pleasurable wooing, the understanding (real or
illusory)—but subtract the sex itself. It's not that the Charmer represses
or discourages sexuality; lurking beneath the surface of any attempt at
charm is a sexual tease, a possibility. Charm cannot exist without a hint of
sexual tension. It cannot be maintained, however, unless sex is kept at bay
or in the background.
The word "charm" comes from the Latin carmen, a song, but also an in-
cantation tied to the casting of a magical spell. The Charmer implicitly
grasps this history, casting a spell by giving people something that holds
their attention, that fascinates them. And the secret to capturing people's
attention, while lowering their powers of reason, is to strike at the things
they have the least control over: their ego, their vanity, and their self-
esteem. As Benjamin Disraeli said, "Talk to a man about himself and
he will listen for hours." The strategy can never be obvious; subtlety is the
Charmer's great skill. If the target is to be kept from seeing through
the Charmer's efforts, and from growing suspicious, maybe even tiring of the
attention, a light touch is essential. The Charmer is like a beam of light that
doesn't play directly on a target but throws a pleasantly diffused glow over it.
Charm can be applied to a group as well as to an individual: a leader
can charm the public. The dynamic is similar. The following are the laws of
charm, culled from the stories of the most successful charmers in history.
Make your target the center of attention. Charmers fade into the back-
ground; their targets become the subject of their interest. To be a Charmer
you have to learn to listen and observe. Let your targets talk, revealing
themselves in the process. As you find out more about them—their
strengths, and more important their weaknesses—you can individualize
your attention, appealing to their specific desires and needs, tailoring your
flatteries to their insecurities. By adapting to their spirit and empathizing
with their woes, you can make them feel bigger and better, validating their
sense of self-worth. Make them the star of the show and they will become
Birds are taken with pipes
that imitate their own
voices, and men with those
sayings that are most
agreeable to their own
opinions.
—SAMUEL BUTLER
Go with the bough, you'll
bend it; \ Use brute force,
it'll snap. \ Go with the
current: that's how to swim
across rivers— \ Fighting
upstream's no good. \ Go
easy with lions or tigers if
you aim to tame them; \
The bull gets inured to the
plough by slow degrees. . . . \
So, yield if she shows
resistance: \ That way
you'll win in the end. fust
be sure to play \ The part
she allots you. Censure the
things she censures, \
Endorse her endorsements,
echo her every word, \ Pro
or con, and laugh whenever
she laughs; remember, \ If
she weeps, to weep too:
take your cue \ From her
every expression. 
Suppose
she's playing a board game,
\ Then throw the dice
carelessly, move \ Your
pieces all wrong. . . . \
Don't jib at a slavish task
like holding \ Her mirror:
81
82 
• 
The Art of Seduction
addicted to you and grow dependent on you. On a mass level, make ges-
tures of self-sacrifice (no matter how fake) to show the public that you
share their pain and are working in their interest, self-interest being the
public form of egotism.
Be a source of pleasure. No one wants to hear about your problems and
troubles. Listen to your targets' complaints, but more important, distract
them from their problems by giving them pleasure. (Do this often enough
and they will fall under your spell.) Being lighthearted and fun is always
more charming than being serious and critical. An energetic presence is
likewise more charming than lethargy, which hints at boredom, an enor-
mous social taboo; and elegance and style will usually win out over vul-
garity, since most people like to associate themselves with whatever they
think elevated and cultured. In politics, provide illusion and myth rather
than reality. Instead of asking people to sacrifice for the greater good, talk
of grand moral issues. An appeal that makes people feel good will translate
into votes and power.
Bring antagonism into harmony. The court is a cauldron of resentment
and envy, where the sourness of a single brooding Cassius can quickly turn
into a conspiracy. The Charmer knows how to smooth out conflict. Never
stir up antagonisms that will prove immune to your charm; in the face of
those who are aggressive, retreat, let them have their little victories. Yield-
ing and indulgence will charm the fight out of any potential enemies.
Never criticize people overtly—that will make them insecure, and resistant
to change. Plant ideas, insinuate suggestions. Charmed by your diplomatic
skills, people will not notice your growing power.
Lull your victims into ease and comfort. Charm is like the hypnotist's
trick with the swinging watch: the more relaxed the target, the easier it is
to bend him or her to your will. The key to making your victims feel com-
fortable is to mirror them, adapt to their moods. People are narcissists—
they are drawn to those most similar to themselves. Seem to share their
values and tastes, to understand their spirit, and they will fall under your
spell. This works particularly well if you are an outsider: showing that you
share the values of your adopted group or country (you have learned their
language, you prefer their customs, etc.) is immensely charming, since for
you this preference is a choice, not a question of birth. Never pester or be
overly persistent—these uncharming qualities will disrupt the relaxation
you need to cast your spell.
slavish or not, such
attentions please. . . .
—OVID, 
THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
Disraeli was asked to
dinner, and came in green
velvet trousers, with a
canary waistcoat, buckle
shoes, and lace cuffs. His
appearance at first proved
disquieting, but on leaving
the table the guests
remarked to each other that
the wittiest talker at the
luncheon-party 
was the
man in the yellow
waistcoat. Benjamin had
made great advances in
social conversation since the
days of Murray's dinners.
Faithful to his method, he
noted the stages: "Do not
talk too much at present;
do not try to talk. But
whenever you speak, speak
with self-possession. 
Speak
in a subdued tone, and
always look at the person
whom you are addressing.
Before one can engage in
general conversation with
any effect, there is a certain
acquaintance with trifling
but amusing subjects which
must be first attained. You
will soon pick up sufficient
by listening and observing.
Never argue. In society
nothing must be discussed;
give only results. If any
person differ from you, bow
and turn the conversation.
In society never think;
always be on the watch, or
you will miss many
opportunities and say
many disagreeable things.
Talk to women, talk to
women as much as you
can. This is the best
school. This is the way to
gain fluency, because you
need not care what you say,
and had better not be
sensible. They, too, will
rally you on many points,
The Charmer • 83
Show calm and self-possession in the face of adversity. Adversity and
setbacks actually provide the perfect setting for charm. Showing a calm, un-
ruffled exterior in the face of unpleasantness puts people at ease. You seem
patient, as if waiting for destiny to deal you a better card—or as if you were
confident you could charm the Fates themselves. Never show anger, ill
temper, or vengefulness, all disruptive emotions that will make people de-
fensive. In the politics of large groups, welcome adversity as a chance to
show the charming qualities of magnanimity and poise. Let others get flus-
tered and upset—the contrast will redound to your favor. Never whine,
never complain, never try to justify yourself.
Make yourself useful. If done subtly, your ability to enhance the lives of
others will be devilishly seductive. Your social skills will prove important
here: creating a wide network of allies will give you the power to link
people up with each other, which will make them feel that by knowing
you they can make their lives easier. This is something no one can resist.
Follow-through is key: so many people will charm by promising a person
great things—a better job, a new contact, a big favor—but if they do not
follow through they make enemies instead of friends. Anyone can make a
promise; what sets you apart, and makes you charming, is your ability to
come through in the end, following up your promise with a definite action.
Conversely, if someone does you a favor, show your gratitude concretely.
In a world of bluff and smoke, real action and true helpfulness are perhaps
the ultimate charm.
Examples of Charmers
1. In the early 1870s, Queen Victoria of England had reached a low point
in her life. Her beloved husband, Prince Albert, had died in 1861, leaving
her more than grief stricken. In all of her decisions she had relied on his
advice; she was too uneducated and inexperienced to do otherwise, or so
everyone made her feel. In fact, with Albert's death, political discussions
and policy issues had come to bore her to tears. Now Victoria gradually
withdrew from the public eye. As a result, the monarchy became less popu-
lar and therefore less powerful.
In 1874, the Conservative Party came to power, and its leader, the
seventy-year-old Benjamin Disraeli, became prime minister. The protocol
of his accession to his seat demanded that he come to the palace for a pri-
vate meeting with the queen, who was fifty-five at the time. Two more un-
likely associates could not be imagined: Disraeli, who was Jewish by birth,
had dark skin and exotic features by English standards; as a young man he
had been a dandy, his dress bordering on the flamboyant, and he had writ-
ten popular novels that were romantic or even Gothic in style. The queen,
on the other hand, was dour and stubborn, formal in manner and simple in
and as they are women you
will not be offended.
Nothing is of so much
importance and of so
much use to a young man
entering life as to be well
criticised by women."
—ANDRÉ MAUROIS, DISRAELI,
TRANSLATED BY HAMISH MILES
You know what charm is:
a way of getting the answer
yes without having asked
any clear question.
—ALBERT CAMUS
A speech that carries its
audience along with it and
is applauded is often less
suggestive simply because it
is clear that it sets out to be
persuasive. People talking
together influence each
other in close proximity by
means of the tone of voice
they adopt and the way
they look at each other and
not only by the kind of
language they use. We are
right to call a good
conversationalist a charmer
in the magical sense of the
word.
—GUSTAVE 
TARDE, L'OPINION
ET LA FOULE, QUOTED IN SERGE
MOSCOVICI, THE AGE OF THE
CROWD
84 
• 
The Art of Seduction
taste. To please her, Disraeli was advised, he should curb his natural ele-
gance; but he disregarded what everyone had told him and appeared before
her as a gallant prince, falling to one knee, taking her hand, and kissing it,
saying, "I plight my troth to the kindest of mistresses." Disraeli pledged that
his work now was to realize Victoria's dreams. He praised her qualities so
fulsomely that she blushed; yet strangely enough, she did not find him
comical or offensive, but came out of the encounter smiling. Perhaps she
should give this strange man a chance, she thought, and she waited to see
what he would do next.
Victoria soon began receiving reports from Disraeli—on parliamentary
debates, policy issues, and so forth—that were unlike anything other minis-
ters had written. Addressing her as the "Faery Queen," and giving the
monarchy's various enemies all kinds of villainous code names, he filled his
notes with gossip. In a note about a new cabinet member, Disraeli wrote,
"He is more than six feet four inches in stature; like St. Peter's at Rome no
one is at first aware of his dimensions. But he has the sagacity of the ele-
phant as well as its form." The minister's blithe, informal spirit bordered on
disrespect, but the queen was enchanted. She read his reports voraciously,
and almost without her realizing it, her interest in politics was rekindled.
At the start of their relationship, Disraeli sent the queen all of his novels
as a gift. She in return presented him with the one book she had written,
Journal of Our Life in the Highlands. From then on he would toss out in his
letters and conversations with her the phrase, "We authors." The queen
would beam with pride. She would overhear him praising her to others—
her ideas, common sense, and feminine instincts, he said, made her the
equal of Elizabeth I. He rarely disagreed with her. At meetings with other
ministers, he would suddenly turn and ask her for advice. In 1875, when
Disraeli managed to finagle the purchase of the Suez Canal from the debt-
ridden khedive of Egypt, he presented his accomplishment to the queen as
if it were a realization of her own ideas about expanding the British Em-
pire. She did not realize the cause, but her confidence was growing by leaps
and bounds.
Victoria once sent flowers to her prime minister. He later returned the
favor, sending primroses, a flower so ordinary that some recipients might
have been insulted; but his gift came with a note: "Of all the flowers, the
one that retains its beauty longest, is sweet primrose." Disraeli was envelop-
ing Victoria in a fantasy atmosphere in which everything was a metaphor,
and the simplicity of the flower of course symbolized the queen—and also
the relationship between the two leaders. Victoria fell for the bait; prim-
roses were soon her favorite flower. In fact everything Disraeli did now met
with her approval. She allowed him to sit in her presence, an unheard-
of privilege. The two began to exchange valentines every February. The
queen would ask people what Disraeli had said at a party; when he paid a
little too much attention to Empress Augusta of Germany, she grew jeal-
ous. The courtiers wondered what had happened to the stubborn, formal
woman they had known—she was acting like an infatuated girl.
Wax, a substance naturally
hard and brittle, can be
made soft by the
application of a little
warmth, so that it will take
any shape you please. In
the same way, by being
polite and friendly, you can
make people pliable and
obliging, even though they
are apt to be crabbed and
malevolent. 
Hence
politeness is to human
nature what warmth is to
wax.
—ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER,
COUNSELS 
AND 
MAXIMS,
TRANSLATED BY T. BAILEY
SAUNDERS
Never explain. 
Never
complain.
—BENJAMIN DISRAELI
The Charmer • 85
In 1876, Disraeli steered through Parliament a bill declaring Queen
Victoria a "Queen-Empress." The queen was beside herself with joy. Out
of gratitude and certainly love, she elevated this Jewish dandy and novelist
to the peerage, making him Earl of Beaconsfield, the realization of a life-
long dream.
Disraeli knew how deceptive appearances can be: people were always judg-
ing him by his face and by his clothes, and he had learned never to do
the same to them. So he was not deceived by Queen Victoria's dour, sober
exterior. Beneath it, he sensed, was a woman who yearned for a man to
appeal to her feminine side, a woman who was affectionate, warm, even
sexual. The extent to which this side of Victoria had been repressed merely
revealed the strength of the feelings he would stir once he melted her
reserve.
Disraeli's approach was to appeal to two aspects of Victoria's personality
that other people had squashed: her confidence and her sexuality. He was a
master at flattering a person's ego. As one English princess remarked,
"When I left the dining room after sitting next to Mr. Gladstone, I thought
he was the cleverest man in England. But after sitting next to Mr. Disraeli, I
thought I was the cleverest woman in England." Disraeli worked his magic
with a delicate touch, insinuating an atmosphere of amusement and relax-
ation, particularly in relation to politics. Once the queen's guard was down,
he made that mood a little warmer, a little more suggestive, subtly sexual—
though of course without overt flirtation. Disraeli made Victoria feel desir-
able as a woman and gifted as a monarch. How could she resist? How could
she deny him anything?
Our personalities are often molded by how we are treated: if a parent or
spouse is defensive or argumentative in dealing with us, we tend to respond
the same way. Never mistake people's exterior characteristics for reality, for
the character they show on the surface may be merely a reflection of the
people with whom they have been most in contact, or a front disguising
its own opposite. A gruff exterior may hide a person dying for warmth; a
repressed, sober-looking type may actually be struggling to conceal uncon-
trollable emotions. That is the key to charm—feeding what has been
repressed or denied.
By indulging the queen, by making himself a source of pleasure, Dis-
raeli was able to soften a woman who had grown hard and cantankerous.
Indulgence is a powerful tool of seduction: it is hard to be angry or defen-
sive with someone who seems to agree with your opinions and tastes.
Charmers may appear to be weaker than their targets but in the end they
are the more powerful side because they have stolen the ability to resist.
2. In 1971, the American financier and Democratic Party power-player
Averell Harriman saw his life drawing to a close. He was seventy-nine, his
wife of many years, Marie, had just died, and with the Democrats out
86 
• 
The Art of Seduction
of office his political career seemed over. Feeling old and depressed, he
resigned himself to spending his last years with his grandchildren in quiet
retirement.
A few months after Marie's death, Harriman was talked into attending a
Washington party. There he met an old friend, Pamela Churchill, whom he
had known during World War II, in London, where he had been sent as a
personal envoy of President Franklin D. Roosevelt. She was twenty-one at
the time, and was the wife of Winston Churchill's son Randolph. There
had certainly been more beautiful women in the city, but none had been
more pleasant to be around: she was so attentive, listening to his problems,
befriending his daughter (they were the same age), and calming him when-
ever he saw her. Marie had remained in the States, and Randolph was in
the army, so while bombs rained on London Averell and Pamela had begun
an affair. And in the many years since the war, she had kept in touch with
him: he knew about the breakup of her marriage, and about her endless se-
ries of affairs with Europe's wealthiest playboys. Yet he had not seen her
since his return to America, and to his wife. What a strange coincidence to
run into her at this particular moment in his life.
At the party Pamela pulled Harriman out of his shell, laughing at his
jokes and getting him to talk about London in the glory days of the war.
He felt his old power returning—it was as if he were charming her. A few
days later she dropped in on him at one of his weekend homes. Harriman
was one of the wealthiest men in the world, but was no lavish spender; he
and Marie had lived a Spartan life. Pamela made no comment, but when
she invited him to her own home, he could not help but notice the bright-
ness and vibrancy of her life—flowers everywhere, beautiful linens on the
bed, wonderful meals (she seemed to know all of his favorite foods). He
had heard of her reputation as a courtesan and understood the lure of his
wealth, yet being around her was invigorating, and eight weeks after that
party, he married her.
Pamela did not stop there. She persuaded her husband to donate the art
that Marie had collected to the National Gallery. She got him to part with
some of his money—a trust fund for her son Winston, new houses, constant
redecorations. Her approach was subtle and patient; she made him somehow
feel good about giving her what she wanted. Within a few years, hardly any
traces of Marie remained in their life. Harriman spent less time with his
children and grandchildren. He seemed to be going through a second youth.
In Washington, politicians and their wives viewed Pamela with suspi-
cion. They saw through her, and were immune to her charm, or so they
thought. Yet they always came to the frequent parties she hosted, justify-
ing themselves with the thought that powerful people would be there.
Everything at these parties was calibrated to create a relaxed, intimate
atmosphere. No one felt ignored: the least important people would find
themselves talking to Pamela, opening up to that attentive look of hers. She
made them feel powerful and respected. Afterward she would send them a
The Charmer • 
87
personal note or gift, often referring to something they had mentioned in
conversation. The wives who had called her a courtesan and worse slowly
changed their minds. The men found her not only beguiling but useful—
her worldwide contacts were invaluable. She could put them in touch with
exactly the right person without them even having to ask. The Harrimans'
parties soon evolved into fundraising events for the Democratic Party. Put
at their ease, feeling elevated by the aristocratic atmosphere Pamela created
and the sense of importance she gave them, visitors would empty their wal-
lets without realizing quite why. This, of course, was exactly what all the
men in her life had done.
In 1986, Averell Harriman died. By then Pamela was powerful and
wealthy enough that she no longer needed a man. In 1993, she was named
the U.S. ambassador to France, and easily transferred her personal and social
charm into the world of political diplomacy. She was still working when
she died, in 1997.
We often recognize Charmers as such; we sense their cleverness. (Surely
Harriman must have realized that his meeting with Pamela Churchill in
1971 was no coincidence.) Nevertheless, we fall under their spell. The rea-
son is simple: the feeling that Charmers provide is so rare as to be worth the
price we pay.
The world is full of self-absorbed people. In their presence, we know that
everything in our relationship with them is directed toward themselves—
their insecurities, their neediness, their hunger for attention. That rein-
forces our own egocentric tendencies; we protectively close ourselves up. It
is a syndrome that only makes us the more helpless with Charmers. First,
they don't talk much about themselves, which heightens their mystery and
disguises their limitations. Second, they seem to be interested in us, and
their interest is so delightfully focused that we relax and open up to them.
Finally, Charmers are pleasant to be around. They have none of most peo-
ple's ugly qualities—nagging, complaining, self-assertion. They seem to
know what pleases. Theirs is a diffused warmth; union without sex. (You
may think a geisha is sexual as well as charming; her power, however, lies
not in the sexual favors she provides but in her rare self-effacing attentive-
ness.) Inevitably, we become addicted, and dependent. And dependence is
the source of the Charmer's power.
People who are physically beautiful, and who play on their beauty to
create a sexually charged presence, have little power in the end; the bloom
of youth fades, there is always someone younger and more beautiful, and
in any case people tire of beauty without social grace. But they never tire
of feeling their self-worth validated. Learn the power you can wield by
making the other person feel like the star. The key is to diffuse your sexual
presence: create a vaguer, more beguiling sense of excitement through a
generalized flirtation, a socialized sexuality that is constant, addictive, and
never totally satisfied.
88 
• 
The Art of Seduction
3. In December of 1936, Chiang Kai-shek, leader of the Chinese Nation-
alists, was captured by a group of his own soldiers who were angry with his
policies: instead of fighting the Japanese, who had just invaded China, he
was continuing his civil war against the Communist armies of Mao Ze-
dong. The soldiers saw no threat in Mao—Chiang had almost annhilated
the Communists. In fact, they believed he should join forces with Mao
against the common enemy—it was the only patriotic thing to do. The sol-
diers thought by capturing him they could compel Chiang to change his
mind, but he was a stubborn man. Since Chiang was the main impediment
to a unified war against the Japanese, the soldiers contemplated having him
executed, or turned over to the Communists.
As Chiang lay in prison, he could only imagine the worst. Several days
later he received a visit from Zhou Enlai—a former friend and now a lead-
ing Communist. Politely and respectfully, Zhou argued for a united front:
Communists and Nationalists against the Japanese. Chiang could not begin
to hear such talk; he hated the Communists with a passion, and became
hopelessly emotional. To sign an agreement with the Communists in these
circumstances, he yelled, would be humiliating, and would lose me all
honor among my own army. It's out of the question. Kill me if you must.
Zhou listened, smiled, said barely a word. As Chiang's rant ended he
told the Nationalist general that a concern for honor was something he
understood, but that the honorable thing for them to do was actually to
forget their differences and fight the invader. Chiang could lead both
armies. Finally, Zhou said that under no circumstances would he allow his
fellow Communists, or anyone for that matter, to execute such a great man
as Chiang Kai-shek. The Nationalist leader was stunned and moved.
The next day, Chiang was escorted out of prison by Communist
guards, transferred to one of his own army's planes, and sent back to his
own headquarters. Apparently Zhou had executed this policy on his own,
for when word of it reached the other Communist leaders, they were out-
raged: Zhou should have forced Chiang to fight the Japanese, or else should
have ordered his execution—to release him without concessions was the
height of pusillanimity, and Zhou would pay. Zhou said nothing and
waited. A few months later, Chiang signed an agreement to halt the civil
war and join with the Communists against the Japanese. He seemed to have
come to his decision on his own, and his army respected it—they could not
doubt his motives.
Working together, the Nationalists and the Communists expelled the
Japanese from China. But the Communists, whom Chiang had previously
almost destroyed, took advantage of this period of collaboration to regain
strength. Once the Japanese had left, they turned on the Nationalists, who,
in 1949, were forced to evacuate mainland China for the island of For-
mosa, now Taiwan.
Now Mao paid a visit to the Soviet Union. China was in terrible shape
and in desperate need of assistance, but Stalin was wary of the Chinese, and
lectured Mao about the many mistakes he had made. Mao argued back.
The Charmer • 
89
Stalin decided to teach the young upstart a lesson; he would give China
nothing. Tempers rose. Mao sent urgently for Zhou Enlai who arrived the
next day and went right to work.
In the long negotiating sessions, Zhou made a show of enjoying his
hosts' vodka. He never argued, and in fact agreed that the Chinese had
made many mistakes, had much to learn from the more experienced Sovi-
ets: "Comrade Stalin," he said, "we are the first large Asian country to join
the socialist camp under your guidance." Zhou had come prepared with all
kinds of neatly drawn diagrams and charts, knowing the Russians loved
such things. Stalin warmed up to him. The negotiations proceeded, and a
few days after Zhou's arrival, the two parties signed a treaty of mutual aid—
a treaty far more useful to the Chinese than to the Soviets.
In 1959, China was again in deep trouble. Mao's Great Leap Forward,
an attempt to spark an overnight industrial revolution in China, had been
a devastating failure. The people were angry: they were starving while
Beijing bureaucrats lived well. Many Beijing officials, Zhou among them,
returned to their native towns to try to bring order. Most of them managed
by bribes—by promising all kinds of favors—but Zhou proceeded differ-
ently: he visited his ancestral graveyard, where generations of his family
were buried, and ordered that the tombstones be removed and the coffins
buried deeper. Now the land could be farmed for food. In Confucian
terms (and Zhou was an obedient Confucian), this was sacrilege, but every-
one knew what it meant: Zhou was willing to suffer personally. Every-
one had to sacrifice, even the leaders. His gesture had immense symbolic
impact.
When Zhou died, in 1976, an unofficial and unorganized outpouring
of public grief caught the government by surprise. They could not under-
stand how a man who had worked behind the scenes, and had shunned the
adoration of the masses, could have won such affection.
The capture of Chiang Kai-shek was a turning point in the civil war. To
execute him might have been disastrous: it had been Chiang who had held
the Nationalist army together, and without him it could have broken up
into factions, allowing the Japanese to overrun the country. To force him to
sign an agreement would have not helped either: he would have lost face
before his army, would never have honored the agreement, and would have
done everything he could to avenge his humiliation. Zhou knew that to
execute or compel a captive will only embolden your enemy, and will have
repercussions you cannot control. Charm, on the other hand, is a manipu-
lative weapon that disguises its own manipulativeness, letting you gain a
victory without stirring the desire for revenge.
Zhou worked on Chiang perfectly, paying him respect, playing the in-
ferior, letting him pass from the fear of execution to the relief of unex-
pected release. The general was allowed to leave with his dignity intact.
Zhou knew all this would soften him up, planting the seed of the idea that
perhaps the Communists were not so bad after all, and that he could change
90 
• 
The Art of Seduction
his mind about them without looking weak, particularly if he did so inde-
pendently rather than while he was in prison. Zhou applied the same phi-
losophy to every situation: play the inferior, unthreatening and humble.
What will this matter if in the end you get what you want: time to recover
from a civil war, a treaty, the good will of the masses.
Time is the greatest weapon you have. Patiently keep in mind a long-
term goal and neither person nor army can resist you. And charm is the
best way of playing for time, of widening your options in any situation.
Through charm you can seduce your enemy into backing off, giving you
the psychological space to plot an effective counterstrategy. The key is to
make other people emotional while you remain detached. They may feel
grateful, happy, moved, arrogant—it doesn't matter, as long as they feel. An
emotional person is a distracted person. Give them what they want, appeal
to their self-interest, make them feel superior to you. When a baby has
grabbed a sharp knife, do not try to grab it back; instead, stay calm, offer
candy, and the baby will drop the knife to pick up the tempting morsel you
offer.
4. In 1761, Empress Elizabeth of Russia died, and her nephew ascended to
the throne as Czar Peter III. Peter had always been a little boy at heart—he
played with toy soldiers long past the appropriate age—and now, as czar, he
could finally do whatever he pleased and the world be damned. Peter con-
cluded a treaty with Frederick the Great that was highly favorable to the
foreign ruler (Peter adored Frederick, and particularly the disciplined way
his Prussian soldiers marched). This was a practical debacle, but in matters
of emotion and etiquette, Peter was even more offensive: he refused to
properly mourn his aunt the empress, resuming his war games and parties a
few days after the funeral. What a contrast he was to his wife, Catherine.
She was respectful during the funeral, was still wearing black months later,
and could be seen at all hours beside Elizabeth's tomb, praying and cry-
ing. She was not even Russian, but a German princess who had come east
to marry Peter in 1745 without speaking a word of the language. Even the
lowest peasant knew that Catherine had converted to the Russian Ortho-
dox Church, and had learned to speak Russian with incredible speed, and
beautifully. At heart, they thought, she was more Russian than all of those
fops in the court.
During these difficult months, while Peter offended almost everyone in
the country, Catherine discreetly kept a lover, Gregory Orlov, a lieutenant
in the guards. It was through Orlov that word spread of her piety, her pa-
triotism, her worthiness for rule; how much better to follow such a woman
than to serve Peter. Late into the night, Catherine and Orlov would talk,
and he would tell her the army was behind her and would urge her to stage
a coup. She would listen attentively, but would always reply that this was
not the time for such things. Orlov wondered to himself: perhaps she was
too gentle and passive for such a great step.
The Charmer • 91
Peter's regime was repressive, and the arrests and executions piled up.
He also grew more abusive toward his wife, threatening to divorce her and
marry his mistress. One drunken evening, driven to distraction by Cather-
ine's silence and his inability to provoke her, he ordered her arrest. The
news spread fast, and Orlov hurried to warn Catherine that she would be
imprisoned or executed unless she acted fast. This time Catherine did not
argue; she put on her simplest mourning gown, left her hair half undone,
followed Orlov to a waiting carriage, and rushed to the army barracks.
Here the soldiers fell to the ground, kissing the hem of her dress—they had
heard so much about her but had never seen her in person, and she seemed
to them like a statue of the Madonna come to life. They gave her an army
uniform, marveling at how beautiful she looked in men's clothes, and set
off under Orlov's command for the Winter Palace. The procession grew as
it passed through the streets of St. Petersburg. Everyone applauded Cather-
ine, everyone felt that Peter should be dethroned. Soon priests arrived to
give Catherine their blessing, making the people even more excited. And
through it all, she was silent and dignified, as if all were in the hands of fate.
When news reached Peter of this peaceful rebellion, he grew hysterical,
and agreed to abdicate that very night. Catherine became empress without
a single battle or even a single gunshot.
As a child, Catherine was intelligent and spirited. Since her mother had
wanted a daughter who was obedient rather than dazzling, and who would
therefore make a better match, the child was subjected to a constant barrage
of criticism, against which she developed a defense: she learned to seem to
defer to other people totally as a way to neutralize their aggression. If she
was patient and did not force the issue, instead of attacking her they would
fall under her spell.
When Catherine came to Russia—at the age of sixteen, without a
friend or ally in the country—she applied the skills she had learned in
dealing with her difficult mother. In the face of all the court monsters—
the imposing Empress Elizabeth, her own infantile husband, the endless
schemers and betrayers—she curtseyed, deferred, waited, and charmed. She
had long wanted to rule as empress, and knew how hopeless her husband
was. But what good would it do to seize power violently, laying a claim that
some would certainly see as illegitimate, and then have to worry endlessly
that she would be dethroned in turn? No, the moment had to be ripe, and
she had to make the people carry her into power. It was a feminine style of
revolution: by being passive and patient, Catherine suggested that she had
no interest in power. The effect was soothing—charming.
There will always be difficult people for us to face—the chronically in-
secure, the hopelessly stubborn, the hysterical complainers. Your ability to
disarm these people will prove an invaluable skill. You do have to be care-
ful, though: if you are passive they will run all over you; if assertive you will
make their monstrous qualities worse. Seduction and charm are the most
effective counterweapons. Outwardly, be gracious. Adapt to their every
92 
• 
The Art of Seduction
mood. Enter their spirit. Inwardly, calculate and wait: your surrender is a
strategy, not a way of life. When the time comes, and it inevitably will, the
tables will turn. Their aggression will land them in trouble, and that will
put you in a position to rescue them, regaining superiority. (You could also
decide that you had had enough, and consign them to oblivion.) Your
charm has prevented them from foreseeing this or growing suspicious. A
whole revolution can be enacted without a single act of violence, simply by
waiting for the apple to ripen and fall.
Symbol: The
Mirror. Your spirit holds a mirror up
to others. When they see you they see them-
selves: their values, their tastes, even their flaws. Their
lifelong love affair with their own image is comfortable and
hypnotic; so feed it. No one ever sees what is behind the mirror.
The Charmer • 93
Dangers
T
here are those who are immune to a Charmer; particularly cynics, and
confident types who do not need validation. These people tend to
view Charmers as slippery and deceitful, and they can make problems for
you. The solution is to do what most Charmers do by nature: befriend and
charm as many people as possible. Secure your power through numbers and
you will not have to worry about the few you cannot seduce. Catherine the
Great's kindness to everyone she met created a vast amount of good will
that paid off later. Also, it is sometimes charming to reveal a strategic flaw.
There is one person you dislike? Confess it openly, do not try to charm
such an enemy, and people will think you more human, less slippery. Dis-
raeli had such a scapegoat with his great nemesis, William Gladstone.
The dangers of political charm are harder to handle: your conciliatory,
shifting, flexible approach to politics will make enemies out of everyone
who is a rigid believer in a cause. Social seducers such as Bill Clinton and
Henry Kissinger could often win over the most hardened opponent with
their personal charm, but they could not be everywhere at once. Many
members of the English Parliament thought Disraeli a shifty conniver; in
person his engaging manner could dispel such feelings, but he could not
address the entire Parliament one-on-one. In difficult times, when people
yearn for something substantial and firm, the political charmer may be in
danger.
As Catherine the Great proved, timing is everything. Charmers must
know when to hibernate and when the times are ripe for their persuasive
powers. Known for their flexibility, they should sometimes be flexible
enough to act inflexibly. Zhou Enlai, the consummate chameleon, could
play the hard-core Communist when it suited him. Never become the slave
to your own powers of charm; keep it under control, something you can
turn off and on at will.
Charisma
is a presence that excites us. It
comes from an inner quality—self-confi-
dence, sexual energy, sense of purpose, content-
ment—that 
most people lack and want. This
quality radiates outward, permeating the gestures
of Charismatics, making them seem extraordinary
and superior, and making us imagine there is more
to them than meets the eye: they are gods, saints,
stars. Charismatics can learn to heighten their
charisma with a piercing gaze, fiery oratory,
an air of mystery. They can seduce on a
grand scale. Learn to create the
charismatic illusion by radiating
intensity 
while 
remain-
ing 
detached.
Charisma and Seduction
C
harisma is seduction on a mass level. Charismatics make crowds of
people fall in love with them, then lead them along. The process of
making them fall in love is simple and follows a path similar to that of a
one-on-one seduction. Charismatics have certain qualities that are power-
fully attractive and that make them stand out. This could be their self-
belief, their boldness, their serenity. They keep the source of these qualities
mysterious. They do not explain where their confidence or contentment
comes from, but it can be felt by everyone; it radiates outward, without the
appearance of conscious effort. The face of the Charismatic is usually ani-
mated, full of energy, desire, alertness—the look of a lover, one that is in-
stantly appealing, even vaguely sexual. We happily follow Charismatics
because we like to be led, particularly by people who promise adventure or
prosperity. We lose ourselves in their cause, become emotionally attached
to them, feel more alive by believing in them—we fall in love. Charisma
plays on repressed sexuality, creates an erotic charge. Yet the origins of the
word lie not in sexuality but in religion, and religion remains deeply em-
bedded in modern charisma.
Thousands of years ago, people believed in gods and spirits, but few
could ever say that they had witnessed a miracle, a physical demonstration
of divine power. A man, however, who seemed possessed by a divine
spirit—speaking in tongues, ecstatic raptures, the expression of intense
visions—would stand out as one whom the gods had singled out. And this
man, a priest or a prophet, gained great power over others. What made the
Hebrews believe in Moses, follow him out of Egypt, and remain loyal to
him despite their endless wandering in the desert? The look in his eye, his
inspired and inspiring words, the face that literally glowed when he came
down from Mount Sinai—all these things gave him the appearance of hav-
ing direct communication with God, and were the source of his authority.
And these were what was meant by "charisma," a Greek word referring to
prophets and to Christ himself. In early Christianity, charisma was a gift or
talent vouchsafed by God's grace and revealing His presence. Most of the
great religions were founded by a Charismatic, a person who physically dis-
played the signs of God's favor.
Over the years, the world became more rational. Eventually people
came to hold power not by divine right but because they won votes, or
proved their competence. The great early-twentieth-century German soci-
"Charisma" shall be
understood to refer to an
extraordinary quality of a
person, regardless of
whether this quality is
actual, alleged or
presumed. 
"Charismatic
authority," hence, shall
refer to a rule over men,
whether 
predominately
ex tern al or p redominately
internal, to which the
governed submit because of
their belief in the
extraordinary quality of the
specific person.
—MAX 
WEBER, FROM MAX
WEBER: 
ESSAYS 
IN 
SOCIOLOGY,
EDITED BY HANS GERTH AND
C. WRIGHT MILLS
97
98 
• The Art of Seduction
ologist Max Weber, however, noticed that despite our supposed progress,
there were more Charismatics than ever. What characterized a modern
Charismatic, according to Weber, was the appearance of an extraordinary
quality in their character, the equivalent of a sign of God's favor. How else
to explain the power of a Robespierre or a Lenin? More than anything it
was the force of their magnetic personalities that made these men stand out
and was the source of their power. They did not speak of God but of a
great cause, visions of a future society. Their appeal was emotional; they
seemed possessed. And their audiences reacted as euphorically as earlier au-
diences had to a prophet. When Lenin died, in 1924, a cult formed around
his memory, transforming the communist leader into a deity.
Today, anyone who has presence, who attracts attention when he or she
enters a room, is said to possess charisma. But even these less-exalted types
reveal a trace of the quality suggested by the word's original meaning.
Their charisma is mysterious and inexplicable, never obvious. They have an
unusual confidence. They have a gift—often a smoothness with language—
that makes them stand out from the crowd. They express a vision. We may
not realize it, but in their presence we have a kind of religious experience:
we believe in these people, without having any rational evidence for doing
so. When trying to concoct an effect of charisma, never forget the religious
source of its power. You must radiate an inward quality that has a saintly or
spiritual edge to it. Your eyes must glow with the fire of a prophet. Your
charisma must seem natural, as if it came from something mysteriously be-
yond your control, a gift of the gods. In our rational, disenchanted world,
people crave a religious experience, particularly on a group level. Any sign
of charisma plays to this desire to believe in something. And there is noth-
ing more seductive than giving people something to believe in and follow.
Charisma must seem mystical, but that does not mean you cannot learn
certain tricks that will enhance the charisma you already possess, or will
give you the outward appearance of it. The following are basic qualities
that will help create the illusion of charisma:
Purpose. If people believe you have a plan, that you know where you are
going, they will follow you instinctively. The direction does not matter:
pick a cause, an ideal, a vision and show that you will not sway from your
goal. People will imagine that your confidence comes from something
real—just as the ancient Hebrews believed Moses was in communion with
God, simply because he showed the outward signs.
Purposefulness is doubly charismatic in times of trouble. Since most
people hesitate before taking bold action (even when action is what is re-
quired), single-minded self-assurance will make you the focus of attention.
People will believe in you through the simple force of your character. When
Franklin Delano Roosevelt came to power amidst the Depression, much of
the public had little faith he could turn things around. But in his first few
months in office he displayed such confidence, such decisiveness and clarity
And the Lord said to
Moses, 
"Write these
words; in accordance with
these words I have made a
covenant with you and
with Israel." And he was
there with the Lord forty
days and forty nights; he
neither ate bread nor drank
water. And he wrote upon
the tables the words of the
covenant, the ten
commandments. 
When
Moses came down from
Mount Sinai, with the two
tables of the testimony in
his hand as he came down
from the mountain, Moses
did not know that the skin
of his face shone because he
had been talking with
God. And when Aaron
and all the people of Israel
saw Moses, behold, the
skin of his face shone, and
they were afraid to come
near him. But Moses
called to them; and Aaron
and all the leaders of the
congregation returned to
him, and Moses talked
with them. And afterward
all the people of Israel came
near, and he gave them in
commandment all that the
Lord had spoken with him
in Mount Sinai. And
when Moses had finished
speaking with them, he put
a veil on his face; but
whenever Moses went in
before the Lord to speak
with him, he took the veil
off, until he came out; and
when he came out, and
told the people of Israel
what he was commanded,
the people of Israel saw the
face of Moses, that the skin
of Moses's face shone; and
Moses would put the veil
upon his face again, until
he went in to speak
with him.
—EXODUS 34:27 OLD
TESTAMENT
The Charismatic • 
99
in dealing with the country's many problems, that the public began to see
him as their savior, someone with intense charisma.
Mystery. Mystery lies at charisma's heart, but it is a particular kind of
mystery—a mystery expressed by contradiction. The Charismatic may be
both proletarian and aristocratic (Mao Zedong), both cruel and kind (Peter
the Great), both excitable and icily detached (Charles de Gaulle), both inti-
mate and distant (Sigmund Freud). Since most people are predictable, the
effect of these contradictions is devastatingly charismatic. They make you
hard to fathom, add richness to your character, make people talk about you.
It is often better to reveal your contradictions slowly and subtly—if you
throw them out one on top of the other, people may think you have an er-
ratic personality. Show your mysteriousness gradually and word will spread.
You must also keep people at arm's length, to keep them from figuring
you out.
Another aspect of mystery is a hint of the uncanny. The appearance of
prophetic or psychic gifts will add to your aura. Predict things authorita-
tively and people will often imagine that what you have said has come true.
Saintliness. Most of us must compromise constantly to survive; saints do
not. They must live out their ideals without caring about the consequences.
The saintly effect bestows charisma.
Saintliness goes far beyond religion: politicians as disparate as George
Washington and Lenin won saintly reputations by living simply, despite
their power—by matching their political values to their personal lives. Both
men were virtually deified after they died. Albert Einstein too had a saintly
aura—childlike, unwilling to compromise, lost in his own world. The key
is that you must already have some deeply held values; that part cannot be
faked, at least not without risking accusations of charlatanry that will de-
stroy your charisma in the long run. The next step is to show, as simply and
subtly as possible, that you live what you believe. Finally, the appearance of
being mild and unassuming can eventually turn into charisma, as long as
you seem completely comfortable with it. The source of Harry Truman's
charisma, and even of Abraham Lincoln's, was to appear to be an Everyman.
That devil of a man
exercises a fascination on
me that I cannot explain
even to myself, and in such
a degree that, though I fear
neither God nor devil,
when I am in his presence
I am ready to tremble like
a child, and he could make
me go through the eye of a
needle to throw myself into
the fire.
—GENERAL VANDAMME, ON
NAPOLEON 
BONAPARTE
[The masses] have never
thirsted after truth. 
They
demand illusions, and
cannot do without them.
They constantly give what
is unreal precedence over
what is real; they are
almost as strongly
influenced by what is
untrue as by what is true.
They have an evident
tendency not to distinguish
between the two.
—SIGMUND FREUD, THE
STANDARD 
EDITION 
OFTHE
COMPLETE 
PSYCHOLOGICAL
WORKS OF 
SIGMUND 
FREUD,
VOLUME I8
Eloquence. A Charismatic relies on the power of words. The reason is
simple: words are the quickest way to create emotional disturbance. They
can uplift, elevate, stir anger, without referring to anything real. During the
Spanish Civil War, Dolores Gómez Ibarruri, known as La Pasionaria, gave
pro-Communist speeches that were so emotionally powerful as to deter-
mine several key moments in the war. To bring off this kind of eloquence,
it helps if the speaker is as emotional, as caught up in words, as the audi-
ence is. Yet eloquence can be learned: the devices La Pasionaria used—
100 • 
The Art of Seduction
catchwords, slogans, rhythmic repetitions, phrases for the audience to re-
peat—can easily be acquired. Roosevelt, a calm, patrician type, was able to
make himself a dynamic speaker, both through his style of delivery, which
was slow and hypnotic, and through his brilliant use of imagery, allitera-
tion, and biblical rhetoric. The crowds at his rallies were often moved to
tears. The slow, authoritative style is often more effective than passion in
the long run, for it is more subtly spellbinding, and less tiring.
Theatricality. A Charismatic is larger than life, has extra presence. Actors
have studied this kind of presence for centuries; they know how to stand
on a crowded stage and command attention. Surprisingly, it is not the actor
who screams the loudest or gestures the most wildly who works this magic
best, but the actor who stays calm, radiating self-assurance. The effect is
ruined by trying too hard. It is essential to be self-aware, to have the ability
to see yourself as others see you. De Gaulle understood that self-awareness
was key to his charisma; in the most turbulent circumstances—the Nazi
occupation of France, the national reconstruction after World War II,
an army rebellion in Algeria—he retained an Olympian composure that
played beautifully against the hysteria of his colleagues. When he spoke, no
one could take their eyes off him. Once you know how to command at-
tention this way, heighten the effect by appearing in ceremonial and ritual
events that are full of exciting imagery, making you look regal and godlike.
Flamboyancy has nothing to do with charisma—it attracts the wrong kind
of attention.
Uninhibitedness. Most people are repressed, and have little access to their
unconscious—a problem that creates opportunities for the Charismatic,
who can become a kind of screen on which others project their secret fan-
tasies and longings. You will first have to show that you are less inhibited
than your audience—that you radiate a dangerous sexuality, have no fear of
death, are delightfully spontaneous. Even a hint of these qualities will make
people think you more powerful than you are. In the 1850s a bohemian
American actress, Adah Isaacs Menken, took the world by storm through
her unbridled sexual energy, and her fearlessness. She would appear on
stage half-naked, performing death-defying acts; few women could dare
such things in the Victorian period, and a rather mediocre actress became a
figure of cultlike adoration.
An extension of your being uninhibited is a dreamlike quality in your
work and character that reveals your openness to your unconscious. It was
the possession of this quality that transformed artists like Wagner and Pi-
casso into charismatic idols. Its cousin is a fluidity of body and spirit; while
the repressed are rigid, Charismatics have an ease and an adaptability that
show their openness to experience.
The Charismatic 
• 101
Fervency. You need to believe in something, and to believe in it strongly
enough for it to animate all your gestures and make your eyes light up. This
cannot be faked. Politicians inevitably lie to the public; what distinguishes
Charismatics is that they believe their own lies, which makes them that
much more believable. A prerequisite for fiery belief is some great cause to
rally around—a crusade. Become the rallying point for people's discontent,
and show that you share none of the doubts that plague normal humans. In
1490, the Florentine Girolamo Savonarola railed at the immorality of the
pope and the Catholic Church. Claiming to be divinely inspired, he be-
came so animated during his sermons that hysteria would sweep the crowd.
Savonarola developed such a following that he briefly took over the city,
until the pope had him captured and burned at the stake. People believed in
him because of the depth of his conviction. His example has more rele-
vance today than ever: people are more and more isolated, and long for
communal experience. Let your own fervent and contagious faith, in virtu-
ally anything, give them something to believe in.
Vulnerability. Charismatics display a need for love and affection. They are
open to their audience, and in fact feed off its energy; the audience in turn
is electrified by the Charismatic, the current increasing as it passes back and
forth. This vulnerable side to charisma softens the self-confident side,
which can seem fanatical and frightening.
Since charisma involves feelings akin to love, you in turn must reveal
your love for your followers. This was a key component to the charisma
that Marilyn Monroe radiated on camera. "I knew I belonged to the Pub-
lic," she wrote in her diary, "and to the world, not because I was talented or
even beautiful but because I had never belonged to anything or anyone else.
The Public was the only family, the only Prince Charming and the only
home I had ever dreamed of." In front of a camera, Monroe suddenly came
to life, flirting with and exciting her unseen public. If the audience does
not sense this quality in you they will turn away from you. On the other
hand, you must never seem manipulative or needy. Imagine your public as a
single person whom you are trying to seduce—nothing is more seductive
to people than the feeling that they are desired.
Adventurousness. Charismatics are unconventional. They have an air of
adventure and risk that attracts the bored. Be brazen and courageous in
your actions—be seen taking risks for the good of others. Napoleon made
sure his soldiers saw him at the cannons in battle. Lenin walked openly on
the streets, despite the death threats he had received. Charismatics thrive in
troubled waters; a crisis situation allows them to flaunt their daring, which
enhances their aura. John F. Kennedy came to life in dealing with the
Cuban missile crisis, Charles de Gaulle when he confronted rebellion in
102 
• The Art of Seduction
Algeria. They needed these problems to seem charismatic, and in fact some
have even accused them of stirring up situations (Kennedy through his
brinkmanship style of diplomacy, for instance) that played to their love of
adventure. Show heroism to give yourself a charisma that will last you a
lifetime. Conversely, the slightest sign of cowardice or timidity will ruin
whatever charisma you had.
Magnetism. If any physical attribute is crucial in seduction, it is the eyes.
They reveal excitement, tension, detachment, without a word being spo-
ken. Indirect communication is critical in seduction, and also in charisma.
The demeanor of Charismatics may be poised and calm, but their eyes are
magnetic; they have a piercing gaze that disturbs their targets' emotions,
exerting force without words or action. Fidel Castro's aggressive gaze can
reduce his opponents to silence. When Benito Mussolini was challenged,
he would roll his eyes, showing the whites in a way that frightened people.
President Kusnasosro Sukarno of Indonesia had a gaze that seemed as if it
could have read thoughts. Roosevelt could dilate his pupils at will, making
his stare both hypnotizing and intimidating. The eyes of the Charismatic
never show fear or nerves.
All of these skills are acquirable. Napoleon spent hours in front of a
mirror, modeling his gaze on that of the great contemporary actor Talma.
The key is self-control. The look does not necessarily have to be aggressive;
it can also show contentment. Remember: your eyes can emanate charisma,
but they can also give you away as a faker. Do not leave such an important
attribute to chance. Practice the effect you desire.
Genuine charisma thus means the ability to internally gen-
erate and externally express extreme excitement, an ability
which makes one the object of intense attention and unre-
flective imitation by others.
—LIAH GREENFIELD
Charismatic Types—Historical Examples
The miraculous prophet. In the year 1425, Joan of Arc, a peasant girl
from the French village of Domrémy, had her first vision: "I was in my
thirteenth year when God sent a voice to guide me." The voice was that of
Saint Michael and he came with a message from God: Joan had been cho-
sen to rid France of the English invaders who now ruled most of the
country, and of the resulting chaos and war. She was also to restore the
French crown to the prince—the Dauphin, later Charles VII—who was its
rightful heir. Saint Catherine and Saint Margaret also spoke to Joan. Her
visions were extraordinarily vivid: she saw Saint Michael, touched him,
smelled him.
In such conditions, where
half the battle was hand-
to-hand, concentrated into
a small space, the spirit
and example of the leader
counted for much. 
When
we remember this, it
becomes easier to
understand the astonishing
effect 
of Joan's presence
upon the French troops.
Her position as a leader
was a unique one. She was
not a professional soldier;
she was not really a soldier
at all; she was not even a
man. She was ignorant of
war. She was a girl dressed
up. But she believed, and
had made others willing to
believe, that she was the
mouthpiece of God. • On
Friday, April 29th, 
1429,
the news spread in Orléans
that a force, led by the
Pucelle of Domrémy, was
on its way to the relief of
the city, a piece of news
which, as the chronicler
remarks, comforted them
greatly.
—VITA SACKVILLE-WEST,
SAINT JOAN 
OF 
ARC
The Charismatic • 103
At first Joan told no one what she had seen; for all anyone knew, she
was a quiet farm girl. But the visions became even more intense, and so in
1429 she left Domrémy, determined to realize the mission for which God
had chosen her. Her goal was to meet Charles in the town of Chinon,
where he had established his court in exile. The obstacles were enor-
mous: Chinon was far, the journey was dangerous, and Charles, even if she
reached him, was a lazy and cowardly young man who was unlikely to cru-
sade against the English. Undaunted, she moved from village to village, ex-
plaining her mission to soldiers and asking them to escort her to Chinon.
Young girls with religious visions were a dime a dozen at the time, and
there was nothing in Joan's appearance to inspire confidence; one soldier,
however, Jean de Metz, was intrigued with her. What fascinated him was
the detail of her visions: she would liberate the besieged town of Orléans,
have the king crowned at the cathedral in Reims, lead the army to Paris;
she knew how she would be wounded, and where; the words she attributed
to Saint Michael were quite unlike the language of a farm girl; and she was
so calmly confident, she glowed with conviction. De Metz fell under her
spell. He swore allegiance and set out with her for Chinon. Soon others of-
fered assistance, too, and word reached Charles of the strange young girl on
her way to meet him.
On the 350-mile road to Chinon, accompanied only by a handful of
soldiers, through a land infested with warring bands, Joan showed neither
fear nor hesitation. The journey took several months. When she finally ar-
rived, the Dauphin decided to meet the girl who had promised to restore
him to his throne, despite the advice of his counselors; but he was bored,
and wanted amusement, and decided to play a trick on her. She was to
meet him in a hall packed with courtiers; to test her prophetic powers, he
disguised himself as one of these men, and dressed another man as the
prince. Yet when Joan arrived, to the amazement of the crowd, she walked
straight up to Charles and curtseyed: "The King of Heaven sends me to
you with the message that you shall be the lieutenant of the King of
Heaven, who is the king of France." In the talk that followed, Joan seemed
to echo Charles's most private thoughts, while once again recounting in
extraordinary detail the feats she would accomplish. Days later, this indeci-
sive, flighty man declared himself convinced and gave her his blessing to
lead a French army against the English.
Miracles and saintliness aside, Joan of Arc had certain basic qualities that
made her exceptional. Her visions were intense; she could describe them in
such detail that they had to be real. Details have that effect: they lend a
sense of reality to even the most preposterous statements. Furthermore, in a
time of great disorder, she was supremely focused, as if her strength came
from somewhere unworldly. She spoke with authority, and she predicted
things people wanted: the English would be defeated, prosperity would re-
turn. She also had a peasant's earthy common sense. She had surely heard
descriptions of Charles on the road to Chinon; once at court, she could
Amongst the surplus
population living on the
margin of society [in the
Middle Ages] there was
always a strong tendency to
take as leader a layman, or
maybe an apostate friar or
monk, who imposed
himself not simply as a
holy man but as a prophet
or even as a living god. On
the strength of inspirations
or revelations for which he
claimed divine origin this
leader would decree for his
followers a communal
mission of vast dimensions
and 
world-shaking
importance. 
The conviction
of having such a mission,
of being divinely appointed
to carry out a prodigious
task, provided the
disoriented and the
frustrated with new
bearings and new hope. It
gave them not simply a
place in the world but a
unique and resplendent
place. A fraternity of this
kind felt itself an elite, set
infinitely apart from and
above ordinary mortals,
sharing also in his
miraculous powers.
—NORMAN 
COHN,
THE PURSUIT OF THE
MILLENNIUM
104 
• 
The Art of Seduction
have sensed the trick he was playing on her, and could have confidently
picked out his pampered face in the crowd. The following year, her visions
abandoned her, and her confidence as well—she made many mistakes,
leading to her capture by the English. She was indeed human.
We may no longer believe in miracles, but anything that hints at
strange, unworldly, even supernatural powers will create charisma. The psy-
chology is the same: you have visions of the future, and of the wondrous
things you can accomplish. Describe these things in great detail, with an air
of authority, and suddenly you stand out. And if your prophecy—of pros-
perity, say—is just what people want to hear, they are likely to fall under
your spell and to see later events as a confirmation of your predictions. Ex-
hibit remarkable confidence and people will think your confidence comes
from real knowledge. You will create a self-fulfilling prophecy: people's be-
lief in you will translate into actions that help realize your visions. Any hint
of success will make them see miracles, uncanny powers, the glow of
charisma.
The authentic animal. One day in 1905, the St. Petersburg salon of
Countess Ignatiev was unusually full. Politicians, society ladies, and courtiers
had all arrived early to await the remarkable guest of honor: Grigori Efi-
movich Rasputin, a forty-year-old Siberian monk who had made a name
for himself throughout Russia as a healer, perhaps a saint. When Rasputin
arrived, few could disguise their disappointment: his face was ugly, his hair
was stringy, he was gangly and awkward. They wondered why they had
come. But then Rasputin approached them one by one, wrapping his big
hands around their fingers and gazing deep into their eyes. At first his gaze
was unsettling: as he looked them up and down, he seemed to be probing
and judging them. Yet suddenly his expression would change, and kindness,
joy, and understanding would radiate from his face. Several of the ladies he
actually hugged, in a most effusive manner. This startling contrast had pro-
found effects.
The mood in the salon soon changed from disappointment to excite-
ment. Rasputin's voice was so calm and deep; his language was coarse, yet
the ideas it expressed were delightfully simple, and had the ring of great
spiritual truth. Then, just as the guests were beginning to relax with this
dirty-looking peasant, his mood suddenly changed to anger: "I know you,
I can read your souls. You are all too pampered. . . . These fine clothes and
arts of yours are useless and pernicious. Men must learn to humble them-
selves! You must be simpler, far, far simpler. Only then will God come
nearer to you." The monk's face grew animated, his pupils expanded, he
looked completely different. How impressive that angry look was, recalling
Jesus throwing the moneylenders from the temple. Now Rasputin calmed
down, returned to being gracious, but the guests already saw him as some-
one strange and remarkable. Next, in a performance he would soon repeat
"How peculiar
[Rasputin's] eyes are,"
confesses a woman who
had made efforts to resist
his influence. She goes on
to say that every time she
met him she was always
amazed afresh at the power
of his glance, which it was
impossible 
to withstand for
any considerable time.
There was something
oppressive in this kind and
gentle, but at the same
time sly and cunning,
glance; people were helpless
under the spell of the
powerful will which could
be felt in his whole being.
However tired you might
be of this charm, and
however much you wanted
to escape it, somehow or
other you always found
yourself attracted back and
held. • A young girl who
had heard of the strange
new saint came from her
province to the capital, and
visited him in search of
edification and spiritual
instruction. She had never
seen either him or a
portrait of him before, and
met him for the first time
in his house. When he
came up to her and spoke
to her, she thought him like
one of the peasant
preachers she had often
seen in her own country
home. His gentle, monastic
gaze and the plainly parted
light brown hair around the
worthy simple face, all at
first inspired her confidence.
But when he came nearer
to her, she felt immediately
that another quite different
man, mysterious, crafty,
and corrupting, looked out
from behind the eyes that
radiated goodness and
gentleness. • He sat down
opposite her, edged quite
close up to her, and his
light blue eyes changed
color, and became deep and
The Charismatic • 
105
in salons throughout the city, he led the guests in a folk song, and as they
sang, he began to dance, a strange uninhibited dance of his own design,
and as he danced, he circled the most attractive women there, and with his
eyes invited them to join him. The dance turned vaguely sexual; as his
partners fell under his spell, he whispered suggestive comments in their
ears. Yet none of them seemed to be offended.
Over the next few months, women from every level of St. Petersburg
society visited Rasputin in his apartment. He would talk to them of spiri-
tual matters, but then without warning he would turn sexual, murmuring
the crassest come-ons. He would justify himself through spiritual dogma:
how can you repent if you have not sinned? Salvation only comes to those
who go astray. One of the few who rejected his advances was asked by a
friend, "How can one refuse anything to a saint?" "Does a saint need sinful
love?" she replied. Her friend said, "He makes everything that comes near
him holy. I have already belonged to him, and I am proud and happy to
have done so." "But you are married! What does your husband say?" "He
considers it a very great honor. If Rasputin desires a woman we all think it
a blessing and a distinction, our husbands as well as ourselves."
Rasputin's spell soon extended over Czar Nicholas and more particu-
larly over his wife, the Czarina Alexandra, after he apparently healed their
son from a life-threatening injury. Within a few years, he had become the
most powerful man in Russia, with total sway over the royal couple.
People are more complicated than the masks they wear in society. The man
who seems so noble and gentle is probably disguising a dark side, which
will often come out in strange ways; if his nobility and refinement are in
fact a put-on, sooner or later the truth will out, and his hypocrisy will dis-
appoint and alienate. On the other hand, we are drawn to people who
seem more comfortably human, who do not bother to disguise their con-
tradictions. This was the source of Rasputin's charisma. A man so authenti-
cally himself, so devoid of self-consciousness or hypocrisy, was immensely
appealing. His wickedness and saintliness were so extreme that it made him
seem larger than life. The result was a charismatic aura that was immediate
and preverbal; it radiated from his eyes, and from the touch of his hands.
Most of us are a mix of the devil and the saint, the noble and the igno-
ble, and we spend our lives trying to repress the dark side. Few of us can
give free rein to both sides, as Rasputin did, but we can create charisma to a
smaller degree by ridding ourselves of self-consciousness, and of the dis-
comfort most of us feel about our complicated natures. You cannot help
being the way you are, so be genuine. That is what attracts us to animals:
beautiful and cruel, they have no self-doubt. That quality is doubly fasci-
nating in humans. Outwardly people may condemn your dark side, but it is
not virtue alone that creates charisma; anything extraordinary will do. Do
not apologize or go halfway. The more unbridled you seem, the more mag-
netic the effect.
dark. A keen glance
reached her from the corner
of his eyes, bored into her,
and held her fascinated.
A leaden heaviness
overpowered her limbs as
his great wrinkled face,
distorted with desire, came
closer to hers. She felt his
hot breath on her cheeks,
and saw how his eyes,
burning from the depths of
their sockets, furtively roved
over her helpless body, until
he dropped his lids with a
sensuous expression. 
His
voice had fallen to a
passionate whisper, and he
murmured strange,
voluptuous words in her
ear. • Just as she was on
the point of abandoning
herself to her seducer, a
memory stirred in her
dimly and as if from some
far distance; she recalled
that she had come to ask
him about God.
—RENÉ 
FÜLÖP-MILLER,
RASPUTIN: 
THE 
HOLY 
DEVIL
106 
• 
The Art of Seduction
The demonic performer. Throughout his childhood Elvis Presley was
thought a strange boy who kept pretty much to himself. In high school in
Memphis, Tennessee, he attracted attention with his pompadoured hair and
sideburns, his pink and black clothing, but people who tried to talk to him
found nothing there—he was either terribly bland or hopelessly shy. At the
high school prom, he was the only boy who didn't dance. He seemed lost
in a private world, in love with the guitar he took everywhere. At the Ellis
Auditorium, at the end of an evening of gospel music or wrestling, the
concessions manager would often find Elvis onstage, miming a perfor-
mance and taking bows before an imaginary audience. Asked to leave, he
would quietly walk away. He was a very polite young man.
In 1953, just out of high school, Elvis recorded his first song, in a local
studio. The record was a test, a chance for him to hear his own voice. A
year later the owner of the studio, Sam Phillips, called him in to record two
blues songs with a couple of professional musicians. They worked for
hours, but nothing seemed to click; Elvis was nervous and inhibited. Then,
near the end of the evening, giddy with exhaustion, he suddenly let loose
and started to jump around like a child, in a moment of complete self-
abandon. The other musicians joined in, the song getting wilder and
wilder. Phillips's eyes lit up—he had something here.
A month later Elvis gave his first public performance, outdoors in a
Memphis park. He was as nervous as he had been at the recording session,
and could only stutter when he had to speak; but once he broke into song,
the words came out. The crowd responded excitedly, rising to peaks at
certain moments. Elvis couldn't figure out why. "I went over to the man-
ager after the song," he later said, "and I asked him what was making the
crowd go nuts. He told me, 'I'm not really sure, but I think that every
time you wiggle your left leg, they start to scream. Whatever it is, just
don't stop.'
A single Elvis recorded in 1954 became a hit. Soon he was in demand.
Going onstage filled him with anxiety and emotion, so much so that he
became a different person, as if possessed. "I've talked to some singers
and they get a little nervous, but they say their nerves kind of settle down
after they get into it. Mine never do. It's sort of this energy . . . something
maybe like sex." Over the next few months he discovered more gestures
and sounds—twitching dance movements, a more tremulous voice—that
made the crowds go crazy, particularly teenage girls. Within a year he had
become the hottest musician in America. His concerts were exercises in
mass hysteria.
Elvis Presley had a dark side, a secret life. (Some have attributed it to the
death, at birth, of his twin brother.) This dark side he deeply repressed as a
young man; it included all kinds of fantasies which he could only give in to
when he was alone, although his unconventional clothing may also have
been a symptom of it. When he performed, though, he was able to let
these demons loose. They came out as a dangerous sexual power. Twitch-
By its very nature, the
existence of charismatic
authority is specifically
unstable. 
The holder may
forego his charisma; he
may feel "forsaken by his
God," as Jesus did on the
cross; he may prove to his
followers that 
"virtue
is gone out of him." It is
then that his mission
is extinguished, and hope
waits and searches for a
new holder of charisma.
—MAX 
WEBER, FROM MAX
WEBER: 
ESSAYS 
IN SOCIOLOGY,
EDITED BY HANS GERTH AND
C. WRIGHT MILLS
The Charismatic • 
107
ing, androgynous, uninhibited, he was a man enacting strange fantasies be-
fore the public. The audience sensed this and was excited by it. It wasn't a
flamboyant style and appearance that gave Elvis charisma, but rather the
electrifying expression of his inner turmoil.
A crowd or group of any sort has a unique energy. Just below the sur-
face is desire, a constant sexual excitement that has to be repressed because
it is socially unacceptable. If you have the ability to rouse those desires, the
crowd will see you as having charisma. The key is learning to access your
own unconscious, as Elvis did when he let go. You are full of an excite-
ment that seems to come from some mysterious inner source. Your unin-
hibitedness will invite other people to open up, sparking a chain reaction:
their excitement in turn will animate you still more. The fantasies you
bring to the surface do not have to be sexual—any social taboo, anything
repressed and yearning for an outlet, will suffice. Make this felt in your
recordings, your artwork, your books. Social pressure keeps people so re-
pressed that they will be attracted to your charisma before they have even
met you in person.
The Savior. In March of 1917, the Russian parliament forced the coun-
try's ruler, Czar Nicholas, to abdicate and established a provisional govern-
ment. Russia was in rums. Its participation in World War I had been a
disaster; famine was spreading widely, the vast countryside was riven by
looting and lynch law, and soldiers were deserting from the army en masse.
Politically the country was bitterly divided; the main factions were the
right, the social democrats, and the left-wing revolutionaries, and each of
these groups was itself afflicted by dissension.
Into this chaos came the forty-seven-year-old Vladimir Ilyich Lenin. A
Marxist revolutionary, the leader of the Bolshevik Communist party, he
had suffered a twelve-year exile in Europe until, recognizing the chaos
overcoming Russia as the chance he had long been waiting for, he had hur-
ried back home. Now he called for the country to end its participation in
the war and for an immediate socialist revolution. In the first weeks after his
arrival, nothing could have seemed more ridiculous. As a man, Lenin
looked unimpressive; he was short and plain-featured. He had also spent
years away in Europe, isolated from his people and immersed in reading and
intellectual argument. Most important, his party was small, representing
only a splinter group within the loosely organized left coalition. Few took
him seriously as a national leader.
Undaunted, Lenin went to work. Wherever he went, he repeated the
same simple message: end the war, establish the rule of the proletariat,
abolish private property, redistribute wealth. Exhausted with the nation's
endless political infighting and the complexity of its problems, people be-
gan to listen. Lenin was so determined, so confident. He never lost his
cool. In the midst of a raucous debate, he would simply and logically de-
bunk each one of his adversaries' points. Workers and soldiers were im-
He is their god. He leads
them like a thing \ Made
by some other deity than
nature, \ That shapes man
better; and they follow him
\ Against us brats with no
less confidence \ Than boys
pursuing summer butterflies
\ Or butchers killing
flies. . . .
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
CORIOLANUS
The roof did lift as Presley
came onstage. He sang for
twenty-five minutes while
the audience erupted like
Mount Vesuvius. "I never
saw such excitement and
screaming in my entire life,
ever before or since," said
[film director Hal] Kanter.
As an observer, he
describ-ed being stunned by
"an exhibition of public
mass hysteria . . . a tidal
wave of adoration surging
up from 9,000 people,
over the wall of police
flanking the stage, up over
the flood-lights, to the
performer and beyond him,
lifting him to frenzied
heights of response."
—A 
DESCRIPTION OF ELVIS
PRESLEY'S CONCERT AT THE
HAYRIDE THEATER, SHREVEPORT,
LOUISIANA, DECEMBER 17, 1956,
IN PETER WHITMER, THE INNER
ELVIS: A 
PSYCHOLOGICAL
BIOGRAPHY 
OF 
ELVIS AARON
PRESLEY
108 
• 
The Art of Seduction
pressed by his firmness. Once, in the midst of a brewing riot, Lenin amazed
his chauffeur by jumping onto the running board of his car and directing
the way through the crowd, at considerable personal risk. Told that his ideas
had nothing to do with reality, he would answer, "So much the worse for
reality!"
Allied to Lenin's messianic confidence in his cause was his ability to or-
ganize. Exiled in Europe, his party had been scattered and diminished; in
keeping them together he had developed immense practical skills. In front
of a large crowd, he was a also powerful orator. His speech at the First All-
Russian Soviet Congress made a sensation; either revolution or a bourgeois
government, he cried, but nothing in between—enough of this compro-
mise in which the left was sharing. At a time when other politicians were
scrambling desperately to adapt to the national crisis, and seemed weak in
the process, Lenin was rock stable. His prestige soared, as did the member-
ship of the Bolshevik party
Most astounding of all was Lenin's effect on workers, soldiers, and peas-
ants. He would address these common people wherever he found them—in
the street, standing on a chair, his thumbs in his lapel, his speech an odd
mix of ideology, peasant aphorisms, and revolutionary slogans. They would
listen, enraptured. When Lenin died, in 1924—seven years after single-
handedly opening the way to the October Revolution of 1917, which had
swept him and the Bolsheviks into power—these same ordinary Russians
went into mourning. They worshiped at his tomb, where his body was
preserved on view; they told stories about him, developing a body of
Lenin folklore; thousands of newborn girls were christened "Ninel," Lenin
spelled backwards. This cult of Lenin assumed religious proportions.
There all kinds of misconceptions about charisma, which, paradoxically,
only add to its mystique. Charisma has little to do with an exciting physical
appearance or a colorful personality, qualities that elicit short—term interest.
Particularly in times of trouble, people are not looking for entertainment—
they want security, a better quality of life, social cohesion. Believe it or not,
a plain-looking man or woman with a clear vision, a quality of single-
mindedness, and practical skills can be devastatingly charismatic, provided it
is matched with some success. Never underestimate the power of success in
enhancing one's aura. But in a world teeming with compromisers and
fudgers whose indecisiveness only creates more disorder, one clear-minded
soul will be a magnet of attention—will have charisma.
One on one, or in a Zurich cafe before the revolution, Lenin had little
or no charisma. (His confidence was attractive, but many found his strident
manner irritating.) He won charisma when he was seen as the man who
could save the country. Charisma is not a mysterious quality that inhabits
you outside your control; it is an illusion in the eyes of those who see you
as having what they lack. Particularly in times of trouble, you can enhance
that illusion through calmness, resolution, and clear-minded practicality. It
also helps to have a seductively simple message. Call it the Savior Syn-
No one could so fire others
with theif plans, no one
could so impose his will
and conquer by force of his
personality as this
seemingly so ordinary and
somewhat coarse man who
lacked any obvious sources
of charm. . . . Neither
Plekhanov nor Martov nor
anyone else possessed the
secret radiating from Lenin
of positively hypnotic effect
upon people—I would
even say, domination of
them. 
Plekhanov was
treated with deference,
Martov was loved, but
Lenin alone was followed
unhesitatingly as the only
indisputable leader. For
only Lenin represented that
rare 
phenomenon,
especially rare in Russia, of
a man of iron will and
indomitable energy who
combines fanatical faith in
the movement, the cause,
with no less faith in
himself.
—A. N. POTRESOV, QUOTED IN
DANKWART A. RUSTOW, ED.,
PHILOSOPHERS 
AND KINGS:
STUDIES 
IN 
LEADERSHIP
"I had hoped to see the
mountain eagle of our
party, the great man, great
physically as well as
politically. I had fancied
Lenin as a giant, stately
and imposing. Mow great
was my disappointment to
see a most ordinary-looking
man, below average height,
in no way, literally in no
way distinguishable from
ordinary mortals. "
—JOSEPH STALIN, ON MEETING
LENIN FOR THE FIRST TIME IN
1905, QUOTED IN RONALD W.
CLARK, 
LENIN:THE MAN
BEHIND 
THE 
MASK
The Charismatic 
• 
109
drome: once people imagine you can save them from chaos, they will fall in
love with you, like a person who melts in the arms of his or her rescuer.
And mass love equals charisma. How else to explain the love ordinary Rus-
sians felt for a man as emotionless and unexciting as Vladimir Lenin.
The guru. According to the beliefs of the Theosophical Society, every two
thousand years or so the spirit of the World Teacher, Lord Maitreya, inhab-
its the body of a human. First there was Sri Krishna, born two thousand
years before Christ; then there was Jesus himself; and at the start of the
twentieth century another incarnation was due. One day in 1909, the
theosophist Charles Leadbeater saw a boy on an Indian beach and had an
epiphany: this fourteen-year-old lad, Jiddu Krishnamurti, would be the
World Teacher's next vehicle. Leadbeater was struck by the simplicity of
the boy, who seemed to lack the slightest trace of selfishness. The members
of the Theosophical Society agreed with his assessment and adopted this
scraggly underfed youth, whose teachers had repeatedly beaten him for stu-
pidity. They fed and clothed him and began his spiritual instruction. The
scruffy urchin turned into a devilishly handsome young man.
In 1911, the theosophists formed the Order of the Star in the East, a
group intended to prepare the way for the coming of the World Teacher.
Krishnamurti was made head of the order. He was taken to England, where
his education continued, and everywhere he went he was pampered and
revered. His air of simplicity and contentment could not help but impress.
Soon Krishnamurti began to have visions. In 1922 he declared, "I have
drunk at the fountain of Joy and eternal Beauty. I am God-intoxicated."
Over the next few years he had psychic experiences that the theosophists
interpreted as visits from the World Teacher. But Krishnamurti had actually
had a different kind of revelation: the truth of the universe came from
within. No god, no guru, no dogma could ever make one realize it. He
himself was no god or messiah, but just another man. The reverence that
he was treated with disgusted him. In 1929, much to his followers' shock,
he disbanded the Order of the Star and resigned from the Theosophical
Society.
And so Krishnamurti became a philosopher, determined to spread the
truth he had discovered: you must be simple, removing the screen of lan-
guage and past experience. Through these means anyone could attain con-
tentment of the kind that radiated from Krishnamurti. The theosophists
abandoned him but his following grew larger than ever. In California,
where he spent much of his time, the interest in him verged on cultic ado-
ration. The poet Robinson Jeffers said that whenever Krishnamurti entered
a room you could feel a brightness filling the space. The writer Aldous
Huxley met him in Los Angeles and fell under his spell. Hearing him
speak, he wrote: "It was like listening to the discourse of the Buddha—
such power, such intrinsic authority." The man radiated enlightenment.
The actor John Barrymore asked him to play the role of Buddha in a film.
Tirst and foremost there
can be no prestige without
mystery, for familiarity
breeds contempt. 
. . . I n
the design, the demeanor
and the mental operations
of a leader there must
always be a "something"
which others cannot
altogether fathom, 
which
puzzles them, stirs them,
and rivets their
attention . . . to hold in
reserve some piece of secret
knowledge which may any
moment intervene, and the
more effectively from being
in the nature of a surprise.
The latent faith of the
masses will do the rest.
Once the leader has been
fudged capable of adding
the weight of his
personality to the known
factors of any situation, the
ensuing hope and
confidence will add
immensely to the faith
reposed in him.
—CHARLES DE GAULLE, THE
EDGE OF THE SWORD, IN DAVID
SCHOENBRUN, 
THE 
THREE
LIVES 
OF CHARLES DE GAULLE
110 
• 
The Art of Seduction
(Krishnamurti politely declined.) When he visited India, hands would
reach out from the crowd to try to touch him through the open car win-
dow. People prostrated themselves before him.
Repulsed by all this adoration, Krishnamurti grew more and more de-
tached. He even talked about himself in the third person. In fact, the ability
to disengage from one's past and view the world anew was part of his phi-
losophy, yet once again the effect was the opposite of what he expected:
the affection and reverence people felt for him only grew. His followers
fought jealously for signs of his favor. Women in particular fell deeply in
love with him, although he was a lifelong celibate.
Krishnamurti had no desire to be a guru or a Charismatic, but he inadver-
tently discovered a law of human psychology that disturbed him. People do
not want to hear that your power comes from years of effort or discipline.
They prefer to think that it comes from your personality, your character,
something you were born with. They also hope that proximity to the guru
or Charismatic will make some of that power rub off on them. They did
not want to have to read Krishnamurti's books, or to spend years practicing
his lessons—they simply wanted to be near him, soak up his aura, hear him
speak, feel the light that entered the room with him. Krishnamurti advo-
cated simplicity as a way of opening up to the truth, but his own simplicity
just allowed people to see what they wanted in him, attributing powers to
him that he not only denied but ridiculed.
This is the guru effect, and it is surprisingly simple to create. The aura
you are after is not the fiery one of most Charismatics, but one of incan-
descence, enlightenment. An enlightened person has understood some-
thing that makes him or her content, and this contentment radiates outward.
That is the appearance you want: you do not need anything or anyone, you
are fulfilled. People are naturally drawn to those who emit happiness;
maybe they can catch it from you. The less obvious you are, the better: let
people conclude that you are happy, rather than hearing it from you. Let
them see it in your unhurried manner, your gentle smile, your ease and
comfort. Keep your words vague, letting people imagine what they will.
Remember: being aloof and distant only stimulates the effect. People
will fight for the slightest sign of your interest. A guru is content and
detached—a deadly Charismatic combination.
The drama saint. It began on the radio. Throughout the late 1930s and
early 1940s, Argentine women would hear the plaintive, musical voice of
Eva Duarte in one of the lavishly produced soap operas that were so popu-
lar at the time. She never made you laugh, but how often she could make
you cry—with the complaints of a betrayed lover, or the last words of
Marie Antoinette. The very thought of her voice made you shiver with
emotion. And she was pretty, with her flowing blond hair and her serious
face, which was often on the covers of the gossip magazines.
Only a month after Evita's
death, the newspaper
vendors' 
union put forward
her name for canonization,
and although this gesture
was an isolated one and
was never taken seriously
by the Vatican, the idea of
Evita's holiness remained
with many people and was
reinforced by the
publication 
of devotional
literature subsidized by
the government; by the
renaming of cities, schools,
and subway stations; and
by the stamping of
medallions, the casting
of busts, and the issuing of
ceremonial stamps. 
The
time of the evening news
broadcast was changed from
8:30 
P.M. 
to 8:25 P.M.,
the time when Evita had
"passed into immortality,"
and each month there were
torch-lit processions on the
twenty-sixth 
of the 
month,
the day of her death. On
the first anniversary of her
death, La Prensa printed a
story about one of its
readers seeing Evita's face
in the face of the moon,
and after this there were
many more such sightings
reported in the newspapers.
For the most part, official
publications stopped short
of claiming sainthood for
her, but their restraint was
not always convincing. . . .
In the calendar for 1953 of
the Buenos Aires
newspaper vendors, as in
other unofficial images,
she was depicted in the
traditional blue robes of the
Virgin, her hands crossed,
her sad head to one side
and surrounded by a halo.
—NICHOLAS FRASER AND
MARYSA NAYARRO. EVITA
The 
Charismatic 
• 111
In 1943, those magazines published a most exciting story: Eva had
begun an affair with one of the most dashing men in the new military
government, Colonel Juan Perón. Now Argentines heard her doing propa-
ganda spots for the government, lauding the "New Argentina" that glis-
tened in the future. And finally, this fairy tale story reached its perfect
conclusion: in 1945 Juan and Eva married, and the following year, the
handsome colonel, after many trials and tribulations (including a spell in
prison, from which he was freed by the efforts of his devoted wife) was
elected president. He was a champion of the descamisados—the "shirtless
ones," the workers and the poor, just as his wife was. Only twenty-six at the
time, she had grown up in poverty herself.
Now that this star was the first lady of the republic, she seemed to
change. She lost weight, most definitely; her outfits became less flamboy-
ant, even downright austere; and that beautiful flowing hair was now pulled
back, rather severely. It was a shame—the young star had grown up. But as
Argentines saw more of the new Evita, as she was now known, her new
look affected them more strongly. It was the look of a saintly, serious
woman, one who was indeed what her husband called the "Bridge of
Love" between himself and his people. She was now on the radio all the
time, and listening to her was as emotional as ever, but she also spoke mag-
nificently in public. Her voice was lower and her delivery slower; she
stabbed the air with her fingers, reached out as if to touch the audience.
And her words pierced you to the core: "I left my dreams by the wayside in
order to watch over the dreams of others. . . . I now place my soul at the
side of the soul of my people. I offer them all my energies so that my body
may be a bridge erected toward the happiness of all. Pass over it . . . toward
the supreme destiny of the new fatherland."
It was no longer only through magazines and the radio that Evita made
herself felt. Almost everyone was personally touched by her in some way.
Everyone seemed to know someone who had met her, or who had visited
her in her office, where a line of supplicants wound its way through the
hallways to her door. Behind her desk she sat, so calm and full of love. Film
crews recorded her acts of charity: to a woman who had lost everything,
Evita would give a house; to one with a sick child, free care in the finest
hospital. She worked so hard, no wonder rumor had it that she was ill. And
everyone heard of her visits to the shanty towns and to hospitals for the
poor, where, against the wishes of her staff, she would kiss people with all
kinds of maladies (lepers, syphilitic men, etc.) on the cheek. Once an assis-
tant appalled by this habit tried to dab Evita's lips with alcohol, to sterilize
them. This saint of a woman grabbed the bottle and smashed it against the
wall.
Yes, Evita was a saint, a living madonna. Her appearance alone could
heal the sick. And when she died of cancer, in 1952, no outsider to Ar-
gentina could possibly understand the sense of grief and loss she left be-
hind. For some, the country never recovered.
* 
* 
*
As for me, I have the gift
of electrifying men.
—NAPOLEON BONAPARTE, IN
PIETER 
GEYL, NAPOLEON: FOR
AND 
AGAINST
I do not pretend to be a
divine man, but I do
believe in divine guidance,
divine power, and divine
prophecy. I am not
educated, nor am I an
expert in any particular
field—but I am sincere and
my sincerity is my
credentials.
—MALCOLM X, QUOTED IN
EUGENE VICTORWOLFENSTEIN,
THE 
VICTIMS 
OF DEMOCRACY:
MALCOLM X 
AND 
THIS BLACK
REVOLUTION
112 
• 
The Art of Seduction
Most of us live in a semi-somnambulistic state: we do our daily tasks and
the days fly by. The two exceptions to this are childhood and those mo-
ments when we are in love. In both cases, our emotions are more engaged,
more open and active. And we equate feeling emotional with feeling more
alive. A public figure who can affect people's emotions, who can make
them feel communal sadness, joy, or hope, has a similar effect. An appeal to
the emotions is far more powerful than an appeal to reason.
Eva Perón knew this power early on, as a radio actress. Her tremulous
voice could make audiences weep; because of this, people saw in her great
charisma. She never forgot the experience. Her every public act was framed
in dramatic and religious motifs. Drama is condensed emotion, and the
Catholic religion is a force that reaches into your childhood, hits you where
you cannot help yourself. Evita's uplifted arms, her staged acts of charity,
her sacrifices for the common folk—all this went straight to the heart. It
was not her goodness alone that was charismatic, although the appear-
ance of goodness is alluring enough. It was her ability to dramatize her
goodness.
You must learn to exploit the two great purveyors of emotion: drama
and religion. Drama cuts out the useless and banal in life, focusing on mo-
ments of pity and terror; religion deals with matters of life and death.
Make your charitable actions dramatic, give your loving words religious
import, bathe everything in rituals and myths going back to childhood.
Caught up in the emotions you stir, people will see over your head the halo
of charisma.
The deliverer. In Harlem in the early 1950s, few African-Americans knew
much about the Nation of Islam, or ever stepped into its temple. The Na-
tion preached that white people were descended from the devil and that
someday Allah would liberate the black race. This doctrine had little mean-
ing for Harlemites, who went to church for spiritual solace and turned in
practical matters to their local politicians. But in 1954, a new minister for
the Nation of Islam arrived in Harlem.
The minister's name was Malcolm X, and he was well-read and elo-
quent, yet his gestures and words were angry. Word spread: whites had
lynched Malcolm's father. He had grown up in a juvenile facility, then had
survived as a small-time hustler before being arrested for burglary and
spending six years in prison. His short life (he was only twenty—nine at the
time) had been one long run-in with the law, yet look at him now—so
confident and educated. No one had helped him; he had done it all on his
own. Harlemites began to see Malcolm X everywhere, handing out fliers,
addressing the young. He would stand outside their churches, and as the
congregation dispersed, he would point to the preacher and say, "He repre-
sents the white man's god; I represent the black man's god." The curious
began to come to hear him preach at a Nation of Islam temple. He would
ask them to look at the actual conditions of their lives: "When you get
The Charismatic • 
113
through looking at where you live, then . . . take a walk across Central
Park," he would tell them. "Look at the white man's apartments. Look
at his Wall Street!" His words were powerful, particularly coming from a
minister.
In 1957, a young Muslim in Harlem witnessed the beating of a
drunken black man by several policemen. When the Muslim protested, the
police pummeled him senseless and carted him off to jail. An angry crowd
gathered outside the police station, ready to riot. Told that only Malcolm X
could forestall violence, the police commissioner brought him in and told
him to break up the mob. Malcolm refused. Speaking more temperately,
the commissioner begged him to reconsider. Malcolm calmly set conditions
for his cooperation: medical care for the beaten Muslim, and proper
punishment for the police officers. The commissioner reluctantly agreed.
Outside the station, Malcolm explained the agreement and the crowd
dispersed. In Harlem and around the country, he was an overnight hero—
finally a man who took action. Membership in his temple soared.
Malcolm began to speak all over the United States. He never read from
a text; looking out at the audience, he made eye contact, pointed his finger.
His anger was obvious, not so much in his tone—he was always controlled
and articulate—as in his fierce energy, the veins popping out on his neck.
Many earlier black leaders had used cautious words, and had asked their fol-
lowers to deal patiently and politely with their social lot, no matter how
unfair. What a relief Malcolm was. He ridiculed the racists, he ridiculed
the liberals, he ridiculed the president; no white person escaped his scorn.
If whites were violent, Malcolm said, the language of violence should be
spoken back to them, for it was the only language they understood. "Hos-
tility is good!" he cried out. "It's been bottled up too long." In response to
the growing popularity of the nonviolent leader Martin Luther King, Jr.,
Malcolm said, "Anybody can sit. An old woman can sit. A coward can
sit. . . . It takes a man to stand."
Malcolm X had a bracing effect on many who felt the same anger he
did but were frightened to express it. At his funeral—he was assassinated in
1965, at one of his speeches—the actor Ossie Davis delivered the eulogy
before a large and emotional crowd: "Malcolm," he said, "was our own
black shining prince."
Malcolm X was a Charismatic of Moses' kind: he was a deliverer. The
power of this sort of Charismatic comes from his or her expression of dark
emotions that have built up over years of oppression. In doing so, the deliv-
erer provides an opportunity for the release of bottled-up emotions by
other people—of the hostility masked by forced politeness and smiles. De-
liverers have to be one of the suffering crowd, only more so: their pain
must be exemplary. Malcolm's personal history was an integral part of his
charisma. His lesson—that blacks should help themselves, not wait for
whites to lift them up—meant a great deal more because of his own years
in prison, and because he had followed his own doctrine by educating him-
114 
• 
The Art of Seduction
self, lifting himself up from the bottom. The deliverer must be a living ex-
ample of personal redemption.
The essence of charisma is an overpowering emotion that communi-
cates itself in your gestures, In your tone of voice, in subtle signs that are
the more powerful for being unspoken. You feel something more deeply
than others, and no emotion is more powerful and more capable of creating
a charismatic reaction than hatred, particularly if it comes from deep-
rooted feelings of oppression. Express what others are afraid to express and
they will see great power in you. Say what they want to say but cannot.
Never be afraid of going too far. If you represent a release from oppression,
you have the leeway to go still farther. Moses spoke of violence, of destroy-
ing every last one of his enemies. Language like this brings the oppressed
together and makes them feel more alive. This is not, however, something
that is uncontrollable on your part. Malcolm X felt rage from early on, but
only in prison did he teach himself the art of oratory, and how to channel
his emotions. Nothing is more charismatic than the sense that someone is
struggling with great emotion rather than simply giving in to it.
The Olympian actor. On January 24, 1960 an insurrection broke out in
Algeria, then still a French colony. Led by right-wing French soldiers, its
purpose was to forestall the proposal of President Charles de Gaulle to
grant Algeria the right of self-determination. If necessary, the insurrection-
ists would take over Algeria in the name of France.
For several tense days, the seventy-year-old de Gaulle maintained a
strange silence. Then on January 29, at eight in the evening, he appeared
on French national television. Before he had uttered a word, the audience
was astonished, for he wore his old uniform from World War II, a uniform
that everyone recognized and that created a strong emotional response. De
Gaulle had been the hero of the resistance, the savior of the country at its
darkest moment. But that uniform had not been seen for quite some time.
Then de Gaulle spoke, reminding his public, in his cool and confident
manner, of all they had accomplished together in liberating France from
the Germans. Slowly he moved from these charged patriotic issues to the
rebellion in Algeria, and the affront it presented to the spirit of the libera-
tion. He finished his address by repeating his famous words of June 18,
1940: "Once again I call all Frenchmen, wherever they are, whatever they
are, to reunite with France. Vive la République! Vive la France!"
The speech had two purposes. It showed that de Gaulle was deter-
mined not to give an inch to the rebels, and it reached for the heart of all
patriotic Frenchmen, particularly in the army. The insurrection quickly
died, and no one doubted the connection between its failure and de
Gaulle's performance on television.
The following year, the French voted overwhelmingly in favor of Al-
gerian self-determination. On April 11, 1961, de Gaulle gave a press con-
ference in which he made it clear that France would soon grant the
The Charismatic 
• 
115
country full independence. Eleven days later, French generals in Algeria is-
sued a communique stating that they had taken over the country and de-
claring a state of siege. This was the most dangerous moment of all: faced
with Algeria's imminent independence, these right-wing generals would go
all the way. A civil war could break out, toppling de Gaulle's government.
The following night, de Gaulle appeared once again on television, once
again wearing his old uniform. He mocked the generals, comparing them
to a South American junta. He talked calmly and sternly. Then, suddenly,
at the very end of the address, his voice rose and even trembled as he called
out to the audience: "Françaises, Français, aidez-moi!" ("Frenchwomen,
Frenchmen, help me!") It was the most stirring moment of all his televi-
sion appearances. French soldiers in Algeria, listening on transistor radios,
were overwhelmed. The next day they held a mass demonstration in favor
of de Gaulle. Two days later the generals surrendered. On July 1, 1962, de
Gaulle proclaimed Algeria's independence.
In 1940, after the German invasion of France, de Gaulle escaped to En-
gland to recruit an army that would eventually return to France for the lib-
eration. At the beginning, he was alone, and his mission seemed hopeless.
But he had the support of Winston Churchill, and with Churchill's blessing
he gave a series of radio talks that the BBC broadcast to France. His
strange, hypnotic voice, with its dramatic tremolos, would enter French liv-
ing rooms in the evenings. Few of his listeners even knew what he looked
like, but his tone was so confident, so stirring, that he recruited a silent
army of believers. In person, de Gaulle was a strange, brooding man whose
confident manner could just as easily irritate as win over. But over the radio
that voice had intense charisma. De Gaulle was the first great master of
modern media, for he easily transferred his dramatic skills to television,
where his iciness, his calmness, his total self-possession, made audiences feel
both comforted and inspired.
The world has grown more fractured. A nation no longer conies to-
gether on the streets or in the squares; it is brought together in living
rooms, where people watching television all over the country can simulta-
neously be alone and with others. Charisma must now be communicable
over the airwaves or it has no power. But it is in some ways easier to project
on television, both because television makes a direct one-on-one appeal
(the Charismatic seems to address you) and because charisma is fairly easy to
fake for the few moments you spend in front of the camera. As de Gaulle
understood, when appearing on television it is best to radiate calmness and
control, to use dramatic effects sparingly. De Gaulle's overall iciness made
doubly effective the brief moments in which he raised his voice, or let
loose a biting joke. By remaining calm and underplaying it, he hypnotized
his audience. (Your face can express much more if your voice is less stri-
dent.) He conveyed emotion visually—the uniform, the setting—and
through the use of certain charged words: the liberation, Joan of Arc. The
less he strained for effect, the more sincere he appeared.
116 
• The Art of Seduction
All this must be carefully orchestrated. Punctuate your calmness with
surprises; rise to a climax; keep things short and terse. The only thing that
cannot be faked is self-confidence, the key component to charisma since
the days of Moses. Should the camera lights betray your insecurity, all the
tricks in the world will not put your charisma back together again.
Symbol: The Lamp. Invisible to the eye, a current flowing
through a wire in a glass vessel generates a heat that
turns into candescence. All we see is the glow.
In the prevailing darkness, the Lamp
lights the way.
Dangers
O
n a pleasant May day in 1794, the citizens of Paris gathered in a park
for the Festival of the Supreme Being. The focus of their attention
was Maximilien de Robespierre, head of the Committee of Public Safety,
and the man who had thought up the festival in the first place. The idea was
simple: to combat atheism, "to recognize the existence of a Supreme Being
and the Immortality of the Soul as the guiding forces of the universe."
It was Robespierre's day of triumph. Standing before the masses in his
sky-blue suit and white stockings, he initiated the festivities. The crowd
adored him; after all, he had safeguarded the purposes of the French Revo-
lution through the intense politicking that had followed it. The year before,
he had initiated the Reign of Terror, which cleansed the revolution of its
enemies by sending them to the guillotine. He had also helped guide the
country through a war against the Austrians and the Prussians. What made
crowds, and particularly women, love him was his incorruptible virtue (he
lived very modestly), his refusal to compromise, the passion for the revolu-
tion that was evident in everything he did, and the romantic language of
his speeches, which could not fail to inspire. He was a god. The day was
beautiful and augured a great future for the revolution.
Two months later, on July 26, Robespierre delivered a speech that he
The Charismatic • 
117
thought would ensure his place in history, for he intended to hint at the
end of the Terror and a new era for France. Rumor also had it that he was
to call for a last handful of people to be sent to the guillotine, a final group
that threatened the safety of the revolution. Mounting the rostrum to ad-
dress the country's governing convention, Robespierre wore the same
clothes he had worn on the day of the festival. The speech was long, almost
three hours, and included an impassioned description of the values and
virtues he had helped protect. There was also talk of conspiracies, treach-
ery, unnamed enemies.
The response was enthusiastic, but a little less so than usual. The speech
had tired many representatives. Then a lone voice was heard, that of a man
named Bourdon, who spoke against printing Robespierre's speech, a veiled
sign of disapproval. Suddenly others stood up on all sides, and accused him
of vagueness: he had talked of conspiracies and threats without naming the
guilty. Asked to be specific, he refused, preferring to name names later on.
The next day Robespierre stood to defend his speech, and the representa-
tives shouted him down. A few hours later, he was the one sent to the guil-
lotine. On July 28, amid a gathering of citizens who seemed to be in an
even more festive mood than at the Festival of the Supreme Being, Robe-
spierre's head fell into the basket, to resounding cheers. The Reign of Ter-
ror was over.
Many of those who seemed to admire Robespierre actually harbored a
gnawing resentment of him—he was so virtuous, so superior, it was oppres-
sive. Some of these men had plotted against him, and were waiting for the
slightest sign of weakness—which appeared on that fateful day when he
gave his last speech. In refusing to name his enemies, he had shown either a
desire to end the bloodshed or a fear that they would strike at him before
he could have them killed. Fed by the conspirators, this one spark turned
into fire. Within two days, first a governing body and then a nation turned
against a Charismatic who two months before had been revered.
Charisma is as volatile as the emotions it stirs. Most often it stirs senti-
ments of love. But such feelings are hard to maintain. Psychologists talk of
"erotic fatigue"—the moments after love in which you feel tired of it, re-
sentful. Reality creeps in, love turns to hate. Erotic fatigue is a threat to all
Charismatics. The Charismatic often wins love by acting the savior, rescu-
ing people from some difficult circumstance, but once they feel secure,
charisma is less seductive to them. Charismatics need danger and risk. They
are not plodding bureaucrats; some of them deliberately keep danger go-
ing, as de Gaulle and Kennedy were wont to do, or as Robespierre did
through the Reign of Terror. But people tire of this, and at your first sign
of weakness they turn on you. The love they showed before will be
matched by their hatred now.
The only defense is to master your charisma. Your passion, your anger,
your confidence make you charismatic, but too much charisma for too
long creates fatigue, and a desire for calmness and order. The better kind of
118 
• 
The Art of Seduction
charisma is created consciously and is kept under control. When you need
to you can glow with confidence and fervor, inspiring the masses. But
when the adventure is over, you can settle into a routine, turning the heat,
not out, but down. (Robespierre may have been planning that move, but it
came a day too late.) People will admire your self-control and adaptability.
Their love affair with you will move closer to the habitual affection of a
man and wife. You will even have the leeway to look a little boring, a little
simple—a role that can also seem charismatic, if played correctly. Remem-
ber: charisma depends on success, and the best way to maintain success, af-
ter the initial charismatic rush, is to be practical and even cautious. Mao
Zedong was a distant, enigmatic man who for many had an awe-inspiring
charisma. He suffered many setbacks that would have spelled the end of a
less clever man, but after each reversal he retreated, becoming practical, tol-
erant, flexible; at least for a while. This protected him from the dangers of a
counterreaction.
There is another alternative: to play the armed prophet. According to
Machiavelli, although a prophet may acquire power through his charismatic
personality, he cannot long survive without the strength to back it up. He
needs an army. The masses will tire of him; they will need to be forced.
Being an armed prophet may not literally involve arms, but it demands a
forceful side to your character, which you can back up with action. Unfor-
tunately this means being merciless with your enemies for as long as you re-
tain power. And no one creates more bitter enemies than the Charismatic.
Finally, there is nothing more dangerous than succeeding a Charismatic.
These characters are unconventional, and their rule is personal in style, be-
ing stamped with the wildness of their personalities. They often leave chaos
in their wake. The one who follows after a Charismatic is left with a mess,
which the people, however, do not see. They miss their inspirer and blame
the successor. Avoid this situation at all costs. If it is unavoidable, do not try
to continue what the Charismatic started; go in a new direction. By being
practical, trustworthy, and plain-speaking, you can often generate a strange
kind of charisma through contrast. That was how Harry Truman not only
survived the legacy of Roosevelt but established his own type of charisma.
Daily life is harsh, and most of us
constantly seek escape from it in fantasies and
dreams. Stars feed on this weakness; standing
out from others through a distinctive and appeal-
ing style, they make us want to watch them. At
the same time, they are vague and ethereal,
keeping their distance, and letting us imagine
more than is there. Their dreamlike quality
works on our unconscious; we are not even
aware how much we imitate them. Learn to be-
come an object of fascination by projecting the
glittering but elusive presence of the Star.
The Fetishistic Star
O
ne day in 1922, in Berlin, Germany, a casting call went out for the
part of a voluptuous young woman in a film called Tragedy of Love. Of
the hundreds of struggling young actresses who showed up, most would do
anything to get the casting director's attention, including exposing them-
selves. There was one young woman in the line, however, who was simply
dressed, and performed none of the other girls' desperate antics. Yet she
stood out anyway.
The girl carried a puppy on a leash, and had draped an elegant necklace
around the puppy's neck. The casting director noticed her immediately. He
watched her as she stood in line, calmly holding the dog in her arms and
keeping to herself. When she smoked a cigarette, her gestures were slow
and suggestive. He was fascinated by her legs and face, the sinuous way she
moved, the hint of coldness in her eyes. By the time she had come to the
front, he had already cast her. Her name was Marlene Dietrich.
By 1929, when the Austrian-American director Josef von Sternberg ar-
rived in Berlin to begin work on the film The Blue Angel, the twenty-
seven-year-old Dietrich was well known in the Berlin film and theater
world. The Blue Angel was to be about a woman called Lola-Lola who preys
sadistically on men, and all of Berlin's best actresses wanted the part—except,
apparently, Dietrich, who made it known that she thought the role demean-
ing; von Sternberg should choose from the other actresses he had in mind.
Shortly after arriving in Berlin, however, von Sternberg attended a perfor-
mance of a musical to watch a male actor he was considering for The Blue
Angel The star of the musical was Dietrich, and as soon as she came on-
stage, von Sternberg found that he could not take his eyes off her. She
stared at him directly, insolently, like a man; and then there were those legs,
and the way she leaned provocatively against the wall. Von Sternberg forgot
about the actor he had come to see. He had found his Lola-Lola.
Von Sternberg managed to convince Dietrich to take the part, and im-
mediately he went to work, molding her into the Lola of his imagination.
He changed her hair, drew a silver line down her nose to make it seem
thinner, taught her to look at the camera with the insolence he had seen
onstage. When filming began, he created a lighting system just for her—a
light that tracked her wherever she went, and was strategically heightened
by gauze and smoke. Obsessed with his "creation," he followed her every-
where. No one else could go near her.
The cool, bright face which
didn't ask for anything,
which simply existed,
waiting—it 
was an empty
face, he thought; a face that
could change with any
wind of expression. One
could dream into it
anything. It was like a
beautiful empty house
waiting for carpets and
pictures. It had all
possibilities—it 
could
become a palace or a
brothel. It depended on the
one who filled it. How
limited by comparison was
all that was already
completed and labeled.
— E R I C H MARIA REMARQUE,
ON MARLENE DIETRICH,
ARCH 
OF 
TRIUMPH
Marlene Dietrich is not an
actress, like Sarah
Bernhardt; she is a myth,
like Phryne.
—ANDRÉ: MALRAUX, QUOTED IN
EDGAR 
MORIN, 
THE STARS,
TRANSLATED BY RICHARD
HOWARD
When 
Pygmalion saw
these women, living such
wicked lives, he was
121
122 
• 
The Art of Seduction
The Blue Angel was a huge success in Germany. Audiences were fasci-
nated with Dietrich: that cold, brutal stare as she spread her legs over a
stool, baring her underwear; her effortless way of commanding attention
on screen. Others besides von Sternberg became obsessed with her. A man
dying of cancer, Count Sascha Kolowrat, had one last wish: to see Mar-
lene's legs in person. Dietrich obliged, visiting him in the hospital and lift-
ing up her skirt; he sighed and said "Thank you. Now I can die happy."
Soon Paramount Studios brought Dietrich to Hollywood, where everyone
was quickly talking about her. At a party, all eyes would turn toward her
when she came into the room. She would be escorted by the most hand-
some men in Hollywood, and would be wearing an outfit both beautiful
and unusual—gold-lame pajamas, a sailor suit with a yachting cap. The
next day the look would be copied by women all over town; next it would
spread to magazines, and a whole new trend would start.
The real object of fascination, however, was unquestionably Dietrich's
face. What had enthralled von Sternberg was her blankness—with a simple
lighting trick he could make that face do whatever he wanted. Dietrich
eventually stopped working with von Sternberg, but never forgot what he
had taught her. One night in 1951, the director Fritz Lang, who was about
to direct her in the film Rancho Notorious, was driving past his office when
he saw a light flash in the window. Fearing a burglary, he got out of his car,
crept up the stairs, and peeked through the crack in the door: it was Diet-
rich taking pictures of herself in the mirror, studying her face from every
angle.
Marlene Dietrich had a distance from her own self: she could study her
face, her legs, her body, as if she were someone else. This gave her the
ability to mold her look, transforming her appearance for effect. She could
pose in just the way that would most excite a man, her blankness letting
him see her according to his fantasy, whether of sadism, voluptuousness, or
danger. And every man who met her, or who watched her on screen, fan-
tasized endlessly about her. The effect worked on women as well; in the
words of one writer, she projected "sex without gender." But this self-
distance gave her a certain coldness, whether on film or in person. She was
like a beautiful object, something to fetishize and admire the way we ad-
mire a work of art.
The fetish is an object that commands an emotional response and that
makes us breathe life into it. Because it is an object we can imagine what-
ever we want to about it. Most people are too moody, complex, and reac-
tive to let us see them as objects that we can fetishize. The power of the
Fetishistic Star comes from an ability to become an object, and not just any
object but an object we fetishize, one that stimulates a variety of fantasies.
Fetishistic Stars are perfect, like the statue of a Greek god or goddess. The
effect is startling, and seductive. Its principal requirement is self-distance. If
you see yourself as an object, then others will too. An ethereal, dreamlike
air will heighten the effect.
revolted by the many faults
which nature has
implanted 
in the female
sex, and long lived a
bachelor existence, without
any wife to share his home.
But meanwhile, 
with
marvelous artistry, he
skillfully carved a snowy
ivory statue. He made it
lovelier than any woman
born, and fell in love with
his own creation. The
statue had all the
appearance of a real girl, so
that it seemed to be alive,
to want to move, did not
modesty forbid. So cleverly
did his art conceal its art.
Pygmalion gazed in
wonder, and in his heart
there rose a passionate love
for this image of a human
form. Often he ran his
hands over the work,
feeling it to see whether it
was flesh or ivory, and
would not yet admit that
ivory was all it was. He
kissed the statue, and
imagined 
that it kissed him
back, spoke to it and
embraced it, and thought
he felt his fingers sink into
the limbs he touched, so
that he was afraid lest a
bruise appear where he had
pressed the flesh.
Sometimes he addressed it
in flattering speeches,
sometimes brought the kind
of presents that girls
enjoy. . . . He dressed the
limbs of his statue in
woman's robes, and put
rings on its fingers, long
necklaces round its
neck. . . . All this finery
became the image well, but
it was no less lovely
unadorned. 
Pygmalion
then placed the statue on a
couch that was covered with
cloths of Tynan purple,
laid its head to rest on soft
down pillows, as if it could
appreciate them, and called
it his bedfellow. • The
festival of Venus, which is
celebrated with the greatest
The Star • 123
You are a blank screen. Float through life noncommittally and people
will want to seize you and consume you. Of all the parts of your body that
draw this fetishistic attention, the strongest is the face; so learn to tune your
face like an instrument, making it radiate a fascinating vagueness for effect.
And since you will have to stand out from other Stars in the sky, you will
need to develop an attention-getting style. Dietrich was the great practi-
tioner of this art; her style was chic enough to dazzle, weird enough to en-
thrall. Remember, your own image and presence are materials you can
control. The sense that you are engaged in this kind of play will make peo-
ple see you as superior and worthy of imitation.
She had such natural poise . . . such an economy of ges-
ture, that she became as absorbing as a Modigliani. . . .
She had the one essential star quality: she could be mag-
nificent doing nothing.
—BERLIN 
ACTRESS LILI DARVAS ON MARLENE D I E T R I C H
The Mythic Star
O
n July 2, 1960, a few weeks before that year's Democratic National
Convention, former President Harry Truman publicly stated that
John F. Kennedy—who had won enough delegates to be chosen his party's
candidate for the presidency—was too young and inexperienced for the
job. Kennedy's response was startling: he called a press conference, to be
televised live, and nationwide, on July 4. The conference's drama was
heightened by the fact that he was away on vacation, so that no one saw or
heard from him until the event itself. Then, at the appointed hour,
Kennedy strode into the conference room like a sheriff entering Dodge
City. He began by stating that he had run in all of the state primaries, at
considerable expense of money and effort, and had beaten his opponents
fairly and squarely. Who was Truman to circumvent the democratic
process? "This is a young country," Kennedy went on, his voice getting
louder, "founded by young men . . . and still young in heart. . . . The
world is changing, the old ways will not do, . . . It is time for a new genera-
tion of leadership to cope with new problems and new opportunities."
Even Kennedy's enemies agreed that his speech that day was stirring. He
turned Truman's challenge around: the issue was not his inexperience but
the older generation's monopoly on power. His style was as eloquent as
his words, for his performance evoked films of the time—Alan Ladd in
Shane confronting the corrupt older ranchers, or James Dean in Rebel With-
out a Cause. Kennedy even resembled Dean, particularly in his air of cool
detachment.
A few months later, now approved as the Democrats' presidential can-
didate, Kennedy squared off against his Republican opponent, Richard
Nixon, in their first nationally televised debate. Nixon was sharp; he knew
pomp all through Cyprus,
was now in progress, and
heifers, their crooked horns
gilded for the occasion, had
fallen at the altar as the
axe struck their snowy
necks. Smoke was rising
from the incense, when
Pygmalion, 
having made
his offering, stood by the
altar and timidly prayed,
saying: "If you gods can
give all things, may I have
as my wife, I pray—"he
did not dare to say: "the
ivory maiden," but
finished: "one like the
ivory maid." However,
golden Venus, present at
her festival in person,
understood what his
prayers meant, and as a
sign that the gods were
kindly disposed, the flames
burned up three times,
shooting a tongue of fire
into the air. When
Pygmalion returned home,
he made straight for the
statue of the girl he loved,
leaned over the couch, and
kissed her. She seemed
warm: he laid his lips on
hers again, and touched her
breast with his hands—at
his touch the ivory lost its
hardness, and grew soft.
—OVID, METAMORPHOSES,
T R A N S L A T E D B Y M A R Y M . I N N E S
[John F.] Kennedy
brought to television news
and photojournalism 
the
components most prevalent
in the world of film: star
quality and mythic story.
With his telegenic looks,
skills at self presentation,
heroic fantasies, and
creative intelligence,
Kennedy was brilliantly
prepared to project a major
screen persona. He
appropriated the discourses
of mass culture, especially
of Hollywood, 
and
transferred them to the
124 
• 
The Art of Seduction
the answers to the questions and debated with aplomb, quoting statistics on
the accomplishments of the Eisenhower administration, in which he had
served as vice-president. But beneath the glare of the cameras, on black and
white television, he was a ghastly figure—his five o'clock shadow covered
up with powder, streaks of sweat on his brow and cheeks, his face drooping
with fatigue, his eyes shifting and blinking, his body rigid. What was he so
worried about? The contrast with Kennedy was startling. If Nixon looked
only at his opponent, Kennedy looked out at the audience, making eye
contact with his viewers, addressing them in their living rooms as no politi-
cian had ever done before. If Nixon talked data and niggling points of de-
bate, Kennedy spoke of freedom, of building a new society, of recapturing
America's pioneer spirit. His manner was sincere and emphatic. His words
were not specific, but he made his listeners imagine a wonderful future.
The day after the debate, Kennedy's poll numbers soared miraculously,
and wherever he went he was greeted by crowds of young girls, screaming
and jumping. His beautiful wife Jackie by his side, he was a kind of demo-
cratic prince. Now his television appearances were events. He was in due
course elected president, and his inaugural address, also broadcast on televi-
sion, was stirring. It was a cold and wintry day. In the background, Eisen-
hower sat huddled in coat and scarf, looking old and beaten. But Kennedy
stood hatless and coatless to address the nation: "I do not believe that any of
us would exchange places with any other people or any other generation.
The energy, the faith, the devotion which we bring to this endeavor will
light our country and all who serve it—and the glow from that fire can
truly light the world."
Over the months to come Kennedy gave innumerable live press confer-
ences before the TV cameras, something no previous president had dared.
Facing the firing squad of lenses and questions, he was unafraid, speaking
coolly and slightly ironically. What was going on behind those eyes, that
smile? People wanted to know more about him. The magazines teased its
readers with information—photographs of Kennedy with his wife and
children, or playing football on the White House lawn, interviews creating
a sense of him as a devoted family man, yet one who mingled as an equal
with glamorous stars. The images all melted together—the space race, the
Peace Corps, Kennedy facing up to the Soviets during the Cuban missile
crisis just as he had faced up to Truman.
After Kennedy was assassinated, Jackie said in an interview that before
he went to bed, he would often play the soundtracks to Broadway musicals,
and his favorite of these was Camelot, with its lines, "Don't let it be forgot /
that once there was a spot / For one brief shining moment / That was
known as Camelot." There would be great presidents again, Jackie said, but
never "another Camelot." The name "Camelot" seemed to stick, making
Kennedy's thousand days in office resonate as myth.
Kennedy's seduction of the American public was conscious and calculated.
It was also more Hollywood than Washington, which was not surprising:
news. By this strategy he
made the news like dreams
and like the movies—a
realm in which images
played out scenarios that
accorded with the viewer's
deepest yearnings. . . .
Never appearing in an
actual film, but rather
turning the television
apparatus into his screen,
he became the greatest
movie star of the twentieth
century.
— J O H N HELLMANN, THE
KENNEDY 
OBSESSION: 
THE
AMERICAN MYTH OF JFK
But we have seen that,
considered as a total
phenomenon, the history of
the stars repeats, in its own
proportions, the history of
the gods. Before the gods
(before the stars) the
mythical universe (the
screen) was peopled with
specters or phantoms
endowed with the glamour
and magic of the double. •
Several of these presences
have progressively assumed
body and substance, have
taken form, 
amplified, 
and
flowered into gods and
goddesses. And even as
certain major gods of the
ancient pantheons 
meta-
morphose themselves into
hero -gods of salvation, th e
star-goddesses humanize
themselves and become new
mediators between the
fantastic world of dreams
and man's daily life on
earth. . . . • The heroes of
the movies . . . are, in an
obviously attenuated way,
mythological heroes in this
sense of becoming divine.
The star is the actor or
actress who absorbs some of
the 
heroic—i.e., 
divinized
and mythic—substance of
the hero or heroine of the
movies, and who in turn
enriches this substance by
The Star • 
125
Kennedy's father, Joseph, had once been a movie producer, and Kennedy
himself had spent time in Hollywood, hobnobbing with actors and trying
to figure out what made them stars. He was particularly fascinated with
Gary Cooper, Montgomery Clift, and Cary Grant; he often called Grant
for advice.
Hollywood had found ways to unite the entire country around cer-
tain themes, or myths—often the great American myth of the West. The
great stars embodied mythic types: John Wayne the patriarch, Clift
the Promethean rebel, Jimmy Stewart the noble hero, Marilyn Monroe the
siren. These were not mere mortals but gods and goddesses to be dreamed
and fantasized about. All of Kennedy's actions were framed in the conven-
tions of Hollywood. He did not argue with his opponents, he confronted
them dramatically. He posed, and in visually fascinating ways—whether
with his wife, with his children, or alone onstage. He copied the facial
expressions, the presence, of a Dean or a Cooper. He did not discuss
policy details but waxed eloquent about grand mythic themes, the kind
that could unite a divided nation. And all this was calculated for television,
for Kennedy mostly existed as a televised image. That image haunted
our dreams. Well before his assassination, Kennedy attracted fantasies of
America's lost innocence with his call for a renaissance of the pioneer spirit,
a New Frontier.
Of all the character types, the Mythic Star is perhaps the most powerful
of all. People are divided by all kinds of consciously recognized categories—
race, gender, class, religion, politics. It is impossible, then, to gain power on
a grand scale, or to win an election, by drawing on conscious awareness; an
appeal to any one group will only alienate another. Unconsciously, how-
ever, there is much we share. All of us are mortal, all of us know fear, all of
us have been stamped with the imprint of parent figures; and nothing con-
jures up this shared experience more than myth. The patterns of myth,
born out of warring feelings of helplessness on the one hand and thirst for
immortality on the other, are deeply engraved in us all.
Mythic Stars are figures of myth come to life. To appropriate their
power, you must first study their physical presence—how they adopt a dis-
tinctive style, are cool and visually arresting. Then you must assume the
pose of a mythic figure: the rebel, the wise patriarch, the adventurer. (The
pose of a Star who has struck one of these mythic poses might do the trick.)
Make these connections vague; they should never be obvious to the con-
scious mind. Your words and actions should invite interpretation beyond
their surface appearance; you should seem to be dealing not with specific,
nitty-gritty issues and details but with matters of life and death, love and
hate, authority and chaos. Your opponent, similarly, should be framed
not merely as an enemy for reasons of ideology or competition but as a vil-
lain, a demon. People are hopelessly susceptible to myth, so make yourself
the hero of a great drama. And keep your distance—let people identify
with you without being able to touch you. They can only watch and
dream.
his or her own contrib-
ution. When we speak of
the myth of the star, we
mean first of all the process
of divinization which the
movie actor undergoes, a
process that makes him the
idol of crowds.
—EDGAR MORIN, THE STARS,
TRANSLATED 
BY RICHARD
HOWARD
Age: 22, Sex: female,
Nationality: 
British,
Profession: medical student
"[Deanna Durbin] became
my first and only screen
idol. I wanted to be as
much like her as possible,
both in my manners and
clothes. Whenever I was to
get a new dress, I would
find from my collection a
particularly nice picture of
Deanna and ask for a dress
like she was wearing. I did
my hair as much like hers
as 1 could manage. If I
found myself in any
annoying or aggravating
situation . . . I found
myself wondering what
Deanna would do and
modified my own reactions
accordingly. . . . " • Age:
26, 
Sex: female, 
Nation-
ality: British "I only fell in
love once with a movie
actor. It was Conrad Veidt.
His magnetism and his
personality got me. His
voice and gestures fascin-
ated me. I hated him,
feared him, loved him.
When he died it seemed to
me that a vital part of my
imagination died too, and
my world of dreams was
bare. "
—J. P. MAYER, BRITISH
CINEMAS 
AND THEIR
AUDIENCES
126 
• The Art of Seduction
Jack's life had more to do with myth, magic, legend, saga,
and story than with political theory or political science.
—JACQUELINE KENNEDY, A WEEK AFTER JOHN KENNEDY'S DEATH
Keys to the Character
S
eduction is a form of persuasion that seeks to bypass consciousness, stir-
ring the unconscious mind instead. The reason for this is simple: we are
so surrounded by stimuli that compete for our attention, bombarding us
with obvious messages, and by people who are overtly political and manipu-
lative, that we are rarely charmed or deceived by them. We have grown
increasingly cynical. Try to persuade a person by appealing to their con-
sciousness, by saying outright what you want, by showing all your cards, and
what hope do you have? You are just one more irritation to be tuned out.
To avoid this fate you must learn the art of insinuation, of reaching the
unconscious. The most eloquent expression of the unconscious is the
dream, which is intricately connected to myth; waking from a dream, we
are often haunted by its images and ambiguous messages. Dreams obsess us
because they mix the real and the unreal. They are filled with real charac-
ters, and often deal with real situations, yet they are delightfully irrational,
pushing realities to the extremes of delirium. If everything in a dream were
realistic, it would have no power over us; if everything were unreal, we
would feel less involved in its pleasures and fears. Its fusion of the two is
what makes it haunting. This is what Freud called the "uncanny": some-
thing that seems simultaneously strange and familiar.
We sometimes experience the uncanny in waking life—in a déjà vu, a
miraculous coincidence, a weird event that recalls a childhood experience.
People can have a similar effect. The gestures, the words, the very being of
men like Kennedy or Andy Warhol, for example, evoke both the real and
the unreal: we may not realize it (and how could we, really), but they are
like dream figures to us. They have qualities that anchor them in reality—
sincerity, playfulness, sensuality—but at the same time their aloofness, their
superiority, their almost surreal quality makes them seem like something
out of a movie.
These types have a haunting, obsessive effect on people. Whether in
public or in private, they seduce us, making us want to possess them both
physically and psychologically. But how can we possess a person from a
dream, or a movie star or political star, or even one of those real-life fasci-
nators, like a Warhol, who may cross our path? Unable to have them, we
become obsessed with them—they haunt our thoughts, our dreams, our
fantasies. We imitate them unconsciously. The psychologist Sandor Fer-
enczi calls this "introjection": another person becomes part of our ego, we
internalize their character. That is the insidious seductive power of a Star, a
power you can appropriate by making yourself into a cipher, a mix of the
real and the unreal. Most people are hopelessly banal; that is, far too real.
The savage worships idols
of wood and stone; the
civilized man, idols of flesh
and blood.
—GEORGE BERNARD SHAW
When the eye's rays
encounter some clear, well-
polished object—be it
burnished steel or glass or
water, a brilliant stone, or
any other polished and
gleaming 
substance
having luster, glitter, and
sparkle . . . those rays of
the eye are reflected back,
and the observer then
beholds himself and
obtains an ocular vision of
his own person. This is
what you see when you
look into a mirror; in that
situation you are as it were
looking at yourself through
the eyes of another.
—IBN 
HAZM, 
THE RING OF
THE 
DOVE:A 
TREATISE ON THE
ART AND 
PRACTICE 
OF ARAB
LOVE, TRANSLATED BY A . J .
ARBERRY
The only important
constellation of collective
seduction produced by
modern times [is] that of
film stars or cinema
idols. . . . They were our
only myth in an age
incapable 
of generating
great myths or figures of
seduction comparable to
those of mythology or art. •
The cinema's power lives in
its myth. Its stones, its
psychological portraits,
its imagination or realism,
the meaningful impressions
it leaves—these are all
secondary. Only the myth
is powerful, and at the
heart of the
cinematographic myth lies
seduction—that 
of the
renowned seductive figure,
a man or woman (but
The Star • 
127
What you need to do is etherealize yourself. Your words and actions seem
to come from your unconscious—have a certain looseness to them. You
hold yourself back, occasionally revealing a trait that makes people wonder
whether they really know you.
The Star is a creation of modern cinema. That is no surprise: film re-
creates the dream world. We watch a movie in the dark, in a semisomno-
lent state. The images are real enough, and to varying degrees depict
realistic situations, but they are projections, flickering lights, images—we
know they are not real. It as if we were watching someone else's dream. It
was the cinema, not the theater, that created the Star.
On a theater stage, actors are far away, lost in the crowd, too real in
their bodily presence. What enabled film to manufacture the Star was the
close-up, which suddenly separates actors from their contexts, filling your
mind with their image. The close-up seems to reveal something not
so much about the character they are playing but about themselves. We
glimpse something of Greta Garbo herself when we look so closely into
her face. Never forget this while fashioning yourself as a Star. First, you
must have such a large presence that you can fill your target's mind the way
a close-up fills the screen. You must have a style or presence that makes you
stand out from everyone else. Be vague and dreamlike, yet not distant or
absent—you don't want people to be unable to focus on or remember you.
They have to be seeing you in their minds when you're not there.
Second, cultivate a blank, mysterious face, the center that radiates Star-
ness. This allows people to read into you whatever they want to, imagining
they can see your character, even your soul. Instead of signaling moods and
emotions, instead of emoting or overemoting, the Star draws in interpreta-
tions. That is the obsessive power in the face of Garbo or Dietrich, or even
of Kennedy, who molded his expressions on James Dean's.
A living thing is dynamic and changing while an object or image is pas-
sive, but in its passivity it stimulates our fantasies. A person can gain that
power by becoming a kind of object. The great eighteenth-century charla-
tan Count Saint-Germain was in many ways a precursor of the Star. He
would suddenly appear in town, no one knew from where; he spoke many
languages, but his accent belonged to no single country. Nor was it clear
how old he was—not young, clearly, but his face had a healthy glow. The
count only went out at night. He always wore black, and also spectacular
jewels. Arriving at the court of Louis XV, he was an instant sensation; he
reeked wealth, but no one knew its source. He made the king and Madame
de Pompadour believe he had fantastic powers, including even the ability to
turn base matter into gold (the gift of the Philosopher's Stone), but he
never made any great claims for himself; it was all insinuation. He never
said yes or no, only perhaps. He would sit down for dinner but was never
seen eating. He once gave Madame de Pompadour a gift of candies in a
box that changed color and aspect depending on how she held it; this
entrancing object, she said, reminded her of the count himself. Saint-
Germain painted the strangest paintings anyone had ever seen—the colors
above all a woman) linked
to the ravishing but
specious power of the
cinematographic image
itself. . . . • The star is by
no means an ideal or
sublime being: she is
artificial. . . . Her presence
serves to submerge all
sensibility and expression
beneath a ritual fascination
with the void, beneath
ecstasy of her gaze and the
nullity of her smile. This is
how she achieves mythical
status and becomes subject
to collective rites of
sacrificial adulation. • The
ascension of the cinema
idols, the masses'
divinities, was and remains
a central story of modern
times. . . . There is no
point in dismissing it as
merely the dreams of
mystified masses. It is a
seductive occurrence. . . . •
To be sure, seduction in the
age of the masses is no
longer like that of. . . Les
Liaisons Dangereuses or
T h e Seducer's Diary, nor
for that matter, like that
found in ancient
mythology, 
which
undoubtedly contains the
stories richest in seduction.
In these seduction is hot,
while that of our modern
idols is cold, being at the
intersection of two cold
mediums, that of the image
and that of the
masses. . . . • The great
stars or seductresses never
dazzle because of their
talent or intelligence, but
because of their absence.
They are dazzling in their
nullity, and in their
coldness—the coldness of
makeup and ritual
hieraticism. . . . • These
great seductive effigies are
our masks, our Eastern
Island statues.
—JEAN BAUDRILLARD,
SEDUCTION, 
TRANSLATED 
BY
BRIAN SINGER
128 
• 
The Art of Seduction
were so vibrant that when he painted jewels, people thought they were real.
Painters were desperate to know his secrets but he never revealed them. He
would leave town as he had entered, suddenly and quietly. His greatest ad-
mirer was Casanova, who met him and never forgot him. When he died,
no one believed it; years, decades, a century later, people were certain he
was hiding somewhere. A person with powers like his never dies.
The count had all the Star qualities. Everything about him was ambigu-
ous and open to interpretation. Colorful and vibrant, he stood out from the
crowd. People thought he was immortal, just as a star seems neither to age
nor to disappear. His words were like his presence—fascinating, diverse,
strange, their meaning unclear. Such is the power you can command by
transforming yourself into a glittering object.
Andy Warhol too obsessed everyone who knew him. He had a distinc-
tive style—those silver wigs—and his face was blank and mysterious. People
never knew what he was thinking; like his paintings, he was pure surface.
In the quality of their presence Warhol and Saint-Germain recall the great
trompe l'oeil paintings of the seventeenth century, or the prints of M. C.
Escher—fascinating mixtures of realism and impossibility, which make
people wonder if they are real or imaginary.
A Star must stand out, and this may involve a certain dramatic flair, of
the kind that Dietrich revealed in her appearances at parties. Sometimes,
though, a more haunting, dreamlike effect can be created by subtle touches:
the way you smoke a cigarette, a vocal inflection, a way of walking. It is
often the little things that get under people's skin, and make them imitate
you—the lock of hair over Veronica Lake's right eye, Cary Grant's voice,
Kennedy's ironic smile. Although these nuances may barely register to the
conscious mind, subliminally they can be as attractive as an object with a
striking shape or odd color. Unconsciously we are strangely drawn to
things that have no meaning beyond their fascinating appearance.
Stars make us want to know more about them. You must learn to stir
people's curiosity by letting them glimpse something in your private life,
something that seems to reveal an element of your personality. Let them
fantasize and imagine. A trait that often triggers this reaction is a hint of
spirituality, which can be devilishly seductive, like James Dean's interest in
Eastern philosophy and the occult. Hints of goodness and big-heartedness
can have a similar effect. Stars are like the gods on Mount Olympus, who
live for love and play. The things you love—people, hobbies, animals—
reveal the kind of moral beauty that people like to see in a Star. Exploit this
desire by showing people peeks of your private life, the causes you fight for,
the person you are in love with (for the moment).
Another way Stars seduce is by making us identify with them, giving us
a vicarious thrill. This was what Kennedy did in his press conference about
Truman: in positioning himself as a young man wronged by an older man,
evoking an archetypal generational conflict, he made young people identify
with him. (The popularity in Hollywood movies of the figure of the disaf-
fected, wronged adolescent helped him here.) The key is to represent a
If you want to know all
about Andy Warhol, just
look at the surface of my
paintings and films and
me, and there I am.
There's nothing behind it.
— A N D Y WARHOL, QUOTED IN
STEPHEN 
KOCH, STARGAZER:
THE 
LIFE, 
WORLD 
& FILMS OF
ANDY 
WARHOL
The Star • 129
type, as Jimmy Stewart represented the quintessential middle-American,
Cary Grant the smooth aristocrat. People of your type will gravitate to
you, identify with you, share your joy or pain. The attraction must be un-
conscious, conveyed not in your words but in your pose, your attitude.
Now more than ever, people are insecure, and their identities are in flux.
Help them fix on a role to play in life and they will flock to identify with
you. Simply make your type dramatic, noticeable, and easy to imitate. The
power you have in influencing people's sense of self in this manner is insid-
ious and profound.
Remember: everyone is a public performer. People never know exactly
what you think or feel; they judge you on your appearance. You are an ac-
tor. And the most effective actors have an inner distance: like Dietrich, they
can mold their physical presence as if they perceived it from the outside.
This inner distance fascinates us. Stars are playful about themselves, always
adjusting their image, adapting it to the times. Nothing is more laughable
than an image that was fashionable ten years ago but isn't any more. Stars
must always renew their luster or face the worst possible fate: oblivion.
Symbol: The
Idol. A piece of stone carved into the
shape of a god, perhaps glittering with gold
and jewels. The eyes of the worshippers fill the stone
with life, imagining it to have real powers. Its shape allows
them to see what they want to see—a god—but it is actually
just a piece of stone. 
The god lives in their imaginations.
130 
• 
The Art of Seduction
Dangers
S
tars create illusions that are pleasurable to see. The danger is that people
tire of them—the illusion no longer fascinates—and turn to another
Star. Let this happen and you will find it very difficult to regain your place
in the galaxy. You must keep all eyes on you at any cost.
Do not worry about notoriety, or about slurs on your image; we are re-
markably forgiving of our Stars. After the death of President Kennedy, all
kinds of unpleasant truths came to light about him—the endless affairs, the
addiction to risk and danger. None of this diminished his appeal, and in
fact the public still considers him one of America's greatest presidents. Errol
Flynn faced many scandals, including a notorious rape case; they only en-
hanced his rakish image. Once people have recognized a Star, any kind of
publicity, even bad, simply feeds the obsession. Of course you can go too
far: people like a Star to have a transcendent beauty, and too much human
frailty will eventually disillusion them. But bad publicity is less of a danger
than disappearing for too long, or growing too distant. You cannot haunt
people's dreams if they never see you. At the same time, you cannot let the
public get too familiar with you, or let your image become predictable.
People will turn against you in an instant if you begin to bore them, for
boredom is the ultimate social evil.
Perhaps the greatest danger Stars face is the endless attention they elicit.
Obsessive attention can become disconcerting and worse. As any attractive
woman can attest, it is tiring to be gazed at all the time, and the effect can
be destructive, as is shown by the story of Marilyn Monroe. The solution is
to develop the kind of distance from yourself that Dietrich had—take the
attention and idolatry with a grain of salt, and maintain a certain detach-
ment from them. Approach your own image playfully. Most important,
never become obsessed with the obsessive quality of people's interest in you.
Se-
ducers draw
you in by the fo-
cused, individualized atten-
tion they pay to you. Anti-Seducers
are the opposite: insecure, self-absorbed,
and unable to grasp the psychology of an-
other person, they literally repel. Anti-
Seducers have no self-awareness, and never
realize when they are pestering, imposing,
talking too much. They lack the subtlety
to create the promise of pleasure that seduc-
tion 
requires. 
Root 
out 
anti-seductive
qualities in yourself, and recognize them
in others—there is no pleasure or profit
in 
dealing 
with 
the 
Anti-Seducer.
Typology of the Anti-Seducers
A
nti-Seducers come in many shapes and kinds, but almost all of them
share a single attribute, the source of their repellence: insecurity. We
are all insecure, and we suffer for it. Yet we are able to surmount these feel-
ings at times; a seductive engagement can bring us out of our usual self-
absorption, and to the degree that we seduce or are seduced, we feel
charged and confident. Anti-Seducers, however, are insecure to such a de-
gree that they cannot be drawn into the seductive process. Their needs,
their anxieties, their self-consciousness close them off. They interpret the
slightest ambiguity on your part as a slight to their ego; they see the merest
hint of withdrawal as a betrayal, and are likely to complain bitterly about it.
It seems easy: Anti-Seducers repel, so be repelled—avoid them. Unfor-
tunately, however, many Anti-Seducers cannot be detected as such at first
glance. They are more subtle, and unless you are careful they will ensnare
you in a most unsatisfying relationship. You must look for clues to their
self-involvement and insecurity: perhaps they are ungenerous, or they argue
with unusual tenacity, or are excessively judgmental. Perhaps they lavish
you with undeserved praise, declaring their love before knowing anything
about you. Or, most important, they pay no attention to details. Since they
cannot see what makes you different, they cannot surprise you with nu-
anced attention.
It is critical to recognize anti-seductive qualities not only in others but
also in ourselves. Almost all of us have one or two of the Anti-Seducer's
qualities latent in our character, and to the extent that we can consciously
root them out, we become more seductive. A lack of generosity, for in-
stance, need not signal an Anti-Seducer if it is a person's only fault, but an
ungenerous person is seldom truly attractive. Seduction implies opening
yourself up, even if only for the purposes of deception; being unable to
give by spending money usually means being unable to give in general.
Stamp ungenerosity out. It is an impediment to power and a gross sin in
seduction.
It is best to disengage from Anti-Seducers early on, before they sink
their needy tentacles into you, so learn to read the signs. These are the
main types.
Count Lodovico then
remarked with a smile:
"I promise you that our
sensible courtier will never
act so stupidly to gain a
woman's favor." • Cesare
Gonzaga replied: 
"Nor so
stupidly as a gentleman I
remember, of some repute,
whom to spare men's
blushes I don't wish to
mention by name. " •
"Well, at least tell us what
he did," said the Duchess.
• Then Cesare continued:
"He was loved by a very
great lady, and at her
request he came secretly to
the town where she was.
After he had seen her and
enjoyed her company for as
long as she would let him
in the time, he sighed and
wept bitterly, to show the
anguish he was suffering at
having to leave her, and he
begged her never to forget
him; and then he added
that she should pay for his
lodging at the inn, since it
was she who had sent for
him and he thought it only
right, therefore, that he
shouldn't be involved in
any expense over the
journey." • At this, all the
133
134 
• 
The Art of Seduction
The Brute. If seduction is a kind of ceremony or ritual, part of the plea-
sure is its duration—the time it takes, the waiting that increases anticipa-
tion. Brutes have no patience for such things; they are concerned only with
their own pleasure, never with yours. To be patient is to show that you are
thinking of the other person, which never fails to impress. Impatience has
the opposite effect: assuming you are so interested in them you have no rea-
son to wait, Brutes offend you with their egotism. Underneath that ego-
tism, too, there is often a gnawing sense of inferiority, and if you spurn
them or make them wait, they overreact. If you suspect you are dealing
with a Brute, do a test—make that person wait. His or her response will tell
you everything you need to know.
The Suffocator. Suffocators fall in love with you before you are even half-
aware of their existence. The trait is deceptive—you might think they have
found you overwhelming—but the fact is they suffer from an inner void, a
deep well of need that cannot be filled. Never get involved with Suffoca-
tors; they are almost impossible to free yourself from without trauma. They
cling to you until you are forced to pull back, whereupon they smother you
with guilt. We tend to idealize a loved one, but love takes time to develop.
Recognize Suffocators by how quickly they adore you. To be so admired
may give a momentary boost to your ego, but deep inside you sense that
their intense emotions are not related to anything you have done. Trust
these instincts.
A subvariant of the Suffocator is the Doormat, a person who slavishly
imitates you. Spot these types early on by seeing whether they are capable
of having an idea of their own. An inability to disagree with you is a bad
sign.
The Moralizer. Seduction is a game, and should be undertaken with a
light heart. All is fair in love and seduction; morality never enters the pic-
ture. The character of the Moralizer, however, is rigid. These are people
who follow fixed ideas and try to make you bend to their standards. They
want to change you, to make you a better person, so they endlessly criticize
and judge—that is their pleasure in life. In truth, their moral ideas stem
from their own unhappiness, and mask their desire to dominate those
around them. Their inability to adapt and to enjoy makes them easy to rec-
ognize; their mental rigidity may also be accompanied by a physical stiff-
ness. It is hard not to take their criticisms personally so it is better to avoid
their presence and their poisoned comments.
The Tightwad. Cheapness signals more than a problem with money. It is a
sign of something constricted in a person's character—something that
keeps them from letting go or taking a risk. It is the most anti-seductive
ladies began to laugh and
to say that the man
concerned hardly deserved
the name of gentleman;
and many of the men felt
as ashamed as he should
have been, had he ever had
the sense to recognize such
disgraceful behavior for
what it was.
—BALDASSARE CASTIGLIONE,
THE BOOK 
OF 
THE 
COURTIER,
TRANSLATED BY GEORGE BULL
Let us see now how love is
diminished. 
This happens
through the easy
accessibility of its
consolations, through one's
being able to see and
converse lengthily with a
lover, through a lover's
unsuitable garb and gait,
and by the sudden onset of
poverty. . . . • Another
cause of diminution of love
is the realization of the
notoriety of one's lover, and
accounts of his miserliness,
bad character, and general
wickedness; also any affair
with another woman, even
if it involves no feelings of
love. Love is also
diminished if a woman
realizes that her lover is
foolish and undiscerning, or
if she sees him going too far
in demands of love, giving
no thought to his partner's
modesty nor wishing to
pardon her blushes. A
faithful lover ought to
choose the harshest pains of
love rather than by his
demands cause his partner
embarrassment, or take
pleasure in spurning her
modesty; for one who
thinks only of the outcome
of his own pleasure, and
ignores the welfare of his
partner, should be called a
traitor rather than a lover. •
Love also suffers decrease if
the woman realizes that
her lover is fearful in war,
The Anti-Seducer • 
135
trait of all, and you cannot allow yourself to give in to it. Most tightwads
do not realize they have a problem; they actually imagine that when they
give someone some paltry crumb, they are being generous. Take a hard
look at yourself—you are probably cheaper than you think. Try giving
more freely of both your money and yourself and you will see the seduc-
tive potential in selective generosity. Of course you must keep your gener-
osity under control. Giving too much can be a sign of desperation, as if
you were trying to buy someone.
The Bumbler. Bumblers are self-conscious, and their self-consciousness
heightens your own. At first you may think they are thinking about you,
and so much so that it makes them awkward. In fact they are only thinking
of themselves—worrying about how they look, or about the consequences
for them of their attempt to seduce you. Their worry is usually contagious:
soon you are worrying too, about yourself. Bumblers rarely reach the final
stages of a seduction, but if they get that far, they bungle that too. In se-
duction, the key weapon is boldness, refusing the target the time to stop
and think. Bumblers have no sense of timing. You might find it amusing
to try to train or educate them, but if they are still Bumblers past a certain
age, the case is probably hopeless—they are incapable of getting outside
themselves.
The Windbag. The most effective seductions are driven by looks, indirect
actions, physical lures. Words have a place, but too much talk will generally
break the spell, heightening surface differences and weighing things down.
People who talk a lot most often talk about themselves. They have never
acquired that inner voice that wonders, Am I boring you? To be a Windbag
is to have a deep-rooted selfishness. Never interrupt or argue with these
types—that only fuels their windbaggery. At all costs learn to control your
own tongue.
The Reactor. Reactors are far too sensitive, not to you but to their own
egos. They comb your every word and action for signs of a slight to their
vanity. If you strategically back off, as you sometimes must in seduction,
they will brood and lash out at you. They are prone to whining and com-
plaining, two very anti-seductive traits. Test them by telling a gentle joke or
story at their expense: we should all be able to laugh at ourselves a little, but
the Reactor cannot. You can read the resentment in their eyes. Erase any
reactive qualities in your own character—they unconsciously repel people.
The Vulgarian. Vulgarians are inattentive to the details that are so impor-
tant in seduction. You can see this in their personal appearance—their
or sees that he has no
patience, or is stained with
the vice of pride. There is
nothing which appears
more appropriate to the
character of any lover than
to be clad in the adornment
of humility, 
utterly
untouched by the
nakedness of pride. 
• Then
too the prolixity of a fool
or a madman often
diminishes love. There arc
many keen to prolong their
crazy words in the presence
of a woman, thinking that
they please her if they
employ foolish, 
ill-judged
language, but in fact they
are strangely deceived.
Indeed, he who thinks that
his foolish behavior pleases
a wise woman suffers from
the greatest poverty of
sense.
—ANDREAS CAPELLANUS,"HOW
LOVE 
IS 
DIMINISHED,"
TRANSLATED BY P. G.WALSH
Real men \ Shouldn't
primp their good
looks. . . . \ Keep
pleasantly clean, take
exercise, work up an
outdoor \ Tan; make quite
sure that your toga fits \
And doesn't show spots;
don't lace your shoes too
tightly \ Or ignore any
rusty buckles, or slop \
Around in too large a
fitting. Don't 
let some
incompetent barber \ Ruin
your looks: both hair and
beard demand \ Expert
attention. Keep your nails
pared, and dirt-free; \
Don't let those long hairs
sprout \ In your nostrils,
make sure your breath is
never offensive, \ Avoid the
rank male stench \ That
wrinkles noses. . . . \ I was
about to warn you
[women] against rank
goatish armpits \ And
bristling hair on your legs, \
136 
• The Art of Seduction
clothes are tasteless by any standard—and in their actions: they do not
know that it is sometimes better to control oneself and refuse to give in to
one's impulses. Vulgarians will blab, saying anything in public. They have
no sense of timing and are rarely in harmony with your tastes. Indiscretion
is a sure sign of the Vulgarian (talking to others of your affair, for example);
it may seem impulsive, but its real source is their radical selfishness, their in-
ability to see themselves as others see them. More than just avoiding Vul-
garians, you must make yourself their opposite—tact, style, and attention to
detail are all basic requirements of a seducer.
Examples of the Anti-Seducer
1. Claudius, the step-grandson of the great Roman emperor Augustus, was
considered something of an imbecile as a young man, and was treated badly
by almost everyone in his family. His nephew Caligula, who became em-
peror in A.D. 37, made it a sport to torture him, making him run around
the palace at top speed as penance for his stupidity, having soiled sandals
tied to his hands at supper, and so on. As Claudius grew older, he seemed
to become even more slow-witted, and while all of his relatives lived under
the constant threat of assassination, he was left alone. So it came as a great
surprise to everyone, including Claudius himself, that when, in A.D. 41, a
cabal of soldiers assassinated Caligula, they also proclaimed Claudius em-
peror. Having no desire to rule, he delegated most of the governing to
confidantes (a group of freed slaves) and spent his time doing what he loved
best: eating, drinking, gambling, and whoring.
Claudius's wife, Valeria Messalina, was one of the most beautiful
women in Rome. Although he seemed fond of her, Claudius paid her no
attention, and she started to have affairs. At first she was discreet, but over
the years, provoked by her husband's neglect, she became more and more
debauched. She had a room built for her in the palace where she enter-
tained scores of men, doing her best to imitate the most notorious prosti-
tute in Rome, whose name was written on the door. Any man who refused
her advances was put to death. Almost everyone in Rome knew about
these frolics, but Claudius said nothing; he seemed oblivious.
So great was Messalina's passion for her favorite lover, Gaius Silius, that
she decided to marry him, although both of them were married already.
While Claudius was away, they held a wedding ceremony, authorized by a
marriage contract that Claudius himself had been tricked into signing. Af-
ter the ceremony, Gaius moved into the palace. Now the shock and disgust
of the whole city finally forced Claudius into action, and he ordered the
execution of Gaius and of Messalina's other lovers—but not of Messalina
herself. Nevertheless, a gang of soldiers, inflamed by the scandal, hunted
her down and stabbed her to death. When this was reported to the em-
peror, he merely ordered more wine and continued his meal. Several nights
But I'm not instructing
hillbilly girls from the
Caucasus, \ Or Mysian
river-hoydens—so 
what
need \ To remind you not
to let your teeth get all
discolored \ Through
neglect, or forget to wash \
Your hands every morning?
You know how to brighten
your complexion \ With
powder, add rouge to a
bloodless face, \ Skillfully
block in the crude outline
of an eyebrow, \ Stick a
patch on one flawless
cheek. \ You don't shrink
from lining your eyes with
dark mascara \ Or a touch
of Cilician saffron. . . . \
But don't let your lover
find all those jars and
bottles \ On your dressing-
table: the best \ Makeup
remains unobtrusive. A
face so thickly plastered \
With pancake it runs
down your sweaty neck \ Is
bound to create repulsion.
And 
that goo from
unwashed fleeces— \
Athenian maybe, 
but my
dear, the smell!— \ That's
used for face-cream: avoid
it. When you have
company \ Don't dab stuff
on your pimples, don't start
cleaning your teeth: \ The
result may be attractive, but
the process is
sickening. . . .
— O V I D , THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
The Anti-Seducer 
• 
137
later, to the amazement of his slaves, he asked why the empress was not
joining him for dinner.
Nothing is more infuriating than being paid no attention. In the process of
seduction, you may have to pull back at times, subjecting your target to
moments of doubt. But prolonged inattention will not only break the se-
ductive spell, it can create hatred. Claudius was an extreme of this behavior.
His insensitivity was created by necessity: in acting like an imbecile, he hid
his ambition and protected himself among dangerous competitors. But the
insensitivity became second nature. Claudius grew slovenly, and no longer
noticed what was going on around him. His inattentiveness had a profound
effect on his wife: How, she wondered, can a man, especially a physically
unappealing man like Claudius, not notice me, or care about my affairs
with other men? But nothing she did seemed to matter to him.
Claudius marks the extreme, but the spectrum of inattention is wide. A
lot of people pay too little attention to the details, the signals another per-
son gives. Their senses are dulled by work, by hardship, by self-absorption.
We often see this turning off the seductive charge between two people, no-
tably between couples who have been together for years. Carried further, it
will stir angry, bitter feelings. Often, the one who has been cheated on by a
partner started the dynamic by patterns of inattention.
2. In 1639, a French army besieged and took possession of the Italian city of
Turin. Two French officers, the Chevalier (later Count) de Grammont and
his friend Matta, decided to turn their attention to the city's beautiful
women. The wives of some of Turin's most illustrious men were more than
susceptible—their husbands were busy, and kept mistresses of their own. The
wives' only requirement was that the suitor play by the rules of gallantry.
The chevalier and Matta were quick to find partners, the chevalier
choosing the beautiful Mademoiselle de Saint-Germain, who was soon to
be betrothed, and Matta offering his services to an older and more experi-
enced woman, Madame de Senantes. The chevalier took to wearing green,
Matta blue, these being their ladies' favorite colors. On the second day of
their courtships the couples visited a palace outside the city. The chevalier
was all charm, making Mademoiselle de Saint-Germain laugh uproariously
at his witticisms, but Matta did not fare so well; he had no patience for this
gallantry business, and when he and Madame de Senantes took a stroll, he
squeezed her hand and boldly declared his affections. The lady of course
was aghast, and when they got back to Turin she left without looking at
him. Unaware that he had offended her, Matta imagined that she was over-
come with emotion, and felt rather pleased with himself. But the Chevalier
de Grammont, wondering why the pair had parted, visited Madame de
Senantes and asked her how it went. She told him the truth—Matta had
dispensed with the formalities and was ready to bed her. The chevalier
But if, like the winter cat
upon the hearth, the lover
clings when he is
dismissed, and cannot bear
to go, certain means must
be taken to make him
understand; and these
should be progressively
ruder and ruder, until they
touch him to the quick of
his flesh. • She should
refuse him the bed, and
jeer at him, and make him
angry; she should stir up
her mother's enmity against
him; she should treat him
with an obvious lack of
candor, and spread herself
in long considerations
about his ruin; his
departure should be openly
anticipated, his tastes and
desires should be thwarted,
his poverty outraged; she
should let him see that she
is in sympathy with
another man, she should
blame him with harsh
words on every occasion;
she should tell lies about
him to her parasites, she
should interrupt his
sentences, and send him on
frequent errands away from
the house. She should seek
occasions of quarrel, and
make him the victim of a
thousand 
domestic
perfidies; she should rack
her brains to vex him; she
should play with the
glances of another in his
presence, and give herself
up to reprehensible
profligacy before his face;
she should leave the house
as often as possible, and let
it be seen that she has no
real need to do so. All
these means are good for
showing a man the door.
—EASTERN 
LOVE, 
VOLUME II:
THE 
HARLOT'S 
BREVIARY 
OF
KSHEMENDRA, 
TRANSLATED 
BY
E. POWYS MATHERS
138 
• 
The Art of Seduction
laughed and thought to himself how differently he would manage affairs if
he were the one wooing the lovely Madame.
Over the next few days Matta continued to misread the signs. He did
not pay a visit to Madame de Senantes's husband, as custom required. He
did not wear her colors. When the two went riding together, he went chas-
ing after hares, as if they were the more interesting prey, and when he took
snuff he failed to offer her some. Meanwhile he continued to make his
overforward advances. Finally Madame had had enough, and complained to
him directly. Matta apologized; he had not realized his errors. Moved by his
apology, the lady was more than ready to resume the courtship—but a few
days later, after a few trifling stabs at wooing, Matta once again assumed
that she was ready for bed. To his dismay, she refused him as before. "I do
not think that [women] can be mightily offended," Matta told the cheva-
lier, "if one sometimes leaves off trifling, to come to the point." But
Madame de Senantes would have nothing more to do with him, and the
Chevalier de Grammont, seeing an opportunity he could not pass by, took
advantage of her displeasure by secretly courting her properly, and eventu-
ally winning the favors that Matta had tried to force.
There is nothing more anti-seductive than feeling that someone has assumed
that you are theirs, that you cannot possibly resist them. The slightest ap-
pearance of this kind of conceit is deadly to seduction; you must prove
yourself, take your time, win your target's heart. Perhaps you fear that he or
she will be offended by a slower pace, or will lose interest. It is more likely,
however, that your fear reflects your own insecurity, and insecurity is always
anti-seductive. In truth, the longer you take, the more you show the depth
of your interest, and the deeper the spell you create.
In a world of few formalities and ceremony, seduction is one of the few
remnants from the past that retains the ancient patterns. It is a ritual, and its
rites must be observed. Haste reveals not the depth of your feelings but the
degree of your self-absorption. It may be possible sometimes to hurry
someone into love, but you will only be repaid by the lack of pleasure this
kind of love affords. If you are naturally impetuous, do what you can to
disguise it. Strangely enough, the effort you spend on holding yourself
back may be read by your target as deeply seductive.
3. In Paris in the 1730s lived a young man named Meilcour, who was just
of an age to have his first affair. His mother's friend Madame de Lursay, a
widow of around forty, was beautiful and charming, but had a reputation
for being untouchable; as a boy, Meilcour had been infatuated with her, but
never expected his love would be returned. So it was with great surprise
and excitement that he realized that now that he was old enough, Madame
de Lursay's tender looks seemed to indicate a more than motherly interest
in him.
Just as ladies do love men
which be valiant and bold
under arms, so likewise do
they love such as be of like
sort in love; and the man
which is cowardly and over
and above respectful toward
them, will never win their
good favor. Not that they
would have them so
overweening, bold, and
presumptuous, as that they
should by main force lay
them on the floor; but
rather they desire in them a
certain hardy modesty, or
perhaps better a certain
modest hardihood. For
while themselves are not
exactly wantons, and will
neither solicit a man nor
yet actually offer their
favors, yet do they know
well how to rouse the
appetites and passions, and
prettily allure to the
skirmish in such wise that
he which doth not take
occasion by the forelock and
join encounter, and that
without the least awe of
rank and greatness, without
a scruple of conscience or a
fear or any sort of
hesitation, he verily is a
fool and a spiritless
poltroon, and one which
doth merit to be forever
abandoned 
of kind fortune.
• I have heard of two
honorable gentlemen and
comrades, for the which two
very honorable ladies, and
of by no means humble
quality, made tryst one day
at Paris to go walking in a
garden. Being come thither,
each lady did separate
apart one from the other,
each alone with her own
cavalier, each in a several
alley of the garden, that
was so close covered in with
a fair trellis of boughs as
that daylight could really
scarce penetrate there at all,
and the coolness of the
place was very grateful.
The Anti-Seducer 
• 
139
For two months Meilcour trembled in de Lursay's presence. He was
afraid of her, and did not know what to do. One evening they were dis-
cussing a recent play. How well one character had declared his love to a
woman, Madame remarked. Noting Meilcour's obvious discomfort, she
went on, "If I am not mistaken, a declaration can only seem such an em-
barrassing matter because you yourself have one to make." Madame de
Lursay knew full well that she was the source of the young man's awkward-
ness, but she was a tease; you must tell me, she said, with whom you are in
love. Finally Meilcour confessed: it was indeed Madame whom he desired.
His mother's friend advised him to not think of her that way, but she also
sighed, and gave him a long and languid look. Her words said one thing,
her eyes another—perhaps she was not as untouchable as he had thought.
As the evening ended, though, Madame de Lursay said she doubted his
feelings would last, and she left young Meilcour troubled that she had said
nothing about reciprocating his love.
Over the next few days, Meilcour repeatedly asked de Lursay to declare
her love for him, and she repeatedly refused. Eventually the young man de-
cided his cause was hopeless, and gave up; but a few nights later, at a soiree
at her house, her dress seemed more enticing than usual, and her looks at
him stirred his blood. He returned them, and followed her around, while
she took care to keep a bit of distance, lest others sense what was happen-
ing. Yet she also managed to arrange that he could stay without arousing
suspicion when the other visitors left.
When they were finally alone, she made him sit beside her on the sofa.
He could barely speak; the silence was uncomfortable. To get him talking
she raised the same old subject: his youth would make his love for her a
passing fancy. Instead of denying it he looked dejected, and continued to
keep a polite distance, so that she finally exclaimed, with obvious irony, "If
it were known that you were here with my consent, that I had voluntarily
arranged it with you . . . what might not people say? And yet how wrong
they would be, for no one could be more respectful than you are." Goaded
into action, Meilcour grabbed her hand and looked her in the eye. She
blushed and told him he should go, but the way she arranged herself on the
sofa and looked back at him suggested he should do the opposite. Yet Meil-
cour still hesitated: she had told him to go, and if he disobeyed she might
cause a scene, and might never forgive him; he would have made a fool of
himself, and everyone, including his mother, would hear of it. He soon got
up, apologizing for his momentary boldness. Her astonished and somewhat
cold look meant he had indeed gone too far, he imagined, and he said
goodbye and left.
Meilcour and Madame de Lursay appear in the novel The Wayward Head
and Heart, written in 1738 by Crébillon fils, who based his characters on
libertines he knew in the France of the time. For Crébillon fils, seduction is
all about signs—about being able to send them and read them. This is not
Now one of the twain was
a bold man, and well
knowing how the party
had been made for
something else than merely
to walk and take the air,
and judging by his lady's
face, which he saw to be all
a-fire, that she had
longings to taste other fare
than the muscatels that
hung on the trellis, as also
by her hot, wanton, and
wild speech, he did
promptly seize on so fair
an opportunity. So catching
hold of her without the
least ceremony, he did lay
her on a little couch that
was there made of turf and
clods of earth, and did very
pleasantly work his will of
her, without her ever
uttering a word but only:
"Heavens! Sir, what are
you at? Surely you be the
maddest and strangest
fellow ever was! If anyone
comes, whatever will they
say? Great heavens! get
out!" 
But 
the gentleman,
without disturbing himself,
did so well continue what
he had begun that he did
finish, and she to boot,
with such content as that
after taking three or four
turns up and down the
alley, they did presently
start afresh. Anon, coming
forth into another, open,
alley, they did see in
another part of the garden
the other pair, who were
walking about together just
as they had left them at
first. 
Whereupon the lady,
well content, did say to the
gentleman in the like
condition, "I verily believe
so and so hath played the
silly prude, and hath given
his lady no other
entertainment but only
words, fine speeches, and
promenading." 
• Afterward
when all four were come
together, the two ladies did
fall to asking one another
140 
• 
The Art of Seduction
because sexuality is repressed and requires speaking in code. It is rather be-
cause wordless communication (through clothes, gestures, actions) is the
most pleasurable, exciting, and seductive form of language.
In Crébillon fils's novel, Madame de Lursay is an ingenious seductress
who finds it exciting to initiate young men. But even she cannot overcome
the youthful stupidity of Meilcour, who is incapable of reading her signs
because he is absorbed in his own thoughts. Later in the story, she does
manage to educate him, but in real life there are many who cannot be
educated. They are too literal and insensitive to the details that contain
seductive power. They do not so much repel as irritate and infuriate you
by their constant misinterpretations, always viewing life from behind
the screen of their ego and unable to see things as they really are. Meilcour
is so caught up in himself he cannot see that Madame is expecting him to
make the bold move to which she will have to succumb. His hesitation
shows that he is thinking of himself, not of her; that he is worrying about
how he will look, not feeling overwhelmed by her charms. Nothing could
be more anti-seductive. Recognize such types, and if they are past the
young age that would give them an excuse, do not entangle yourself in
their awkwardness—they will infect you with doubt.
4. In the Heian court of late-tenth-century Japan, the young nobleman
Kaoru, purported son of the great seducer Genji himself, had had nothing
but misfortune in love. He had become infatuated with a young princess,
Oigimi, who lived in a dilapidated home in the countryside, her father
having fallen on hard times. Then one day he had an encounter with
Oigimi's sister, Nakanokimi, that convinced him she was the one he actu-
ally loved. Confused, he returned to court, and did not visit the sisters for
some time. Then their father died, followed shortly thereafter by Oigimi
herself.
Now Kaoru realized his mistake: he had loved Oigimi all along, and she
had died out of despair that he did not care for her. He would never meet
her like again; she was all he could think about. When Nakanokimi, her fa-
ther and sister dead, came to live at court, Kaoru had the house where
Oigimi and her family had lived turned into a shrine.
One day, Nakanokimi, seeing the melancholy into which Kaoru had
fallen, told him that there was a third sister, Ukifune, who resembled his
beloved Oigimi and lived hidden away in the countryside. Kaoru came to
life—perhaps he had a chance to redeem himself, to change the past. But
how could he meet this woman? There came a time when he visited the
shrine to pay his respects to the departed Oigimi, and heard that the myste-
rious Ukifune was there as well. Agitated and excited, he managed to catch
a glimpse of her through the crack in a door. The sight of her took his
breath away: although she was a plain-looking country girl, in Kaoru's eyes
she was the living incarnation of Oigimi. Her voice, meanwhile, was like
how it had fared with each.
Then the one which was
well content did reply she
was exceeding well, indeed
she was; indeed for the
nonce she could scarce be
better. The other, which
was ill content, did declare
for her part she had had to
do with the biggest fool and
most coward lover she had
ever seen; and all the time
the two gentlemen could
see them laughing together
as they walked and crying
out: "Oh! the silly fool!
the shamefaced poltroon
and coward!" At this the
successful gallant said to his
companion: "Hark to our
ladies, which do cry out at
you, and mock you sore.
You will find you have
overplayed the prude and
coxcomb this bout." So
much he did allow; but
there was no more time to
remedy his error, for
opportunity gave 
him
no other handle to seize
her by.
—SEIGNEUR DE BRANTÔME,
LIVES 
OF 
FAIR 
& GALLANT
LADIES, TRANSLATED BY A. R..
ALLINSON
The 
Anti-Seducer 
• 141
the voice of Nakanokimi, whom he had loved as well. Tears welled up in
his eyes.
A few months later Kaoru managed to find the house in the mountains
where Ukifune lived. He visited her there, and she did not disappoint. "I
once had a glimpse of you through a crack in a door," he told her, and
"you have been very much on my mind ever since." Then he picked her up
in his arms and carried her to a waiting carriage. He was taking her back to
the shrine, and the journey there brought back to him the image of
Oigimi; again his eyes clouded with tears. Looking at Ukifune, he silently
compared her to Oigimi—her clothes were less nice but she had beautiful
hair.
When Oigimi was alive, she and Kaoru had played the koto together,
so once at the shrine he had kotos brought out. Ukifune did not play as
well as Oigimi had, and her manners were less refined. Not to worry—he
would give her lessons, change her into a lady. But then, as he had done
with Oigimi, Kaoru returned to court, leaving Ukifune languishing at the
shrine. Some time passed before he visited her again; she had improved,
was more beautiful than before, but he could not stop thinking of Oigimi.
Once again he left her, promising to bring her to court, but more weeks
passed, and finally he received the news that Ukifune had disappeared, last
seen heading toward a river. She had most likely committed suicide.
At the funeral ceremony for Ukifune, Kaoru was wracked with guilt:
why had he not come for her earlier? She deserved a better fate.
Kaoru and the others appear in the eleventh-century Japanese novel The
Tale of Genji, by the noblewoman Murasaki Shikibu. The characters are
based on people the author knew, but Kaoru's type appears in every culture
and period: these are men and women who seem to be searching for an
ideal partner. The one they have is never quite right; at first glance a person
excites them, but they soon see faults, and when a new person crosses their
path, he or she looks better and the first person is forgotten. These types
often try to work on the imperfect mortal who has excited them, to im-
prove them culturally and morally. But this proves extremely unsatisfactory
for both parties.
The truth about this type is not that they are searching for an ideal
but that they are hopelessly unhappy with themselves. You may mistake
their dissatisfaction for a perfectionist's high standards, but in point of fact
nothing will really satisfy them, for their unhappiness is deep-rooted. You
can recognize them by their past, which will be littered with short-lived,
stormy romances. Also, they will tend to compare you to others, and to try
to remake you. You may not realize at first what you have gotten into, but
people like this will eventually prove hopelessly anti-seductive because they
cannot see your individual qualities. Cut the romance off before it happens.
These types are closet sadists and will torture you with their unreachable
goals.
142 
• 
The Art of Seduction
5. In 1762, in the city of Turin, Italy, Giovanni Giacomo Casanova made
the acquaintance of one Count A.B., a Milanese gentleman who seemed to
like him enormously. The count had fallen on hard times and Casanova
lent him some money. In gratitude, the count invited Casanova to stay with
him and his wife in Milan. His wife, he said, was from Barcelona, and was
admired far and wide for her beauty. He showed Casanova her letters,
which had an intriguing wit; Casanova imagined her as a prize worth se-
ducing. He went to Milan.
Arriving at the house of Count A.B., Casanova found that the Spanish
lady was certainly beautiful, but that she was also quiet and serious. Some-
thing about her bothered him. As he was unpacking his clothes, the count-
ess saw a stunning red dress, trimmed with sable, among his belongings. It
was a gift, Casanova explained, for any Milanese lady who won his heart.
The following evening at dinner, the countess was suddenly more
friendly, teasing and bantering with Casanova. She described the dress as a
bribe—he would use it to persuade a woman to give in to him. On the
contrary, said Casanova, he only gave gifts afterward, as tokens of his appre-
ciation. That evening, in a carriage on the way back from the opera, she
asked him if a wealthy friend of hers could buy the dress, and when he said
no, she was clearly vexed. Sensing her game, Casanova offered to give her
the sable dress if she was kind to him. This only made her angry, and they
quarreled.
Finally Casanova had had enough of the countess's moods: he sold the
dress for 15,000 francs to her wealthy friend, who in turn gave it to her, as
she had planned all along. But to prove his lack of interest in money,
Casanova told the countess he would give her the 15,000 francs, no strings
attached. "You are a very bad man," she said, "but you can stay, you amuse
me." She resumed her coquettish manner, but Casanova was not fooled. "It
is not my fault, madame, if your charms have so little power over me," he
told her. "Here are 15,000 francs to console you." He laid the money on a
table and walked out, leaving the countess fuming and vowing revenge.
When Casanova first met the Spanish lady, two things about her repelled
him. First, her pride: rather than engaging in the give-and-take of seduc-
tion, she demanded a man's subjugation. Pride can reflect self-assurance,
signaling that you will not abase yourself before others. Just as often,
though, it stems from an inferiority complex, which demands that others
abase themselves before you. Seduction requires an openness to the other
person, a willingness to bend and adapt. Excessive pride, without anything
to justify it, is highly anti-seductive.
The second quality that disgusted Casanova was the countess's greed:
her coquettish little games were designed only to get the dress—she had no
interest in romance. For Casanova, seduction was a lighthearted game that
people played for their mutual amusement. In his scheme of things, it was
fine if a woman wanted money and gifts as well; he could understand that
desire, and he was a generous man. But he also felt that this was a desire a
The Anti-Seducer • 
143
woman should disguise—she should create the impression that what she
was after was pleasure. The person who is obviously angling for money or
other material reward can only repel. If that is your intention, if you are
looking for something other than pleasure—for money, for power—never
show it. The suspicion of an ulterior motive is anti-seductive. Never let
anything break the illusion.
6. In 1868, Queen Victoria of England hosted her first private meeting
with the country's new prime minister, William Gladstone. She had met
him before, and knew his reputation as a moral absolutist, but this was to be
a ceremony, an exchange of pleasantries. Gladstone, however, had no pa-
tience for such things. At that first meeting he explained to the queen his
theory of royalty: the queen, he believed, had to play an exemplary role
in England—a role she had lately failed to live up to, for she was overly
private.
This lecture set a bad tone for the future, and things only got worse:
soon Victoria was receiving letters from Gladstone, addressing the subject
in even greater depth. Half of them she never bothered to read, and soon
she was doing everything she could to avoid contact with the leader of her
government; if she had to see him, she made the meeting as brief as possi-
ble. To that end, she never allowed him to sit down in her presence, hoping
that a man his age would soon tire and leave. For once he got going on a
subject dear to his heart, he did not notice your look of disinterest or the
tears in your eyes from yawning. His memoranda on even the simplest of
issues would have to be translated into plain English for her by a member of
her staff. Worst of all, Gladstone argued with her, and his arguments had a
way of making her feel stupid. She soon learned to nod her head and ap-
pear to agree with whatever abstract point he was trying to make. In a let-
ter to her secretary, referring to herself in the third person, she wrote, "She
always felt in [Gladstone's] manner an overbearing obstinacy and imperi-
ousness . . . which she never experienced from anyone else, and which she
found most disagreeable." Over the years, these feelings hardened into an
unwaning hatred.
As the head of the Liberal Party, Gladstone had a nemesis, Benjamin
Disraeli, the head of the Conservative Party. He considered Disraeli amoral,
a devilish Jew. At one session of Parliament, Gladstone tore into his rival,
scoring point after point as he described where his opponents policies
would lead. Growing angry as he spoke (as usually happened when he
talked of Disraeli), he pounded the speaker's table with such force that pens
and papers went flying. Through all of this Disraeli seemed half-asleep.
When Gladstone had finished, he opened his eyes, rose to his feet, and
calmly walked up to the table. "The right honorable gentleman," he said,
"has spoken with much passion, much eloquence, and much—ahem—
violence." Then, after a drawn-out pause, he continued, "But the damage
can be repaired"—and he proceeded to gather up everything that had fallen
144 
• 
The Art of Seduction
from the table and put them back in place. The speech that followed was all
the more masterful for its calm and ironic contrast to Gladstone's. The
members of Parliament were spellbound, and all of them agreed he had
won the day.
If Disraeli was the consummate social seducer and charmer, Gladstone was
the Anti-Seducer. Of course he had supporters, mostly among the more
puritanical elements of society—he twice defeated Disraeli in a general
election. But he found it hard to broaden his appeal beyond the circle of
believers. Women in particular found him insufferable. Of course they had
no vote at the time, so they were little political liability; but Gladstone had
no patience for a feminine point of view. A woman, he felt, had to learn to
see things as a man did, and it was his purpose in life to educate those he
felt were irrational or abandoned by God.
It did not take long for Gladstone to wear on anyone's nerves. That is
the nature of people who are convinced of some truth, but have no pa-
tience for a different perspective or for dealing with someone else's psy-
chology. These types are bullies, and in the short term they often get their
way, particularly among the less aggressive. But they stir up a lot of resent-
ment and unspoken antipathy, which eventually trips them up. People see
through their righteous moral stance, which is most often a cover for a
power play—morality is a form of power. A seducer never seeks to per-
suade directly, never parades his or her morality, never lectures or imposes.
Everything is subtle, psychological, and indirect.
Symbol: The
Crab. In a harsh world, the crab sur-
vives by its hardened shell, by the threat of its
pincers, and by burrowing into the sand. No one dares
get too close. But the Crab cannot surprise its enemy and has
little mobility. Its defensive strength is its supreme limitation.
The Anti-Seducer • 
145
Uses of Anti-Seduction
T
he best way to avoid entanglements with Anti-Seducers is to recognize
them right away and give them a wide berth, but they often deceive
us. Involvements with these types are painful, and are hard to disengage
from, because the more emotional response you show, the more engaged
you seem to be. Do not get angry—that may only encourage them or
exacerbate their anti-seductive tendencies. Instead, act distant and indiffer-
ent, pay no attention to them, make them feel how little they matter to
you. The best antidote to an Anti-Seducer is often to be anti-seductive
yourself.
Cleopatra had a devastating effect on every man who crossed her path.
Octavius—the future Emperor Augustus, and the man who would de-
feat and destroy Cleopatra's lover Mark Antony—was well aware of her
power, and defended himself against it by being always extremely amiable
with her, courteous to the extreme, but never showing the slightest emo-
tion, whether of interest or dislike. In other words, he treated her as if she
were any other woman. Facing this front, she could not sink her hooks into
him. Octavius made anti-seduction his defense against the most irresistible
woman in history. Remember: seduction is a game of attention, of slowly
filling the other person's mind with your presence. Distance and inattention
will create the opposite effect, and can be used as a tactic when the need
arises.
Finally, if you really want to "anti-seduce," simply feign the qualities
listed at the beginning of the chapter. Nag; talk a lot, particularly about
yourself; dress against the other person's tastes; pay no attention to detail;
suffocate, and so on. A word of warning: with the arguing type, the Wind-
bag, never talk back too much. Words will only fan the flames. Adopt the
Queen Victoria strategy: nod, seem to agree, then find an excuse to cut the
conversation short. This is the only defense.
The Eighteen Types
The people around you are all potential victims of a
seduction, but first you must know what type of vic-
tim you are dealing with. Victims are categorized
by what they feel they are missing in life—ad-
venture, attention, romance, a naughty expe-
rience, mental or physical stimulation, etc.
Once you identify their type, you have
the necessary ingredients for a seduc-
tion: you will be the one to give
them what they lack and cannot
get on their own. In studying
potential victims, learn to see
the reality behind the ap-
pearance. A timid person
may yearn to play the
star; a prude may
long for a trans-
gressive 
thrill.
Never try to
seduce your
own type.
o 
o 
o
o o
o
Victim Theory
N
obody in this world feels whole and complete. We all sense some gap
in our character, something we need or want but cannot get on our
own. When we fall in love, it is often with someone who seems to fill that
gap. The process is usually unconscious and depends on luck: we wait for
the right person to cross our path, and when we fall for them we hope they
return our love. But the seducer does not leave such things to chance.
Look at the people around you. Forget their social exterior, their obvi-
ous character traits; look behind all of that, focusing on the gaps, the miss-
ing pieces in their psyche. That is the raw material of any seduction. Pay
close attention to their clothes, their gestures, their offhand comments, the
things in their house, certain looks in their eyes; get them to talk about
their past, particularly past romances. And slowly the outline of those miss-
ing pieces will come into view. Understand: people are constantly giving
out signals as to what they lack. They long for completeness, whether the
illusion of it or the reality, and if it has to come from another person, that
person has tremendous power over them. We may call them victims of a
seduction, but they are almost always willing victims.
This chapter outlines the eighteen types of victims, each one of which
has a dominant lack. Although your target may well reveal the qualities of
more than one type, there is usually a common need that ties them to-
gether. Perhaps you see someone as both a New Prude and a Crushed Star,
but what is common to both is a feeling of repression, and therefore a de-
sire to be naughty, along with a fear of not being able or daring enough. In
identifying your victim's type, be careful to not be taken in by outward ap-
pearances. Both deliberately and unconsciously, we often develop a social
exterior designed specifically to disguise our weaknesses and lacks. For in-
stance, you may think you are dealing with someone who is tough and
cynical, without realizing that deep inside they have a soft sentimental core.
They secretly pine for romance. And unless you identify their type and the
emotions beneath their toughness, you lose the chance to truly seduce
them. Most important: expunge the nasty habit of thinking that other peo-
ple have the same lacks you do. You may crave comfort and security, but in
giving comfort and security to someone else, on the assumption they must
want them as well, you are more likely smothering and pushing them away.
Never try to seduce someone who is of your own type. You will be like
two puzzles missing the same parts.
149
150 
• 
The Art of Seduction
The Eighteen Types
The Reformed Rake or Siren. People of this type were once happy-go-
lucky seducers who had their way with the opposite sex. But the day came
when they were forced to give this up—someone corraled them into a rela-
tionship, they were encountering too much social hostility, they were get-
ting older and decided to settle down. Whatever the reason, you can be
sure they feel some resentment and a sense of loss, as if a limb were miss-
ing. We are always trying to recapture pleasures we experienced in the past,
but the temptation is particularly great for the Reformed Rake or Siren be-
cause the pleasures they found in seduction were intense. These types are
ripe for the picking: all that is required is that you cross their path and offer
them the opportunity to resume their rakish or siren ways. Their blood will
stir and the call of their youth will overwhelm them.
It is critical, though, to give these types the illusion that they are the
ones doing the seducing. With the Reformed Rake, you must spark his in-
terest indirectly, then let him burn and glow with desire. With the Re-
formed Siren, you want to give her the impression that she still has the
irresistible power to draw a man in and make him give up everything for
her. Remember that what you are offering these types is not another rela-
tionship, another constriction, but rather the chance to escape the corral
and have some ran. Do not be put off if they are in a relationship; a preex-
isting commitment is often the perfect foil. If hooking them into a rela-
tionship is what you want, hide it as best you can and realize it may not be
possible. The Rake or Siren is unfaithful by nature; your ability to spark the
old feeling gives you power, but then you will have to live with the conse-
quences of their feckless ways.
The Disappointed Dreamer. As children, these types probably spent a lot
of time alone. To entertain themselves they developed a powerful fantasy
life, fed by books and films and other kinds of popular culture. And as they
get older, it becomes increasingly difficult to reconcile their fantasy life
with reality, and so they are often disappointed by what they get. This is
particularly true in relationships. They have been dreaming of romantic he-
roes, of danger and excitement, but what they have is lovers with human
frailties, the petty weaknesses of everyday life. As the years pass, they may
force themselves to compromise, because otherwise they would have to
spend their lives alone; but beneath the surface they are bitter and still hun-
gering for something grand and romantic.
You can recognize this type by the books they read and films they go to,
the way their ears prick up when told of the real-life adventures some peo-
ple manage to live out. In their clothes and home furnishings, a taste for
exuberant romance or drama will peek through. They are often trapped in
drab relationships, and little comments here and there will reveal their dis-
appointment and inner tension.
The Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types 
• 151
These types make for excellent and satisfying victims. First, they usually
have a great deal of pent-up passion and energy, which you can release and
focus on yourself. They also have great imaginations and will respond to
anything vaguely mysterious or romantic that you offer them. All you need
do is disguise some of your less than exalted qualities and give them a part
of their dream. This could be the chance to live out their adventures or be
courted by a chivalrous soul. If you give them a part of what they want
they will imagine the rest. At all cost, do not let reality break the illusion
you are creating. One moment of pettiness and they will be gone, more
bitterly disappointed than ever.
The Pampered Royal. These people were the classic spoiled children. All
of their wants and desires were met by an adoring parent—endless enter-
tainments, a parade of toys, whatever kept them happy for a day or two.
Where many children learn to entertain themselves, inventing games and
finding friends, Pampered Royals are taught that others will do the enter-
taining for them. Being spoiled, they get lazy, and as they get older and the
parent is no longer there to pamper them, they tend to feel quite bored and
restless. Their solution is to find pleasure in variety, to move quickly from
person to person, job to job, or place to place before boredom sets in. They
do not settle into relationships well because habit and routine of some kind
are inevitable in such affairs. But their ceaseless search for variety is tiring
for them and comes with a price: work problems, strings of unsatisfying ro-
mances, friends scattered across the globe. Do not mistake their restlessness
and infidelity for reality—what the Pampered Prince or Princess is really
looking for is one person, that parental figure, who will give them the
spoiling they crave.
To seduce this type, be ready to provide a lot of distraction—new
places to visit, novel experiences, color, spectacle. You will have to main-
tain an air of mystery, continually surprising your target with a new side to
your character. Variety is the key. Once Pampered Royals are hooked,
things get easier for they will quickly grow dependent on you and you can
put out less effort. Unless their childhood pampering has made them too
difficult and lazy, these types make excellent victims——they will be as loyal
to you as they once were to mommy or daddy. But you will have to do
much of the work. If you are after a long relationship, disguise it. Offer
long-term security to a Pampered Royal and you will induce a panicked
flight. Recognize these types by the turmoil in their past—job changes,
travel, short-term relationships—and by the air of aristocracy, no matter
their social class, that comes from once being treated like royalty.
The New Prude. Sexual prudery still exists, but it is less common than it
was. Prudery, however, is never just about sex; a prude is someone who is
excessively concerned with appearances, with what society considers ap-
152 
• The Art of Seduction
propriate and acceptable behavior. Prudes rigorously stay within the bounda-
ries of correctness because more than anything they fear society's judg-
ment. Seen in this light, prudery is just as prevalent as it always was.
The New Prude is excessively concerned with standards of goodness,
fairness, political sensitivity, tastefulness, etc. What marks the New Prude,
though, as well as the old one, is that deep down they are actually excited
and intrigued by guilty, transgressive pleasures. Frightened by this attrac-
tion, they run in the opposite direction and become the most correct of all.
They tend to wear drab colors; they certainly never take fashion risks. They
can be very judgmental and critical of people who do take risks and are less
correct. They are also addicted to routine, which gives them a way to tamp
down their inner turmoil.
New Prudes are secretly oppressed by their correctness and long to
transgress. Just as sexual prudes make prime targets for a Rake or Siren, the
New Prude will often be most tempted by someone with a dangerous or
naughty side. If you desire a New Prude, do not be taken in by their judg-
ments of you or their criticisms. That is only a sign of how deeply you fas-
cinate them; you are on their mind. You can often draw a New Prude into
a seduction, in fact, by giving them the chance to criticize you or even try
to reform you. Take nothing of what they say to heart, of course, but now
you have the perfect excuse to spend time with them—and New Prudes
can be seduced simply through being in contact with you. These types ac-
tually make excellent and rewarding victims. Once you open them up and
get them to let go of their correctness, they are flooded with feelings and
energies. They may even overwhelm you. Perhaps they are in a relationship
with someone as drab as they themselves seem to be—do not be put off.
They are simply asleep, waiting to be awakened.
The Crushed Star. We all want attention, we all want to shine, but with
most of us these desires are fleeting and easily quieted. The problem with
Crushed Stars is that at one point in their lives they did find themselves the
center of attention—perhaps they were beautiful, charming and efferves-
cent, perhaps they were athletes, or had some other talent—but those days
are gone. They may seem to have accepted this, but the memory of having
once shone is hard to get over. In general, the appearance of wanting atten-
tion, of trying to stand out, is not seen too kindly in polite society or in the
workplace. So to get along, Crushed Stars learn to tamp down their desires;
but failing to get the attention they feel they deserve, they also become re-
sentful. You can recognize Crushed Stars by certain unguarded moments:
they suddenly receive some attention in a social setting, and it makes them
glow; they mention their glory days, and there is a little glint in the eye; a
little wine in the system, and they become effervescent.
Seducing this type is simple: just make them the center of attention.
When you are with them, act as if they were stars and you were basking in
their glow. Get them to talk, particularly about themselves. In social situa-
The Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types • 153
tions, mute your own colors and let them look funny and radiant by com-
parison. In general, play the Charmer. The reward of seducing Crushed
Stars is that you stir up powerful emotions. They will feel intensely grateful
to you for letting them shine. To whatever extent they had felt crushed and
bottled up, the easing of that pain releases intensity and passion, all directed
at you. They will fall madly in love. If you yourself have any star or dandy
tendencies it is wise to avoid such victims. Sooner or later those tendencies
will come out, and the competition between you will be ugly.
The Novice. What separates Novices from ordinary innocent young peo-
ple is that they are fatally curious. They have little or no experience of the
world, but have been exposed to it secondhand—in newspapers, films,
books. Finding their innocence a burden, they long to be initiated into the
ways of the world. Everyone sees them as so sweet and innocent, but they
know this isn't so—they cannot be as angelic as people think them.
Seducing a Novice is easy. To do it well, however, requires a bit of art.
Novices are interested in people with experience, particularly people with
a touch of corruption and evil. Make that touch too strong, though, and it
will intimidate and frighten them. What works best with a Novice is a mix
of qualities. You are somewhat childlike yourself, with a playful spirit. At
the same time, it is clear that you have hidden depths, even sinister ones.
(This was the secret of Lord Byron's success with so many innocent
women.) You are initiating your Novices not just sexually but experien-
tially, exposing them to new ideas, taking them to new places, new worlds
both literal and metaphoric. Do not make your seduction ugly or seedy—
everything must be romantic, even including the evil and dark side of life.
Young people have their ideals; it is best to initiate them with an aesthetic
touch. Seductive language works wonders on Novices, as does attention to
detail. Spectacles and colorful events appeal to their sensitive senses. They
are easily misled by these tactics, because they lack the experience to see
through them.
Sometimes Novices are a little older and have been at least somewhat
educated in the ways of the world. Yet they put on a show of innocence,
for they see the power it has over older people. These are coy Novices,
aware of the game they are playing—but Novices they remain. They may
be less easily misled than purer Novices, but the way to seduce them is
pretty much the same—mix innocence and corruption and you will fasci-
nate them.
The Conqueror. These types have an unusual amount of energy, which
they find difficult to control. They are always on the prowl for people to
conquer, obstacles to surmount. You will not always recognize Conquerors
by their exterior—they can seem a little shy in social situations and can
have a degree of reserve. Look not at their words or appearance but at their
154 
• 
The Art of Seduction
actions, in work and in relationships. They love power, and by hook or by
crook they get it.
Conquerors tend to be emotional, but their emotion only comes out in
outbursts, when pushed. In matters of romance, the worst thing you can do
with them is lie down and make yourself easy prey; they may take advan-
tage of your weakness, but they will quickly discard you and leave you the
worse for wear. You want to give Conquerors a chance to be aggressive, to
overcome some resistance or obstacle, before letting them think they have
overwhelmed you. You want to give them a good chase. Being a little diffi-
cult or moody, using coquetry, will often do the trick. Do not be intimi-
dated by their aggressiveness and energy—that is precisely what you can
turn to your advantage. To break them in, keep them charging back and
forth like a bull. Eventually they will grow weak and dependent, as
Napoleon became the slave of Josephine.
The Conqueror is generally male but there are plenty of female Con-
querors out there—Lou Andreas-Salomé and Natalie Barney are famous
ones. Female Conquerors will succumb to coquetry, though, just as the
male ones will.
The Exotic Fetishist. Most of us are excited and intrigued by the exotic.
What separates Exotic Fetishists from the rest of us is the degree of this in-
terest, which seems to govern all their choices in life. In truth they feel
empty inside and have a strong dose of self-loathing. They do not like
wherever it is they come from, their social class (usually middle or upper),
and their culture because they do not like themselves.
These types are easy to recognize. They like to travel; their houses are
filled with objets from faraway places; they fetishize the music or art of this
or that foreign culture. They often have a strong rebellious streak. Clearly
the way to seduce them is to position yourself as exotic—if you do not at
least appear to come from a different background or race, or to have some
alien aura, you should not even bother. But it is always possible to play up
what makes you exotic, to make it a kind of theater for their amusement.
Your clothes, the things you talk about, the places you take them, make a
show of your difference. Exaggerate a little and they will imagine the rest,
because such types tend to be self-deluders. Exotic Fetishists, however, do
not make particularly good victims. Whatever exoticism you have will soon
seem banal to them, and they will want something else. It will be a struggle
to hold their interest. Their underlying insecurity will also keep you on
edge.
One variation on this type is the man or woman who is trapped in a
stultifying relationship, a banal occupation, a dead-end town. It is circum-
stance, as opposed to personal neurosis, that makes such people fetishize the
exotic; and these Exotic Fetishists are better victims than the self-loathing
kind, because you can offer them a temporary escape from whatever op-
presses them. Nothing, however, will offer true Exotic Fetishists escape
from themselves.
The Drama Queen. There are people who cannot do without some con-
stant drama in their lives—it is their way of deflecting boredom. The great-
est mistake you can make in seducing these Drama Queens is to come
offering stability and security. That will only make them run for the hills.
Most often, Drama Queens (and there are plenty of men in this category)
enjoy playing the victim. They want something to complain about, they
want pain. Pain is a source of pleasure for them. With this type, you have to
be willing and able to give them the mental rough treatment they desire.
That is the only way to seduce them in a deep manner. The moment you
turn too nice, they will find some reason to quarrel or get rid of you.
You will recognize Drama Queens by the number of people who have
hurt them, the tragedies and traumas that have befallen them. At the ex-
treme, they can be hopelessly selfish and anti-seductive, but most of them
are relatively harmless and will make fine victims if you can live with the
sturm und drang. If for some reason you want something long term with
this type, you will constantly have to inject drama into your relationship.
For some this can be an exciting challenge and a source for constantly re-
newing the relationship. Generally, however, you should see an involve-
ment with a Drama Queen as something fleeting and a way to bring a little
drama into your own life.
The Professor. These types cannot get out of the trap of analyzing and
criticizing everything that crosses their path. Their minds are overdevel-
oped and overstimulated. Even when they talk about love or sex, it is with
great thought and analysis. Having developed their minds at the expense of
their bodies, many of them feel physically inferior and compensate by lord-
ing their mental superiority over others. Their conversation is often wry or
ironic—you never quite know what they are saying, but you sense them
looking down on you. They would like to escape their mental prisons, they
would like pure physicality, without any analysis, but they cannot get there
on their own. Professor types sometimes engage in relationships with other
professor types, or with people they can treat as inferiors. But deep down
they long to be overwhelmed by someone with physical presence—a Rake
or a Siren, for instance.
Professors can make excellent victims, for underneath their intellectual
strength lie gnawing insecurities. Make them feel like Don Juans or Sirens,
to even the slightest degree, and they are your slaves. Many of them have a
masochistic streak that will come out once you stir their dormant senses.
You are offering an escape from the mind, so make it as complete as possi-
ble: if you have intellectual tendencies yourself, hide them. They will only
The Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types • 
155
156 
• The Art of Seduction
stir your target's competitive juices and get their minds turning. Let your
Professors keep their sense of mental superiority; let them judge you. You
will know what they will try to hide: that you are the one in control, for
you are giving them what no one else can give them—physical stimulation.
The Beauty. From early on in life, the Beauty is gazed at by others. Their
desire to look at her is the source of her power, but also the source of much
unhappiness: she constantly worries that her powers are waning, that she
is no longer attracting attention. If she is honest with herself, she also
senses that being worshiped only for one's appearance is monotonous and
unsatisfying—and lonely. Many men are intimidated by beauty and prefer
to worship it from afar; others are drawn in, but not for the purpose of
conversation. The Beauty suffers from isolation.
Because she has so many lacks, the Beauty is relatively easy to seduce,
and if done right, you will have won not only a much prized catch but
someone who will grow dependent on what you provide. Most important
in this seduction is to validate those parts of the Beauty that no one else
appreciates—her intelligence (generally higher than people imagine), her
skills, her character. Of course you must worship her body—you cannot
stir up any insecurities in the one area in which she knows her strength, and
the strength on which she most depends—but you also must worship her
mind and soul. Intellectual stimulation will work well on the Beauty, dis-
tracting her from her doubts and insecurities, and making it seem that you
value that side of her personality.
Because the Beauty is always being looked at, she tends to be passive.
Beneath her passivity, though, there often lies frustration: the Beauty would
love to be more active and to actually do some chasing of her own. A little
coquettishness can work well here: at some point in all your worshiping,
you might go a little cold, inviting her to come after you. Train her to be
more active and you will have an excellent victim. The only downside is
that her many insecurities require constant attention and care.
The Aging Baby. Some people refuse to grow up. Perhaps they are afraid
of death or of growing old; perhaps they are passionately attached to the
life they led as children. Disliking responsibility, they struggle to turn
everything into play and recreation. In their twenties they can be charming,
in their thirties interesting, but by the time they reach their forties they are
beginning to wear thin.
Contrary to what you might imagine, one Aging Baby does not want
to be involved with another Aging Baby, even though the combination
might seem to increase the chances for play and frivolity. The Aging Baby
does not want competition, but an adult figure. If you desire to seduce this
type, you must be prepared to be the responsible, staid one. That may be a
The Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types • 
157
strange way of seducing, but in this case it works. You should appear to like
the Aging Baby's youthful spirit (it helps if you actually do), can engage
with it, but you remain the indulgent adult. By being responsible you free
the Baby to play. Act the loving adult to the hilt, never judging or criticiz-
ing their behavior, and a strong attachment will form. Aging Babies can be
amusing for a while, but, like all children, they are often potently narcissis-
tic. This limits the pleasure you can have with them. You should see them
as short-term amusements or temporary outlets for your frustrated parental
instincts.
The Rescuer. We are often drawn to people who seem vulnerable or
weak—their sadness or depression can actually be quite seductive. There
are people, however, who take this much further, who seem to be attracted
only to people with problems. This may seem noble, but Rescuers usually
have complicated motives: they often have sensitive natures and truly want
to help. At the same time, solving people's problems gives them a kind of
power they relish—it makes them feel superior and in control. It is also the
perfect way to distract them from their own problems. You will recognize
these types by their empathy—they listen well and try to get you to open
up and talk. You will also notice they have histories of relationships with
dependent and troubled people.
Rescuers can make excellent victims, particularly if you enjoy chival-
rous or maternal attention. If you are a woman, play the damsel in distress,
giving a man the chance so many men long for—to act the knight. If you
are a man, play the boy who cannot deal with this harsh world; a female
Rescuer will envelop you in maternal attention, gaining for herself the
added satisfaction of feeling more powerful and in control than a man. An
air of sadness will draw either gender in. Exaggerate your weaknesses, but
not through overt words or gestures—let them sense that you have had too
little love, that you have had a string of bad relationships, that you have got-
ten a raw deal in life. Having lured your Rescuer in with the chance to help
you, you can then stoke the relationship's fires with a steady supply of
needs and vulnerabilities. You can also invite moral rescue: you are bad.
You have done bad things. You need a stern yet loving hand. In this case
the Rescuer gets to feel morally superior, but also the vicarious thrill of in-
volvement with someone naughty.
The Roué. These types have lived the good life and experienced many
pleasures. They probably have, or once had, a good deal of money to fi-
nance their hedonistic lives. On the outside they tend to seem cynical and
jaded, but their worldliness often hides a sentimentality that they have
struggled to repress. Roués are consummate seducers, but there is one type
that can easily seduce them—the young and the innocent. As they get
158 
• 
The Art of Seduction
older, they hanker after their lost youth; missing their long-lost innocence,
they begin to covet it in others.
If you should want to seduce them, you will probably have to be some-
what young and to have retained at least the appearance of innocence. It is
easy to play this up—make a show of how little experience you have in the
world, how you still see things as a child. It is also good to seem to resist
their advances: Roués will think it lively and exciting to chase you. You can
even seem to dislike or distrust them—that will really spur them on. By be-
ing the one who resists, you control the dynamic. And since you have the
youth that they are missing, you can maintain the upper hand and make
them fall deeply in love. They will often be susceptible to such a fall, be-
cause they have tamped down their own romantic tendencies for so long
that when it bursts forth, they lose control. Never give in too early, and
never let your guard down—such types can be dangerous.
The Idol Worshiper. Everyone feels an inner lack, but Idol Worshipers
have a bigger emptiness than most people. They cannot be satisfied with
themselves, so they search the world for something to worship, something
to fill their inner void. This often assumes the form of a great interest in
spiritual matters or in some worthwhile cause; by focusing on something
supposedly elevated, they distract themselves from their own void, from
what they dislike about themselves. Idol Worshipers are easy to spot—they
are the ones pouring their energies into some cause or religion. They often
move around over the years, leaving one cult for another.
The way to seduce these types is to simply become their object of wor-
ship, to take the place of the cause or religion to which they are so dedi-
cated. At first you may have to seem to share their spiritual interest, joining
them in their worship, or perhaps exposing them to a new cause; eventually
you will displace it. With this type you have to hide your flaws, or at least
to give them a saintly sheen. Be banal and Idol Worshipers will pass you by.
But mirror the qualities they aspire to have for themselves and they will
slowly transfer their adoration to you. Keep everything on an elevated
plane—let romance and religion flow into one.
Keep two things in mind when seducing this type. First, they tend to
have overactive minds, which can make them quite suspicious. Because
they often lack physical stimulation, and because physical stimulation will
distract them, give them some: a mountain trek, a boat trip, or sex will do
the trick. But this takes a lot of work, for their minds are always ticking.
Second, they often suffer from low self-esteem. Do not try to raise
it; they will see through you, and your efforts at praising them will clash
with their own self-image. They are to worship you; you are not to wor-
ship them. Idol Worshipers make perfectly adequate victims in the short
term, but their endless need to search will eventually lead them to look for
something new to adore.
The Sensualist. What marks these types is not their love of pleasure
but their overactive senses. Sometimes they show this quality in their
appearance—their interest in fashion, color, style. But sometimes it is
more subtle: because they are so sensitive, they are often quite shy, and
they will shrink from standing out or being flamboyant. You will recog-
nize them by how responsive they are to their environment, how they
cannot stand a room without sunlight, are depressed by certain colors, or
excited by certain smells. They happen to live in a culture that deempha-
sizes sensual experience (except perhaps for the sense of sight). And so
what the Sensualist lacks is precisely enough sensual experiences to appre-
ciate and relish.
The key to seducing them is to aim for their senses, to take them to
beautiful places, pay attention to detail, envelop them in spectacle, and of
course use plenty of physical lures. Sensualists, like animals, can be baited
with colors and smells. Appeal to as many senses as possible, keeping your
targets distracted and weak. Seductions of Sensualists are often easy and
quick, and you can use the same tactics again and again to keep them inter-
ested, although it is wise to vary your sensual appeals somewhat, in kind if
not in quality. That is how Cleopatra worked on Mark Antony, an inveter-
ate Sensualist. These types make superb victims because they are relatively
docile if you give them what they want.
The Lonely Leader. Powerful people are not necessarily different from
everyone else, but they are treated differently, and this has a big effect on
their personalities. Everyone around them tends to be fawning and
courtierlike, to have an angle, to want something from them. This makes
them suspicious and distrustful, and a little hard around the edges, but do
not mistake the appearance for the reality: Lonely Leaders long to be se-
duced, to have someone break through their isolation and overwhelm
them. The problem is that most people are too intimidated to try, or use
the kind of tactics—flattery, charm—that they see through and despise. To
seduce such types, it is better to act like their equal or even their superior—
the kind of treatment they never get. If you are blunt with them you will
seem genuine, and they will be touched—you care enough to be honest,
even perhaps at some risk. (Being blunt with the powerful can be danger-
ous.) Lonely Leaders can be made emotional by inflicting some pain, fol-
lowed by tenderness.
This is one of the hardest types to seduce, not only because they are
suspicious but because their minds are burdened with cares and responsi-
bilities. They have less mental space for a seduction. You will have to be pa-
tient and clever, slowly filling their minds with thoughts of you. Succeed,
though, and you can gain great power in turn, for in their loneliness they
will come to depend on you.
The Seducer's Victims—The Eighteen Types • 
159
160 
• 
The Art of Seduction
The Floating Gender. All of us have a mix of the masculine and the
feminine in our characters, but most of us learn to develop and exhibit the
socially acceptable side while repressing the other. People of the Floating
Gender type feel that the separation of the sexes into such distinct genders
is a burden. They are sometimes thought to be repressed or latent homo-
sexuals, but this is a misunderstanding: they may well be heterosexual but
their masculine and feminine sides are in flux, and because this may dis-
comfit others if they show it, they learn to repress it, perhaps by going to
one extreme. They would actually love to be able to play with their gender,
to give full expression to both sides. Many people fall into this type without
its being obvious: a woman may have a masculine energy, a man a devel-
oped aesthetic side. Do not look for obvious signs, because these types
often go underground, keeping it under wraps. This makes them vulnera-
ble to a powerful seduction.
What Floating Gender types are really looking for is another person of
uncertain gender, their counterpart from the opposite sex. Show them that
in your presence and they can relax, express the repressed side of their char-
acter. If you have such proclivities, this is the one instance where it would
be best to seduce the same type of the opposite sex. Each person will stir
up repressed desires in the other and will suddenly have license to explore
all kinds of gender combinations, without fear of judgment. If you are not
of the Floating Gender, leave this type alone. You will only inhibit them
and create more discomfort.
M
ost of us understand that certain actions on our part will have a
pleasing and seductive effect on the person we would like to seduce.
The problem is that we are generally too self-absorbed: We think more
about what we want from others than what they could want from us. We
may occasionally do something that is seductive, but often we follow this
up a with a selfish or aggressive action (we are in a hurry to get what we
want); or, unaware of what we are doing, we show a side of ourselves that
is petty and banal, deflating any illusions or fantasies a person might have
about us. Our attempts at seduction usually do not last long enough to cre-
ate much of an effect.
You will not seduce anyone by simply depending on your engaging
personality, or by occasionally doing something noble or alluring. Seduc-
tion is a process that occurs over time—the longer you take and the slower
you go, the deeper you will penetrate into the mind of your victim. It is an
art that requires patience, focus, and strategic thinking. You need to always
be one step ahead of your victim, throwing dust in their eyes, casting a
spell, keeping them off balance.
The twenty-four chapters in this section will arm you with a series of
tactics that will help you get out of yourself and into the mind of your vic-
tim, so that you can play it like an instrument. The chapters are placed
in a loose order, going from the initial contact with your victim to the suc-
cessful conclusion. This order is based on certain timeless laws of human
psychology. Because people's thoughts tend to revolve around their daily
concerns and insecurities, you cannot proceed with a seduction until
you slowly put their anxieties to sleep and fill their distracted minds with
thoughts of you. The opening chapters will help you accomplish this.
There is a natural tendency in relationships for people to become so famil-
iar with one another that boredom and stagnation set in. Mystery is the
lifeblood of seduction and to maintain it you have to constantly surprise
your victims, stir things up, even shock them. A seduction should never set-
tle into a comfortable routine. The middle and later chapters will instruct
you in the art of alternating hope and despair, pleasure and pain, until your
victims weaken and succumb. In each instance, one tactic is setting up the
next one, allowing you to push it further with something bolder and more
violent. A seducer cannot be timid or merciful.
To help you move the seduction along, the chapters are arranged in
163
164 
• 
The Art of Seduction
four phases, each phase with a particular goal to aim for: getting the victim
to think of you; gaining access to their emotions by creating moments of
pleasure and confusion; going deeper by working on their unconscious,
stirring up repressed desires; and finally, inducing physical surrender. (The
phases are clearly marked and explained with a short introduction.) By fol-
lowing these phases you will work more effectively on your victim's mind
and create the slow and hypnotic pace of a ritual. In fact, the seductive
process may be thought of as a kind of initiation ritual, in which you are
uprooting people from their habits, giving them novel experiences, putting
them through tests, before initiating them into a new life.
It is best to read all of the chapters and gain as much knowledge as pos-
sible. When it comes time to apply these tactics, you will want to pick and
choose which ones are appropriate for your particular victim; sometimes
only a few are sufficient, depending on the level of resistance you meet and
the complexity of your victim's problems. These tactics are equally applica-
ble to social and political seductions, minus the sexual component in Phase
Four.
At all cost, resist the temptation to hurry to the climax of your seduc-
tion, or to improvise. You are not being seductive but selfish. Everything in
daily life is hurried and improvised, and you need to offer something differ-
ent. By taking your time and respecting the seductive process you will not
only break down your victim's resistance, you will make them fall in love.
Phase One
Separation—
Stirring Interest and Desire
Your victims live in their own worlds, their minds occupied with
anxieties and daily concerns. Your goal in this initial phase is to
slowly separate them from that closed world and fill their minds
with thoughts of you. Once you have decided whom to seduce
(1: Choose the right victim), your first task is to get your vic-
tims' attention, to stir interest in you. For those who might be
more resistant or difficult, you should try a slower and more in-
sidious approach, first winning their friendship (2: Create a
false sense of security—approach indirectly); for those who are
bored and less difficult to reach, a more dramatic approach will
work, either fascinating them with a mysterious presence (3:
Send mixed signals) or seeming to be someone who is coveted
and fought over by others (4: Appear to be an object of desire).
Once the victim is properly intrigued, you need to transform
their interest into something stronger—desire. Desire is generally
preceded by feelings of emptiness, of something missing inside
that needs fulfillment. You must deliberately instill such feelings,
make your victims aware of the adventure and romance that are
lacking in their lives (5: Create a need—stir anxiety and dis-
content). If they see you as the one to fill their emptiness, inter-
est will blossom into desire. The desire should be stoked by
subtly planting ideas in their minds, hints of the seductive plea-
sures that await them (6: Master the art of insinuation). Mir-
roring your victims' values, indulging them in their wants and
moods will charm and delight them (7: Enter their spirit).
Without realizing how it has happened, more and more of their
thoughts now revolve around you. The time has come for some-
thing stronger. Lure them with an irresistible pleasure or adven-
ture (8: Create temptation) and they will follow your lead.
Choose the Right Victim
Everything de-
pends on the target of your seduc-
tion. Study your prey thoroughly, and choose
only those who will prove susceptible to your
charms. The right victims are those for whom you can fill
a void, who see in you something exotic. They are often
isolated or at least somewhat unhappy (perhaps because of re-
cent adverse circumstances), or can easily be made so—for the
completely contented person is almost impossible to seduce.
The perfect victim has some natural quality that attracts
you. The strong emotions this quality inspires will
help make your seductive maneuvers seem more
natural and dynamic. The perfect victim
allows for the perfect chase.
Preparing for the Hunt
T
he young Vicomte de Valmont was a notorious libertine in the Paris of
the 1770s, the ruin of many a young girl and the ingenious seducer of
the wives of illustrious aristocrats. But after a while the repetitiveness of it
all began to bore him; his successes came too easily So one year, during the
sweltering, slow month of August, he decided to take a break from Paris
and visit his aunt at her château in the provinces. Life there was not what
he was used to—there were country walks, chats with the local vicar, card
games. His city friends, particularly his fellow libertine and confidante the
Marquise de Merteuil, expected him to hurry back.
There were other guests at the château, however, including the Prési-
dente de Tourvel, a twenty-two-year-old woman whose husband was tem-
porarily absent, having work to do elsewhere. The Présidente had been
languishing at the château, waiting for him to join her. Valmont had met
her before; she was certainly beautiful, but had a reputation as a prude who
was extremely devoted to her husband. She was not a court lady; her taste
in clothing was atrocious (she always covered her neck with ghastly frills)
and her conversation lacked wit. For some reason, however, far from Paris,
Valmont began to see these traits in a new light. He followed her to the
chapel where she went every morning to pray. He caught glimpses of her at
dinner, or playing cards. Unlike the ladies of Paris, she seemed unaware of
her charms; this excited him. Because of the heat, she wore a simple linen
dress, which revealed her figure. A piece of muslin covered her breasts, let-
ting him more than imagine them. Her hair, unfashionable in its slight dis-
order, conjured the bedroom. And her face—he had never noticed how
expressive it was. Her features lit up when she gave alms to a beggar; she
blushed at the slightest praise. She was so natural and unself-conscious. And
when she talked of her husband, or religious matters, he could sense the
depth of her feelings. If such a passionate nature were ever detoured into a
love affair. . . .
Valmont extended his stay at the château, much to the delight of his
aunt, who could not have guessed at the reason. And he wrote to the Mar-
quise de Merteuil, explaining his new ambition: to seduce Madame de
Tourvel. The Marquise was incredulous. He wanted to seduce this prude?
If he succeeded, how little pleasure she would give him, and if he failed,
what a disgrace—the great libertine unable to seduce a wife whose husband
was far away! She wrote a sarcastic letter, which only inflamed Valmont fur-
The ninth • Have I
become blind? Has the
inner eye of the soul lost its
power? I have seen her, but
it is as if I had seen a
heavenly 
revelation—so
completely has her image
vanished again for me. In
vain do I summon all the
powers of my soul in order
to conjure up this image. If
I ever see her again, I shall
be able to recognize her
instantly, even though she
stands among a hundred
others. Now she has fled,
and the eye of my soul tries
in vain to overtake her
with its longing. I was
walking along Langelinie,
seemingly 
nonchalantly
and without paying
attention to my
surroundings, although my
reconnoitering glance left-
nothing 
unobserved—and
then my eyes fell upon her.
My eyes fixed
unswervingly upon her.
They no longer obeyed
their master's will; it was
impossible for me to shift
my gaze and thus overlook
the object I wanted to
see—I did not look, I
stared. As a fencer freezes
in his lunge, so my eyes
were fixed, petrified in the
direction initially taken. It
was impossible to look
169
170 
• 
The Art of Seduction
ther. The conquest of this notoriously virtuous woman would prove his
greatest seduction. His reputation would only be enhanced.
There was an obstacle, though, that seemed to make success almost im-
possible: everyone knew Valmont's reputation, including the Présidente.
She knew how dangerous it was to ever be alone with him, how people
would talk about the least association with him. Valmont did everything
to belie his reputation, even going so far as to attend church services and
seem repentant of his ways. The Présidente noticed, but still kept her dis-
tance. The challenge she presented to Valmont was irresistible, but could he
meet it?
Valmont decided to test the waters. One day he arranged a little walk
with the Présidente and his aunt. He chose a delightful path that they had
never taken before, but at a certain point they reached a little ditch, unsuit-
able for a lady to cross on her own. And yet, Valmont said, the rest of the
walk was too nice for them to turn back, and he gallantly picked up his
aunt in his arms and carried her across the ditch, making the Présidente
laugh uproariously. But then it was her turn, and Valmont purposefully
picked her up a little awkwardly, so that she caught at his arms, and while
he was holding her against him he could feel her heart beating faster, and
saw her blush. His aunt saw this too, and cried out, "The child is afraid!"
But Valmont sensed otherwise. Now he knew that the challenge could be
met, that the Présidente could be won. The seduction could proceed.
Interpretation. Valmont, the Présidente de Tourvel, and the Marquise de
Merteuil are all characters in the eighteenth-century French novel Danger-
ous Liaisons, by Choderlos de Laclos. (The character of Valmont was in-
spired by several real-life libertines of the time, most prominent of all the
Duke de Richelieu.) In the story, Valmont worries that his seductions have
become mechanical; he makes a move, and the woman almost always re-
sponds the same way. But no two seductions should be the same—a differ-
ent target should change the whole dynamic. Valmont's problem is that he
is always seducing the same type—the wrong type. He realizes this when he
meets Madame de Tourvel.
It is not because her husband is a count that he decides to seduce her,
or because she is stylishly dressed, or is desired by other men—the usual
reasons. He chooses her because, in her unconscious way, she has already
seduced him. A bare arm, an unrehearsed laugh, a playful manner—all
these have captured his attention, because none of them is contrived. Once
he falls under her spell, the strength of his desire will make his subsequent
maneuvers seem less calculated; he is apparently unable to help himself.
And his strong emotions will slowly infect her.
Beyond the effect the Présidente has on Valmont, she has other traits
that make her the perfect victim. She is bored, which draws her toward ad-
venture. She is naive, and unable to see through his tricks. Finally, the
Achilles' heel: she believes herself immune to seduction. Almost all of us
down, impossible to
withdraw my glance,
impossible to see, because I
saw far too much. The
only thing I have retained
is that she had on a green
cloak, that is all—one
could call it capturing the
cloud instead of Juno; she
has escaped me . . .and
left only her cloak
behind. . . . The girl made
an impression on me. •
The sixteenth • . . . I feel
no impatience, for she must
live here in the city, and at
this moment that is enough
for me. 
This possibility is
the condition for the proper
appearance of her image—
everything
will be enjoyed in slow
drafts. . . . • The
nineteenth • Cordelia,
then, is her name!
Cordelia! It is a beautiful
name, and that, too, is
important, since it can
often be very disturbing to
have to name an ugly
name together with the
most tender adjectives.
—SØREN 
KIERKEGAARD, 
THE
SEDUCER'S 
DIARY, 
TRANSLATED
BY HOWARD V. HONG AND
EDNA H. HONG
Love as understood by
Don Juan is a feeling akin
to a taste for hunting. It is
a craving for an activity
which needs an incessant
diversity of stimuli to
challenge skill.
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND
SUZANNE SALE
It is not the quality of the
desired object that gives us
pleasure, but rather the
energy of our appetites.
—CHARLES BAUDELAIRE, THE
END 
OF 
DON JUAN
Choose the Right Victim 
• 
171
are vulnerable to the attractions of other people, and we take precautions
against unwanted lapses. Madame de Tourvel takes none. Once Valmont
has tested her at the ditch, and has seen she is physically vulnerable, he
knows that eventually she will fall.
Life is short, and should not be wasted pursuing and seducing the
wrong people. The choice of target is critical; it is the set up of the seduc-
tion and it will determine everything else that follows. The perfect victim
does not have certain facial features, or the same taste in music, or similar
goals in life. That is how a banal seducer chooses his or her targets. The
perfect victim is the person who stirs you in a way that cannot be explained
in words, whose effect on you has nothing to do with superficialities. He or
she often has a quality that you yourself lack, and may even secretly envy—
the Présidente, for example, has an innocence that Valmont long ago lost or
never had. There should be a little bit of tension—the victim may fear you
a little, even slightly dislike you. Such tension is full of erotic potential and
will make the seduction much livelier. Be more creative in choosing your
prey and you will be rewarded with a more exciting seduction. Of course,
it means nothing if the potential victim is not open to your influence. Test
the person first. Once you feel that he or she is also vulnerable to you then
the hunting can begin.
It is a stroke of good fortune to find one who is worth se-
ducing. . . . Most people rush ahead, become engaged or do
other stupid things, and in a turn of the hand everything is
over, and they know neither what they have won nor what
they have lost.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD
Keys to Seduction
T
hroughout life we find ourselves having to persuade people—to se-
duce them. Some will be relatively open to our influence, if only in
subtle ways, while others seem impervious to our charms. Perhaps we find
this a mystery beyond our control, but that is an ineffective way of dealing
with life. Seducers, whether sexual or social, prefer to pick the odds. As
often as possible they go toward people who betray some vulnerability to
them, and avoid the ones who cannot be moved. To leave people who are
inaccessible to you alone is a wise path; you cannot seduce everyone. On the
other hand, you must actively hunt out the prey that responds the right way.
This will make your seductions that much more pleasurable and satisfying.
How do you recognize your victims? By the way they respond to you.
You should not pay so much attention to their conscious responses—a per-
son who is obviously trying to please or charm you is probably playing to
your vanity, and wants something from you. Instead, pay greater attention
to those responses outside conscious control—a blush, an involuntary mir-
The daughter of desire
should strive to have the
following lovers in their
turn, as being mutually
restful to her: a boy who
has been loosed too soon
from the authority and
counsel of his father, an
author enjoying office with
a rather simple-minded
prince, a merchant's son
whose pride is in rivaling
other lovers, an ascetic who
is the slave of love in
secret, a king's son whose
follies are boundless and
who has a taste for rascals,
the countrified son of some
village Brahman, a
married woman's lover, a
singer who has just
pocketed a very large sum
of money, the master of a
caravan but recently come
in. . . .These brief
instructions admit of
infinitely varied
interpretation, 
dear child,
according to the
circumstance; and it
requires intelligence, insight
and reflection to make the
best of each particular case.
— E A S T E R N LOVE, VOLUME II:
THE 
HARLOT'S 
BREVIARY OF
KSHEMENDRA, TRANSLATED BY
E. POWYS MATHERS
The women who can
be easily won over to
congress: . . . a woman
who looks sideways at
you; . . . a woman who
hates her husband, or who
is hated by him; . . . a
woman who has not had
any children; . . . a
woman who is very fond of
society; a woman who
is apparently very
affectionate toward her
husband; the wife of an
actor; a widow; . . . a
woman fond of
enjoyments; . . . a vain
woman; a woman whose
husband is inferior to her
172 
• 
The Art of Seduction
roring of some gesture of yours, an unusual shyness, even perhaps a flash of
anger or resentment. All of these show that you are having an effect on a
person who is open to your influence.
Like Valmont, you can also recognize the right targets by the effect they
are having on you. Perhaps they make you uneasy—perhaps they corre-
spond to a deep-rooted childhood ideal, or represent some kind of personal
taboo that excites you, or suggest the person you imagine you would be if
you were the opposite sex. When a person has such a deep effect on you, it
transforms all of your subsequent maneuvers. Your face and gestures be-
come more animated. You have more energy; when victims resist you (as a
good victim should) you in turn will be more creative, more motivated to
overcome their resistance. The seduction will move forward like a good
play. Your strong desire will infect the target and give them the dangerous
sensation that they have a power over you. Of course, you are the one ulti-
mately in control since you are making your victims emotional at the right
moments, leading them back and forth. Good seducers choose targets that
inspire them but they know how and when to restrain themselves.
Never rush into the waiting arms of the first person who seems to like
you. That is not seduction but insecurity. The need that draws you will
make for a low-level attachment, and interest on both sides will sag. Look
at the types you have not considered before—that is where you will find
challenge and adventure. Experienced hunters do not choose their prey by
how easily it is caught; they want the thrill of the chase, a life-and-death
struggle—the fiercer the better.
Although the victim who is perfect for you depends on you, certain
types lend themselves to a more satisfying seduction. Casanova liked young
women who were unhappy, or had suffered a recent misfortune. Such
women appealed to his desire to play the savior, but it also responded to ne-
cessity: happy people are much harder to seduce. Their contentment makes
them inaccessible. It is always easier to fish in troubled waters. Also, an air
of sadness is itself quite seductive—Genji, the hero of the Japanese novel
The Tale of Genji, could not resist a woman with a melancholic air. In
Kierkegaard's book The Seducer's Diary, the narrator, Johannes, has one
main requirement in his victim: she must have imagination. That is why he
chooses a woman who lives in a fantasy world, a woman who will envelop
his every gesture in poetry, imagining far more than is there. Just as it is
hard to seduce a person who is happy, it is hard to seduce a person who has
no imagination.
For women, the manly man is often the perfect victim. Mark Antony
was of this type—he loved pleasure, was quite emotional, and when it
came to women, found it hard to think straight. He was easy for Cleopatra
to manipulate. Once she gained a hold on his emotions, she kept him per-
manently on a string. A woman should never be put off by a man who
seems overly aggressive. He is often the perfect victim. It is easy, with a few
coquettish tricks, to turn that aggression around and make him your slave.
Such men actually enjoy being made to chase after a woman.
in rank or ability; a
woman who is proud of her
skill in the arts; . . . a
woman who is slighted by
her husband without any
cause; . . . a woman whose
husband is devoted to
travelling; the wife of a
jeweler; a jealous woman;
a covetous woman.
—THE 
HINDI: ART OF LOVE,
EDITED BY EDWARD WINDSOR
Leisure stimulates love,
leisure watches the
lovelorn, \ Leisure's the
cause and sustenance of
this sweet \ Evil.
Eliminate leisure, and
Cupid's bow is broken, \
His torches lie lightless,
scorned. \ As a plane-tree
rejoices in wine, as a poplar
in water, \ As a marsh-reed
in swampy ground, so
Venus loves \ Leisure. . . .
\ Why do you think
Aegisthus \ Became an
adulterer? Easy: he was
idle—and 
bored. \
Everyone else was away at
Troy on a lengthy \
Campaign: all Greece had
shipped \ Its contingent
across. Suppose he
hankered for warfare?
Argos \ Had no wars to
offer. Suppose he fancied
the courts? \ Argos lacked
litigation. Love was better
than doing nothing. \
That's how Cupid slips
in; that's how he stays.
— O V I D , C U R E S F O R L O V E ,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
The Chinese have a
proverb: "When Yang is in
the ascendant, Yin is
born," which means,
translated into our
language, that when a man
has devoted the better of
his life to the ordinary
business of living, the Yin,
Choose the Right Victim 
• 
173
Be careful with appearances. The person who seems volcanically pas-
sionate is often hiding insecurity and self-involvement. This was what most
men failed to perceive in the nineteenth-century courtesan Lola Montez.
She seemed so dramatic, so exciting. In fact, she was a troubled, self-
obsessed woman, but by the time men discovered this it was too late—they
had become involved with her and could not extricate themselves without
months of drama and torture. People who are outwardly distant or shy are
often better targets than extroverts. They are dying to be drawn out, and
still waters run deep.
People with a lot of time on their hands are extremely susceptible to se-
duction. They have mental space for you to fill. Tullia d'Aragona, the infa-
mous sixteenth-century Italian courtesan, preferred young men as her
victims; besides the physical reason for such a preference, they were more
idle than working men with careers, and therefore more defenseless against
an ingenious seductress. On the other hand, you should generally avoid
people who are preoccupied with business or work—seduction demands
attention, and busy people have too little space in their minds for you to
occupy.
According to Freud, seduction begins early in life, in our relationship
with our parents. They seduce us physically, both with bodily contact and
by satisfying desires such as hunger, and we in turn try to seduce them into
paying us attention. We are creatures by nature vulnerable to seduction
throughout our lives. We all want to be seduced; we yearn to be drawn out
of ourselves, out of our routines and into the drama of eros. And what
draws us more than anything is the feeling that someone has something we
don't, a quality we desire. Your perfect victims are often people who think
you have something they don't, and who will be enchanted to have it pro-
vided for them. Such victims may have a temperament quite the opposite
of yours, and this difference will create an exciting tension.
When Jiang Qing, later known as Madame Mao, first met Mao Tse-
tung in 1937 in his mountain retreat in western China, she could sense
how desperate he was for a bit of color and spice in his life: all the camp's
women dressed like the men, and abjured any feminine finery. Jiang had
been an actress in Shanghai, and was anything but austere. She supplied
what he lacked, and she also gave him the added thrill of being able to edu-
cate her in communism, appealing to his Pygmalion complex—the desire
to dominate, control, and remake a person. In fact it was Jiang Qing who
controlled her future husband.
The greatest lack of all is excitement and adventure, which is precisely
what seduction offers. In 1964, the Chinese actor Shi Pei Pu, a man who
had gained fame as a female impersonator, met Bernard Bouriscout, a young
diplomat assigned to the French embassy in China. Bouriscout had come
to China looking for adventure, and was disappointed to have little contact
with Chinese people. Pretending to be a woman who, when still a child,
had been forced to live as a boy—supposedly the family already had too
many daughters—Shi Pei Pu used the young Frenchman's boredom and
or emotional side of his
nature, rises to the surface
and demands its rights.
When such a period occurs,
all that which has formerly
seemed important loses its
significance. The will-of-
the-wisp of illusion leads
the man hither and thither,
taking him on strange and
complicated 
deviations from
his former path in life.
Ming Huang, the 
"Bright
Emperor" 
of the T'ang
dynasty, was an example
of the profound truth of
this theory. From the
moment he saw Yang
Kuei-fei bathing in the
lake near his palace in the
Li mountains, he was
destined to sit at her feet,
learning from her the
emotional mysteries of
what the Chinese call Yin.
—ELOISE TALCOTT HIBBERT,
EMBROIDERED 
GAUZE:
PORTRAITS 
OF 
FAMOUS
CHINESE 
LADIES
174 • The Art of Seduction
discontent to manipulate him. Inventing a story of the deceptions he had
had to go through, he slowly drew Bouriscout into an affair that would last
many years. (Bouriscout had had previous homosexual encounters, but con-
sidered himself heterosexual.) Eventually the diplomat was led into spying
for the Chinese. All the while, he believed Shi Pei Pu was a woman—his
yearning for adventure had made him that vulnerable. Repressed types are
perfect victims for a deep seduction.
People who repress the appetite for pleasure make ripe victims, particu-
larly later in their lives. The eighth-century Chinese Emperor Ming Huang
spent much of his reign trying to rid his court of its costly addiction to lux-
uries, and was himself a model of austerity and virtue. But the moment he
saw the concubine Yang Kuei-fei bathing in a palace lake, everything
changed. The most charming woman in the realm, she was the mistress of
his son. Exerting his power, the emperor won her away—only to become
her abject slave.
The choice of the right victim is equally important in politics. Mass se-
ducers such as Napoleon or John F. Kennedy offer their public just what it
lacks. When Napoleon came to power, the French people's sense of pride
was beaten down by the bloody aftermath of the French Revolution. He
offered them glory and conquest. Kennedy recognized that Americans
were bored with the stultifying comfort of the Eisenhower years; he gave
them adventure and risk. More important, he tailored his appeal to the
group most vulnerable to it: the younger generation. Successful politicians
know that not everyone will be susceptible to their charm, but if they can
find a group of believers with a need to be filled, they have supporters who
will stand by them no matter what.
Symbol:
Big Game. Lions are dangerous—to hunt
them is to know the thrill of risk. Leopards are clever
and swift, offering the excitement of a difficult chase. Never
rush into the hunt. Know your prey and choose it carefully. Do
not waste time with small game—the rabbits that back into snares,
the mink that walk into a scented trap. Challenge is pleasure.
Choose the Right Victim • 175
Reversal
T
here is no possible reversal. There is nothing to be gained from trying
to seduce the person who is closed to you, or who cannot provide the
pleasure and chase that you need.
Create a False Sense of Security-
Approach Indirectly
If you are too
direct early on, you risk stir-
ring up a resistance that will never be
lowered. At first there must be nothing of the
seducer in your manner. The seduction should begin
at an angle, indirectly, so that the target only gradually
becomes aware of you. Haunt the periphery of your target's
life—approach through a third party, or seem to cultivate a
relatively neutral relationship, moving gradually from friend to
lover. Arrange an occasional "chance" encounter, as if you and your
target were destined to become acquainted—nothing is more seductive
than a sense of destiny. Lull the target into feeling secure, then strike.
Friend to Lover
A
nne Marie Louis d'Orléans, the Duchess de Montpensier, known in
seventeenth-century France as La Grande Mademoiselle, had never
known love in her life. Her mother had died when she was young; her fa-
ther remarried and ignored her. She came from one of Europe's most illus-
trious families: her grandfather had been King Henry IV; the future King
Louis XIV was her cousin. When she was young, matches had been pro-
posed between her and the widowed king of Spain, the son of the Holy
Roman emperor, and even cousin Louis himself, among many others. But
all of these matches were designed for political purposes, or because of her
family's enormous wealth. No one bothered to woo her; she rarely even
met her suitors. To make matters worse, the Grande Mademoiselle was an
idealist who believed in the old-fashioned values of chivalry: courage, hon-
esty, virtue. She loathed the schemers whose motives in courting her were
dubious at best. Whom could she trust? One by one she found a reason to
spurn them. Spinsterhood seemed to be her fate.
In April of 1669, the Grande Mademoiselle, then forty-two, met one
of the strangest men in the court: the Marquis Antonin Peguilin, later
known as the Duke de Lauzun. A favorite of Louis XIV's, the thirty-six-
year-old Marquis was a brave soldier with an acid wit. He was also an in-
curable Don Juan. Although he was short, and certainly not handsome, his
impudent manners and his military exploits made him irresistible to
women. The Grande Mademoiselle had noticed him some years before, ad-
miring his elegance and boldness. But it was only this time, in 1669, that
she had a real conversation with him, if a short one, and although she knew
of his lady-killer reputation, she found him charming. A few days later they
ran into each other again; this time the conversation was longer, and
Lauzun proved more intelligent than she had imagined—they talked of the
playwright Corneille (her favorite), of heroism, and of other elevated top-
ics. Now their encounters became more frequent. They had become
friends. Anne Marie noted in her diary that her conversations with Lauzun,
when they occurred, were the highlight of her day; when he was not at
court, she felt his absence. Surely her encounters with him came frequently
enough that they could not be accidental on his part, but he always seemed
surprised to see her. At the same time, she recorded feeling uneasy—
strange emotions were stealing up on her, she did not know why.
179
Many women adore the
elusive, \ Hate
overeagerness. So, play
hard to get, \ Stop boredom
developing. And don't let
your entreaties \ Sound too
confident 
of possession.
Insinuate sex \
Camouflaged as friendship.
I've seen ultrastubborn
creatures \ Fooled by this
gambit, 
the switch from
companion to stud.
—OVID, 
THEART 
OF 
LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
On the street, I do not stop
her, or I exchange a
greeting with her but never
come close, but always
strive for distance.
Presumably our repeated
encounters are clearly
noticeable to her;
presumably she does
perceive that on her
horizon a new planet has
loomed, which in its course
has encroached disturbingly
upon hers in a curiously
undisturbing way, but
she has no inkling of the
law underlying this
movement. 
. . . Before I
begin my attack, I must
180 
• 
The Art of Seduction
Time passed, and the Grande Mademoiselle was to leave Paris for a
week or two. Now Lauzun approached her without warning and made an
emotional plea to be considered her confidante, the great friend who
would execute any commission she needed done while she was away. He
was poetic and chivalrous, but what did he really mean? In her diary, Anne
Marie finally confronted the emotions that had been stirring in her since
their first conversation: "I told myself, these are not vague musings; there
must be an object to all of these feelings, and I could not imagine who it
was. . . . Finally, after troubling myself with this for several days, I realized
that it was M. de Lauzun whom I loved, it was he who had somehow
slipped into my heart and captured it."
Made aware of the source of her feelings, the Grande Mademoiselle
became more direct. If Lauzun was to be her confidante, she could talk to
him of marriage, of the matches that were still being offered to her. The
topic might give him a chance to express his feelings; perhaps he might
show jealousy. Unfortunately Lauzun did not seem to take the hint. In-
stead, he asked her why she was thinking of marriage at all—she seemed
so happy. Besides, who could possibly be worthy of her? This went
on for weeks. She could pry nothing personal out of him. In a way, she
understood—there were the differences in rank (she was far above him) and
age (she was six years older). Then, a few months later, the wife of the
king's brother died, and King Louis suggested to the Grande Mademoiselle
that she replace his late sister-in-law—that is, that she marry his brother.
Anne Marie was disgusted; clearly the brother was trying to get his hands
on her fortune. She asked Lauzun his opinion. As the king's loyal servants,
he replied, they must obey the royal wish. His answer did not please her,
and to make things worse, he stopped visiting her, as if it were no longer
proper for them to be friends. This was the last straw. The Grande Made-
moiselle told the king she would not marry his brother, and that was that.
Now Anne Marie met with Lauzun, and told him she would write on a
piece of paper the name of the man she had wanted to marry all along. He
was to put the paper under his pillow and read it the next morning. When
he did, he found the words "C'est vous"—It is you. Seeing the Grande
Mademoiselle the following evening, Lauzun said she must have been jok-
ing; she would make him the laughing stock of the court. She insisted that
she was serious. He seemed shocked, surprised—but not as surprised as the
rest of the court was a few weeks later, when an engagement was an-
nounced between this relatively low-ranking Don Juan and the second-
highest-ranking lady in France, a woman known for both her virtue and
her skill at defending it.
Interpretation. The Duke de Lauzun was one of the greatest seducers in
history, and his slow and steady seduction of the Grande Mademoiselle was
his masterpiece. His method was simple: indirection. Sensing her interest in
him in that first conversation, he decided to beguile her with friendship.
first become acquainted
with her and her whole
mental state.
—SØREN 
KIERKEGAARD, 
THE
SEDUCER'S 
DIARY, TRANSLATED
BY HOWARD V. HONG AND
EDNA H . HONG
No sooner had he spoken
than the bullocks, driven
from their mountain
pastures, were on their way
to the beach, as Jove had
directed; they were making
for the sands where the
daughter [Europa] of the
great king used to play
with the young girls of
Tyre, who were her com-
panions. • . . . Aban-
doning the dignity of his
scepter, the father and ruler
of the gods, whose hand
wields the flaming three-
forked bolt, whose nod
shakes the universe,
adopted the guise of a bull;
and, mingling with the
other bullocks, joined in the
lowing and ambled in the
tender grass, a fair sight to
sec. His hide was white as
untrodden snow, snow not
yet melted by the rainy
South wind. 
The muscles
stood out on his neck, and
deep folds of skin hung
along his flanks. His horns
were small, it is true, but
so beautifully made that
you would swear they were
the work of an artist, more
polished and shining than
any jewel. There was no
menace in the set of his
head or in his eyes; he
looked completely placid. •
Agenor's 
daughter
[Europa] was filled with
admiration for one so
handsome and so friendly.
But, gentle though he
seemed, she was afraid at
first to touch him; then she
went closer, and held out
flowers to his shining lips.
The lover was delighted
Create a False Sense of Security—Approach Indirectly • 181
He would become her most devoted friend. At first this was charming; a
man was taking the time to talk to her, of poetry, history, the deeds of
war—her favorite subjects. She slowly began to confide in him. Then, al-
most without her realizing it, her feelings shifted: the consummate ladies'
man was only interested in friendship? He was not attracted to her as a
woman? Such thoughts made her aware that she had fallen in love with
him. This, in part, was what eventually made her turn down the match
with the king's brother—a decision cleverly and indirectly provoked by
Lauzun himself, when he stopped visiting her. And how could he be after
money or position, or sex, when he had never made any kind of move?
No, the brilliance of Lauzun's seduction was that the Grande Mademoiselle
believed it was she who was making all the moves.
Once you have chosen the right victim, you must get his or her at-
tention and stir desire. To move from friendship to love can win success
without calling attention to itself as a maneuver. First, your friendly con-
versations with your targets will bring you valuable information about their
characters, their tastes, their weaknesses, the childhood yearnings that gov-
ern their adult behavior. (Lauzun, for example, could adapt cleverly to
Anne Marie's tastes once he had studied her close up.) Second, by spending
time with your targets you can make them comfortable with you. Believing
you are interested only in their thoughts, in their company, they will lower
their resistance, dissipating the usual tension between the sexes. Now they
are vulnerable, for your friendship with them has opened the golden gate to
their body: their mind. At this point any offhand comment, any slight
physical contact, will spark a different thought, which will catch them off-
guard: perhaps there could be something else between you. Once that feel-
ing has stirred, they will wonder why you haven't made a move, and will
take the initiative themselves, enjoying the illusion that they are in control.
There is nothing more effective in seduction than making the seduced
think that they are the ones doing the seducing.
I do not approach her, I merely skirt the periphery of her
existence. . . . This is the first web into which she must be
spun.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD
Key to Seduction
W
hat you are after as a seducer is the ability to move people in the di-
rection you want them to go. But the game is perilous; the mo-
ment they suspect they are acting under your influence, they will become
resentful. We are creatures who cannot stand feeling that we are obeying
someone else's will. Should your targets catch on, sooner or later they will
turn against you. But what if you can make them do what you want them
to without their realizing it? What if they think they are in control? That is
and, until he could achieve
h is hoped-for pleasure,
kissed her hands. He could
scarcely wait for the rest,
only with great difficulty
did he restrain himself. •
Now he frolicked and
played on the green turf
now lay down, all snowy
white on the yellow sand.
Gradually the princess lost
her fear, and with her
innocent hands she stroked
his breast when he offered
it for her caress, and hung
fresh garlands on his horns:
till finally she even
ventured to mount the bull,
little knowing on whose
back she was resting. Then
the god drew away from
the shore by easy stages,
first planting the hooves
that were part of his
disguise in the surf at the
water's edge, and then
proceeding farther out to
sea, till he bore his booty
away over the wide
stretches of mid ocean.
— O V I D , 
METAMORPHOSES,
TRANSLATED BY MARY 
M. INNES
These few reflections lead
us to the understanding
that, since in attempting a
seduction it is up to the
man to make the first steps,
for the seducer, to seduce is
nothing more than reducing
the distance, in this case
that of the difference
between the sexes and that,
in order to accomplish this,
it is necessary to feminize
himself or at least identify
himself with the object of
his seduction. . . . As
Alain Roger writes: "If
there is a seduction, it is
the seducer who is first lead
astray, in the sense that he
abdicates his own sex. . . .
Seduction undoubtedly
aims at sexual
consummation, but it only
gets there in creating a kind
182 
• 
The Art of Seduction
the power of indirection and no seducer can work his or her magic with-
out it.
The first move to master is simple: once you have chosen the right per-
son, you must make the target come to you. If, in the opening stages, you
can make your targets think that they are the ones making the first ap-
proach, you have won the game. There will be no resentment, no perverse
counterreaction, no paranoia.
To make them come to you requires giving them space. This can be
accomplished in several ways. You can haunt the periphery of their exis-
tence, letting them notice you in different places but never approaching
them. You will get their attention this way, and if they want to bridge the
gap, they will have to come to you. You can befriend them, as Lauzun did
the Grande Mademoiselle, moving steadily closer while always maintaining
the distance appropriate for friends of the opposite sex. You can also play
cat and mouse with them, first seeming interested, then stepping back—
actively luring them to follow you into your web. Whatever you do, and
whatever kind of seduction you are practicing, you must at all cost avoid
the natural tendency to crowd your targets. Do not make the mistake of
thinking they will lose interest unless you apply pressure, or that they will
enjoy a flood of attention. Too much attention early on will actually just
suggest insecurity, and raise doubts as to your motives. Worst of all, it gives
your targets no room for imagination. Take a step back; let the thoughts
you are provoking come to them as if they were their own. This is doubly
important if you are dealing with someone who has a deep effect on you.
We can never really understand the opposite sex. They are always mys-
terious to us, and it is this mystery that provides the tension so delightful in
seduction; but it is also a source of unease. Freud famously wondered what
women really wanted; even to this most insightful of psychological
thinkers, the opposite sex was a foreign land. For both men and women,
there are deep-rooted feelings of fear and anxiety in relation to the oppo-
site sex. In the initial stages of a seduction, then, you must find ways to
calm any sense of mistrust that the other person may experience. (A sense
of danger and fear can heighten the seduction later on, but if you stir such
emotions in the first stages, you will more likely scare the target away.) Es-
tablish a neutral distance, seem harmless, and you give yourself room to
move. Casanova cultivated a slight femininity in his character—an interest
in clothes, theater, domestic matters—that young girls found comforting.
The Renaissance courtesan Tullia d'Aragona, developing friendships with the
great thinkers and poets of her time, talked of literature and philosophy—
anything but the boudoir (and anything but the money that was also her
goal). Johannes, the narrator of Søren Kierkegaard's The Seducer's Diary, fol-
lows his target, Cordelia, from a distance; when their paths cross, he is po-
lite and apparently shy. As Cordelia gets to know him, he doesn't frighten
her. In fact he is so innocuous she begins to wish he were less so.
Duke Ellington, the great jazz artist and a consummate seducer, would
of simulacra of Gomorra.
The seducer is nothing
more than a lesbian."
—FRÉDÉRIC MONNEYRON,
SÉDUIRE: 
L'IMAGINAIRE 
DE 
LA
SÉDUCTION 
DE 
DON 
GIOVANNI
À MICK 
JAGGER
As he [Jupiter] was
hurrying busily to and fro,
he stopped short at the
sight of an Arcadian
maiden. The fire of
passion kindled the very
marrow of his bones. This
girl was not one who spent
her time in spinning soft
fibers of wool, or in
arranging her hair in
different styles. She was
one of Diana's warriors,
wearing her tunic pinned
together with a brooch, her
tresses carelessly caught
back by a white ribbon,
and carrying in her hand a
light javelin or her
bow. . . . • The sun on
high had passed its zenith,
when she entered a grove
whose trees had never felt
the axe. Here she took her
quiver from her shoulders,
unstrung her pliant bow,
and lay down on the
turf, resting her head on
her painted quiver. 
When
Jupiter saw her thus, tired
and unprotected, he
said: "Here is a secret of
which my wife will know
nothing; or if she does get
to know of it, it will be
worth her reproaches!" •
Without wasting time he
assumed the appearance
and the dress of Diana,
and spoke to the girl.
'Dearest of all my
companions," he said,
"where have you been
hunting? On what
mountain ridges?" She
raised herself from the
grass: "Greeting, divine
mistress," she cried,
"greater in my sight than
Create a False Sense of Security—Approach Indirectly • 
183
initially dazzle the ladies with his good looks, stylish clothing, and cha-
risma. But once he was alone with a woman, he would take a slight step
back, becoming excessively polite, making only small talk. Banal conversa-
tion can be a brilliant tactic; it hypnotizes the target. The dullness of your
front gives the subtlest suggestive word, the slightest look, an amplified
power. Never mention love and you make its absence speak volumes—your
victims will wonder why you never discuss your emotions, and as they have
such thoughts, they will go further, imagining what else is going on in your
mind. They will be the ones to bring up the topic of love or affection. De-
liberate dullness has many applications. In psychotherapy, the doctor makes
monosyllabic responses to draw patients in, making them relax and open
up. In international negotiations, Henry Kissinger would lull diplomats
with boring details, then strike with bold demands. Early in a seduction,
less-colorful words are often more effective than vivid ones—the target
tunes them out, looks at your face, begins to imagine, fantasize, fall under
your spell.
Getting to your targets through other people is extremely effective; in-
filtrate their circle and you are no longer a stranger. Before the seventeenth-
century seducer Count de Grammont made a move, he would befriend his
target's chambermaid, her valet, a friend, even a lover. In this way he could
gather information, finding a way to approach her in an unthreatening
manner. He could also plant ideas, saying things the third party was likely
to repeat, things that would intrigue the lady, particularly when they came
from someone she knew.
Ninon de l'Enclos, the seventeenth-century courtesan and strategist of
seduction, believed that disguising one's intentions was not only a necessity,
it added to the pleasure of the game. A man should never declare his feel-
ings, she felt, particularly early on. It is irritating and provokes mistrust. "A
woman is much better persuaded that she is loved by what she guesses than
by what she is told," Ninon once remarked. Often a person's haste in de-
claring his or her feelings comes from a false desire to please, thinking this
will flatter the other. But the desire to please can annoy and offend. Chil-
dren, cats, and coquettes draw us to them by apparently not trying, even by
seeming uninterested. Learn to disguise your feelings and let people figure
out what is happening for themselves.
In all arenas of life, you should never give the impression that you are
angling for something—that will raise a resistance that you will never lower.
Learn to approach people from the side. Mute your colors, blend in, seem
unthreatening, and you will have more room to maneuver later on. The
same holds true in politics, where overt ambition often frightens people.
Vladimir Ilyich Lenin at first glance looked like an everyday Russian; he
dressed like a worker, spoke with a peasant accent, had no air of greatness.
This made the public feel comfortable and identify with him. Yet beneath
this apparently bland appearance, of course, was a deeply clever man who
was always maneuvering. By the time people realized this it was too late.
Jove himself—I care not
if he hears me!" Jove
laughed to hear her words.
Delighted to be preferred to
himself, he kissed her—not
with the restraint becoming
to a maiden's kisses: and
as she began to tell of her
hunting exploits in the
forest, he prevented her by
his embrace, and betrayed
his real self by a shameful
action. So far from
complying, she resisted
him as far as a woman
could . . . but how could a
girl overcome a man, and
who could defeat Jupiter?
He had his way, and
returned to the upper air.
— O V I D , 
M E T A M O R P H O S E S ,
TRANSLATED BY MARY M. INNES
I had rather hear my dog
bark at a crow than a man
swear he loves me.
—BEATRICE, IN WILLIAM
SHAKESPEARE, 
MUCH 
ADO
ABOUT NOTHING
I know of a man whose
beloved was completely
friendly and at ease with
him; but if he had
disclosed by the least
gesture that he was in love,
the beloved would have
become as remote from
him as the Pleiades, whose
stars hang so high in
heaven. It is a sort of
statesmanship that is
required in such cases; the
party concerned was
enjoying the pleasure of his
loved one's company
intensely and to the last
degree, but if he had so
much as hinted at his inner
feelings he would have
attained but a miserable
fraction of the beloved's
favor, and endured into the
bargain all the arrogance
184 
• 
The Art of Seduction
Symbol: The Spider's Web. The spider finds an innocuous corner in
which to spin its web. The longer the web takes, the more fabulous
its construction, yet few really notice it—its gossamer threads are
nearly invisible. The spider has no need to chase for food, or
even to move. It quietly sits in the corner, waiting for its
victims to come to it on their own, and ensnare
themselves in the web.
Reversal
I
n warfare, you need space to align your troops, room to maneuver. The
more space you have, the more intricate your strategy can be. But some-
times it is better to overwhelm the enemy, giving them no time to think or
react. Although Casanova adapted his strategies to the woman in question,
he would often try to make an immediate impression, stirring her desire at
the first encounter. Perhaps he would perform some gallantry, rescuing a
woman in danger; perhaps he would dress so that his target would notice
him in a crowd. In either case, once he had the woman's attention he
would move with lightning speed. A Siren like Cleopatra tries to have an
immediate physical effect on men, giving her victims no time or space to
retreat. She uses the element of surprise. The first period of your contact
with someone can involve a level of desire that will never be repeated;
boldness will carry the day.
But these are short seductions. The Sirens and the Casanovas only get
pleasure from the number of their victims, moving quickly from conquest
to conquest, and this can be tiring. Casanova burned himself out; Sirens,
insatiable, are never satisfied. The indirect, carefully constructed seduction
may reduce the number of your conquests, but more than compensate by
their quality.
and caprice of which love is
capable.
—IBN 
HAZM; 
THE RING OF
THE DOVE: A TREATISE ON 
THE
ART AND 
PRACTICE 
OF ARAB
LOVE, TRANSLATED BY A. J.
ARBERRY
Send Mixed Signals
Once people are aware of your presence, and
perhaps vaguely intrigued, you need to stir their
interest before it settles on someone else. What is ob-
vious and striking may attract their attention at first, but
that attention is often short-lived; in the long run, ambi-
guity is much more potent. Most of us are much too obvi-
ous—instead, 
be hard to figure out. Send mixed signals:
both tough and tender, both spiritual and earthy, both inno-
cent and cunning. A mix of qualities suggests depth, which
fascinates even as it confuses. An elusive, enigmatic aura
will make people want to know more, drawing them
into your circle. Create such a power by hinting
at 
something 
contradictory 
within 
you.
Good and Bad
I
n 1806, when Prussia and France were at war, Auguste, the handsome
twenty-four-year-old prince of Prussia and nephew of Frederick the
Great, was captured by Napoleon. Instead of locking him up, Napoleon al-
lowed him to wander around French territory, keeping a close watch on
him through spies. The prince was devoted to pleasure, and spent his time
moving from town to town, seducing young girls. In 1807 he decided to
visit the Château de Coppet, in Switzerland, where lived the great French
writer Madame de Stae'l.
Auguste was greeted by his hostess with as much ceremony as she could
muster. After she had introduced him to her other guests, they all retired to
a drawing room, where they talked of Napoleon's war in Spain, the current
Paris fashions, and so on. Suddenly the door opened and another guest en-
tered, a woman who had somehow stayed in her room during the hubbub
of the prince's entrance. It was the thirty-year-old Madame Récamier,
Madame de Staël's closest friend. She introduced herself to the prince, then
quickly retired to her bedroom.
Auguste had known that Madame Récamier was at the château. In fact
he had heard many stories about this infamous woman, who, in the years
after the French Revolution, was considered the most beautiful in France.
Men had gone wild over her, particularly at balls when she would take off
her evening wrap, revealing the diaphanous white dresses that she had made
famous, and dance with such abandon. The painters Gérard and David had
immortalized her face and fashions, and even her feet, considered the most
beautiful anyone had ever seen; and she had broken the heart of Lucien
Bonaparte, the Emperor Napoleon's brother. Auguste liked his girls
younger than Madame Récamier, and he had come to the château to rest.
But those few moments in which she had stolen the scene with her sudden
entrance caught him off guard: she was as beautiful as people had said, but
more striking than her beauty was that look of hers that seemed so sweet,
indeed heavenly, with a hint of sadness in the eyes. The other guests con-
tinued their conversations, but Auguste could only think of Madame
Récamier.
Over dinner that evening, he watched her. She did not talk much, and
kept her eyes downward, but once or twice she looked up—directly at the
prince. After dinner the guests assembled in the gallery, and a harp was
brought in. To the prince's delight, Madame Récamier began to play,
Reichardt 
had seen Juliette
at another ball, protesting
coyly that she would not
dance, and then, after a
while, throwing off her
heavy evening gown, 
to
reveal a light dress
underneath. 
On all sides,
there were murmurs and
whisperings about her
coquetry and affectation.
As ever, she wore white
satin, cut very low in the
back, revealing her
charming shoulders. 
The
men implored her to dance
for them. . . . To soft
music she floated into the
room in her diaphanous
Greek robe. Her head was
bound with a muslin fichu.
She bowed timidly to the
audience, and then,
spinning round lightly, she
shook a transparent scarf
with her fingertips, so that
in turns it billowed into the
semblance of a drapery, a
veil, a cloud. All this with
a strange blend of precision
and languor. She used her
eyes in a subtle fascinating
way— "she danced with
her eyes." The women
thought that all that
serpentine undulating of
the body, all that
nonchalant 
rhythmic
nodding of the head, were
sensuous; the men were
wafted into a realm of
187
188 
• 
The Art of Seduction
singing a love song. And now, suddenly, she changed: there was a roguish
look in her eye as she glanced at him. The angelic voice, the glances, the
energy animating her face, sent his mind reeling. He was confused. When
the same thing happened the next night, the prince decided to extend his
stay at the château.
In the days that followed, the prince and Madame Récamier took walks
together, rowed out on the lake, and attended dances, where he finally held
her in his arms. They would talk late into the night. But nothing grew clear
to him: she would seem so spiritual, so noble, and then there would be
a touch of the hand, a sudden flirtatious remark. After two weeks at the
château, the most eligible bachelor in Europe forgot all his libertine habits
and proposed marriage to Madame Récamier. He would convert to Catholi-
cism, her religion, and she would divorce her much older husband. (She
had told him her marriage had never been consummated and so the
Catholic church could annul it.) She would then come to live with him in
Prussia. Madame promised to do as he wished. The prince hurried off to
Prussia to seek the approval of his family, and Madame returned to Paris
to secure the required annulment. Auguste flooded her with love letters,
and waited. Time passed; he felt he was going mad. Then, finally, a letter:
she had changed her mind.
Some months later, Madame Récamier sent Auguste a gift: Gérard's fa-
mous painting of her reclining on a sofa. The prince spent hours in front of
it, trying to pierce the mystery behind her gaze. He had joined the com-
pany of her conquests—of men like the writer Benjamin Constant, who
said of her, "She was my last love. For the rest of my life I was like a tree
struck by lightning."
Interpretation. Madame Récamier's list of conquests became only more
impressive as she grew older: there was Prince Metternich, the Duke of
Wellington, the writers Constant and Chateaubriand. For all of these men
she was an obsession, which only increased in intensity when they were
away from her. The source of her power was twofold. First, she had an an-
gelic face, which drew men to her. It appealed to paternal instincts, charm-
ing with its innocence. But then there was a second quality peeking
through, in the flirtatious looks, the wild dancing, the sudden gaiety—all
these caught men off guard. Clearly there was more to her than they had
thought, an intriguing complexity. When alone, they would find them-
selves pondering these contradictions, as if a poison were coursing through
their blood. Madame Récamier was an enigma, a problem that had to be
solved. Whatever it was that you wanted, whether a coquettish she-devil or
an unattainable goddess, she could seem to be. She surely encouraged this
illusion by keeping her men at a certain distance, so they could never figure
her out. And she was the queen of the calculated effect, like her surprise
entrance at the Château de Coppet, which made her the center of atten-
tion, if only for a few seconds.
unearthly bliss. Juliette was
an ange fatal, and much
more dangerous for looking
like an angel! The music
grew fainter. 
Suddenly, by
a deft trick, Juliette's
chestnut hair was loosened
and fell in clouds around
her. A little out of breath,
she disappeared into her
dimly lit boudoir. And
there the crowd followed
her and beheld her reclining
on her daybed in a loose
tea-gown, 
looking
fashionably pale, 
like
Gérard's Psyche, while her
maids cooled her brow with
toilet water.
—MARGARET TROUNCER,
MADAME 
RÉCAMIER
The idea that two distinct
elements are combined in
Mona Lisa's smile is one
that has struck several
critics. They accordingly
find in the beautiful
Florentine's expression the
most perfect representation
of the contrasts that
dominate the erotic life of
women; the contrast
between reserve and
seduction, and between the
most devoted tenderness
and a sensuality that is
ruthlessly 
demanding—
consuming men as if they
were alien beings.
—SIGMUND 
FREUD, 
LEONARDO
DA VINCI AND A 
MEMORY 
OF
HIS 
CHILDHOOD, 
TRANSLATED
BY ALAN TYSON
[Oscar Wilde's] hands
were fat and flabby; his
handshake lacked grip, and
at a first encounter one
recoiled from its plushy
limpness, but this aversion
was soon overcome when
he began to talk, for his
genuine kindliness and
desire to please made one
forget what was unpleasant
Send Mixed Signals • 
189
The seductive process involves filling someone's mind with your image.
Your innocence, or your beauty, or your flirtatiousness can attract their at-
tention but not their obsession; they will soon move on to the next striking
image. To deepen their interest, you must hint at a complexity that cannot
be grasped in a week or two. You are an elusive mystery, an irresistible lure,
promising great pleasure if only it can be possessed. Once they begin to
fantasize about you, they are on the brink of the slippery slope of seduc-
tion, and will not be able to stop themselves from sliding down.
Artificial and Natural
T
he big Broadway hit of 1881 was Gilbert and Sullivan's operetta Pa-
tience, a satire on the bohemian world of aesthetes and dandies that had
become so fashionable in London. To cash in on this vogue, the operetta's
promoters decided to invite one of England's most infamous aesthetes to
America for a lecture tour: Oscar Wilde. Only twenty-seven at the time,
Wilde was more famous for his public persona than for his small body of
work. The American promoters were confident that their public would be
fascinated by this man, whom they imagined as always walking around with
a flower in his hand, but they did not expect it to last; he would do a few
lectures, then the novelty would wear off, and they would ship him home.
The money was good and Wilde accepted. On his arrival in New York, a
customs man asked him whether he had anything to declare: "I have noth-
ing to declare," he replied, "except my genius."
The invitations poured in—New York society was curious to meet this
oddity. Women found Wilde enchanting, but the newspapers were less
kind; The New York Times called him an "aesthetic sham." Then, a week af-
ter his arrival, he gave his first lecture. The hall was packed; more than a
thousand people came, many of them just to see what he looked like. They
were not disappointed. Wilde did not carry a flower, and was taller than
they had expected, but he had long flowing hair and wore a green velvet
suit and cravat, as well as knee breeches and silk stockings. Many in the au-
dience were put off; as they looked up at him from their seats, the combi-
nation of his large size and pretty attire were rather repulsive. Some people
openly laughed, others could not hide their unease. They expected to hate
the man. Then he began to speak.
The subject was the "English Renaissance," the "art for art's sake"
movement in late-nineteenth-century England. Wilde's voice proved hyp-
notic; he spoke in a kind of meter, mannered and artificial, and few really
understood what he was saying, but the speech was so witty, and it flowed.
His appearance was certainly strange, but overall, no New Yorker had ever
seen or heard such an intriguing man, and the lecture was a huge success.
Even the newspapers warmed up to it. In Boston a few weeks later, some
sixty Harvard boys had prepared an ambush: they would make fun of this
effeminate poet by dressing in knee breeches, carrying flowers, and ap-
in his physical appearance
and contact, gave charm to
his manners, and grace to
his precision of speech. The
first sight of him affected
people in various ways.
Some could hardly restrain
their laughter, others felt
hostile, a few were afflicted
with the "creeps" many
were conscious of being
uneasy, but except for a
small minority who could
never recover from the first
sensation of distaste and so
kept out of his way, both
sexes found him irresistible,
and to the young men of
his time, says W. B. Yeats,
he was like a triumphant
and audacious figure from
another age.
—HESKETH PEARSON, OSCAR
WILDE: 
HIS 
LIFE AND WIT
Once upon a time there
was a magnet, and in its
close neighborhood lived
some steel filings. One day
two or three little filings felt
a sudden desire to go and
visit the magnet, and they
began to talk of what a
pleasant thing it would be
to do. Other filings nearby
overheard their
conversation, and they, too,
became infected with the
same desire. Still others
joined them, till at last all
the filings began to discuss
the matter, and more and
more their vague desire
grew into an impulse.
"Why not go today?" said
one of them; but others
were of opinion that it
would be better to wait
until tomorrow.
Meanwhile, 
without their
having noticed it, they had
been involuntarily moving
nearer to the magnet,
which lay there quite still,
apparently taking no heed
of them. And so they went
on discussing, all the time
190 
• 
The Art of Seduction
plauding far too loudly at his entrance. Wilde was not the least bit flustered.
The audience laughed hysterically at his improvised comments, and when
the boys heckled him he kept his dignity, betraying no anger at all. Once
again, the contrast between his manner and his physical appearance made
him seem rather extraordinary. Many were deeply impressed, and Wilde
was well on his way to becoming a sensation.
The short lecture tour turned into a cross-country affair. In San Fran-
cisco, this visiting lecturer on art and aesthetics proved able to drink every-
one under the table and play poker, which made him the hit of the season.
On his way back from the West Coast, Wilde was to make stops in Colo-
rado, and was warned that if the pretty-boy poet dared to show up in the
mining town of Leadville, he would be hung from the highest tree. It was
an invitation Wilde could not refuse. Arriving in Leadville, he ignored the
hecklers and nasty looks; he toured the mines, drank and played cards, then
lectured on Botticelli and Cellini in the saloons. Like everyone else, the
miners fell under his spell, even naming a mine after him. One cowboy was
heard to say, "That fellow is some art guy, but he can drink any of us under
the table and afterwards carry us home two at a time."
Interpretation. In a fable he improvised at dinner once, Oscar Wilde talked
about some steel filings that had a sudden desire to visit a nearby magnet.
As they talked to each other about this, they found themselves moving
closer to the magnet without realizing how or why. Finally they were swept
in one mass to the magnet's side. "Then the magnet smiled—for the steel
filings had no doubt at all but that they were paying that visit of their
own free will." Such was the effect that Wilde himself had on everyone
around him.
Wilde's attractiveness was more than just a by-product of his character,
it was quite calculated. An adorer of paradox, he consciously played up his
own weirdness and ambiguity, the contrast between his mannered appear-
ance and his witty, effortless performance. Naturally warm and sponta-
neous, he constructed an image that ran counter to his nature. People were
repelled, confused, intrigued, and finally drawn to this man who seemed
impossible to figure out.
Paradox is seductive because it plays with meaning. We are secretly op-
pressed by the rationality in our lives, where everything is meant to mean
something; seduction, by contrast, thrives on ambiguity, on mixed signals,
on anything that eludes interpretation. Most people are painfully obvious.
If their character is showy, we may be momentarily attracted, but the at-
traction wears off; there is no depth, no contrary motion, to pull us in. The
key to both attracting and holding attention is to radiate mystery. And no
one is naturally mysterious, at least not for long; mystery is something you
have to work at, a ploy on your part, and something that must be used early
on in the seduction. Let one part of your character show, so everyone no-
tices it. (In the example of Wilde, this was the mannered affectation con-
insensibly drawing nearer
to their neighbor; and the
more they talked, the more
they felt the impulse
growing stronger, till the
more impatient ones
declared that they would go
that day, whatever the rest
did. Some were heard to
say that it was their duty
to visit the magnet, and
they ought to have gone
long ago. And, while they
talked, they moved always
nearer and nearer, without
realizing that they had
moved. Then, at last, the
impatient ones prevailed,
and, with one irresistible
impulse, the whole body
cried out, "There is no use
waiting. We will go today.
We will go now. We will
go at once." And then in
one unanimous mass they
swept along, and in
another moment were
clinging fast to the magnet
on every side. Then the
magnet smiled—for the
steel filings had no doubt
at all but that they were
paying that visit of their
own free will.
— O S C A R WILDE, AS QUOTED BY
RICHARD LE GALLIENNE IN
HESKETH 
PEARSON, OSCAR
WILDE: HIS 
LIFE 
AND 
WIT
Now that the bohort
[impromptu joust] was over
and the knights were
dispersing and each making
his way to where his
thoughts inclined him, it
chanced that Rivalin was
heading for where lovely
Blancheflor 
was sitting.
Seeing this, he galloped up
to her and looking her in
the eyes saluted her most
pleasantly. • "God save
you, lovely woman!" •
"Thank you," said the
girl, and continued very
bashfully, 
"may God
Almighty, who makes all
hearts glad, gladden your
heart and mind! And my
Send Mixed Signals 
• 
191
veyed by his clothes and poses.) But also send out a mixed signal—some
sign that you are not what you seem, a paradox. Do not worry if this
underquality is a negative one, like danger, cruelty, or amorality; people
will be drawn to the enigma anyway, and pure goodness is rarely seductive.
Paradox with him was only truth standing on its head to
attract attention.
—RICHARD LE GALLIENNE, ON HIS FRIEND OSCAR WILDE
Keys to Seduction
N
othing can proceed in seduction unless you can attract and hold your
victim's attention, your physical presence becoming a haunting men-
tal presence. It is actually quite easy to create that first stir—an alluring style
of dress, a suggestive glance, something extreme about you. But what hap-
pens next? Our minds are barraged with images—not just from media but
from the disorder of daily life. And many of these images are quite striking.
You become just one more thing screaming for attention; your attractive-
ness will pass unless you spark the more enduring kind of spell that makes
people think of you in your absence. That means engaging their imagina-
tions, making them think there is more to you than what they see. Once
they start embellishing your image with their fantasies, they are hooked.
This must, however, be done early on, before your targets know too
much and their impressions of you are set. It should occur the moment
they lay eyes on you. By sending mixed signals in that first encounter, you
create a little surprise, a little tension: you seem to be one thing (innocent,
brash, intellectual, witty), but you also throw them a glimpse of something
else (devilish, shy, spontaneous, sad). Keep things subtle: if the second
quality is too strong, you will seem schizophrenic. But make them wonder
why you might be shy or sad underneath your brash intellectual wit, and
you will have their attention. Give them an ambiguity that lets them see
what they want to see, capture their imagination with little voyeuristic
glimpses into your dark soul.
The Greek philosopher Socrates was one of history's greatest seducers;
the young men who followed him as students were not just fascinated by
his ideas, they fell in love with him. One such youth was Alcibiades, the
notorious playboy who became a powerful political figure near the end of
the fifth century B.C. In Plato's Symposium, Alcibiades describes Socrates's
seductive powers by comparing him to the little figures of Silenus that were
made back then. In Greek myth, Silenus was quite ugly, but also a wise
prophet. Accordingly the statues of Silenus were hollow, and when you
took them apart, you would find little figures of gods inside them—the in-
ner truth and beauty under the unappealing exterior. And so, for Alci-
biades, it was the same with Socrates, who was so ugly as to be repellent but
whose face radiated inner beauty and contentment. The effect was confus-
grateful thanks to you!—
yet not forgetting a bone I
have to pick with you." •
"Ah, sweet woman, what
have I done?" was
courteous Rivalin's reply. •
"You have annoyed me
through a friend of mine,
the best I ever had. " •
"Good heavens," thought
he, "what does this mean?
What have I done to
displease her? What does
she say I have done?" and
he imagined that
unwittingly he must have
injured a kinsman of hers
some time at their knightly
sports and that was why
she was vexed with him.
But no, the friend she
referred to was her heart, in
which he made her suffer:
that was the friend she
spoke of But he knew
nothing of that. • "Lovely
woman," he said with all
his accustomed charm, "I
do not want you to be
angry with me or bear me
any ill will. So, if what
you tell me is true,
pronounce sentence on me
yourself: I will do whatever
you command." • "I do
not hate you overmuch for
what has happened," was
the sweet girl's answer,
"nor do I love you for it.
But to see what amends
you will make for the
wrong you have done me, I
shall test you another
time." • And so he bowed
as if to go, and she, lovely
girl, sighed at him most
secretly and said with
tender feeling: • "Ah, dear
friend, 
God bless you!"
From this time on the
thoughts of each ran on the
other. • Rivalin turned
away, pondering many
things. He pondered from
many sides why
Blancheflor should be
vexed, and what lay
behind it all. He
considered her greeting, her
192 
• 
The Art of Seduction
ing and attractive. Antiquity's other great seducer, Cleopatra, also sent out
mixed signals: by all accounts physically alluring, in voice, face, body, and
manner, she also had a brilliantly active mind, which for many writers of
the time made her seem somewhat masculine in spirit. These contrary
qualities gave her complexity, and complexity gave her power.
To capture and hold attention, you need to show attributes that go
against your physical appearance, creating depth and mystery. If you have a
sweet face and an innocent air, let out hints of something dark, even
vaguely cruel in your character. It is not advertised in your words, but in
your manner. The actor Errol Flynn had a boyishly angelic face and a slight
air of sadness. Beneath this outward appearance, however, women could
sense an underlying cruelty, a criminal streak, an exciting kind of danger-
ousness. This play of contrary qualities attracted obsessive interest. The
female equivalent is the type epitomized by Marilyn Monroe; she had
the face and voice of a little girl, but something sexual and naughty em-
anated powerfully from her as well. Madame Récamier did it all with her
eyes—the gaze of an angel, suddenly interrupted by something sensual and
flirtatious.
Playing with gender roles is a kind of intriguing paradox that has a long
history in seduction. The greatest Don Juans have had a touch of prettiness
and femininity, and the most attractive courtesans have had a masculine
streak. The strategy, though, is only powerful when the underquality is
merely hinted at; if the mix is too obvious or striking it will seem bizarre or
even threatening. The great seventeenth-century French courtesan Ninon
de l'Enclos was decidedly feminine in appearance, yet everyone who met
her was struck by a touch of aggressiveness and independence in her—but
just a touch. The late nineteenth-century Italian novelist Gabriele d'An-
nunzio was certainly masculine in his approaches, but there was a gentle-
ness, a consideration, mixed in, and an interest in feminine finery The
combinations can be juggled every which way: Oscar Wilde was quite
feminine in appearance and manner, but the underlying suggestion that he
was actually quite masculine drew both men and women to him.
A potent variation on this theme is the blending of physical heat and
emotional coldness. Dandies like Beau Brummel and Andy Warhol com-
bine striking physical appearances with a kind of coldness of manner, a dis-
tance from everything and everyone. They are both enticing and elusive,
and people spend lifetimes chasing after such men, trying to shatter their
unattainability. (The power of apparently unattainable people is devilishly
seductive; we want to be the one to break them down.) They also wrap
themselves in ambiguity and mystery, either talking very little or talking
only of surface matters, hinting at a depth of character you can never reach.
When Marlene Dietrich entered a room, or arrived at a party, all eyes in-
evitably turned to her. First there were her startling clothes, chosen to make
heads turn. Then there was her air of nonchalant indifference. Men, and
women too, became obsessed with her, thinking of her long after other
memories of the evening had faded. Remember: that first impression, that
words; he examined her
sigh minutely, 
her farewell,
he whole behavior. . . But
since he was uncertain of
her motive—whether she
had acted from enmity or
love—he 
wavered in
perplexity. 
He wavered
in his thoughts now here,
now there. At one moment
he was off in one direction,
then suddenly in another,
till he had so ensnared
himself in the toils of his
own desire that he was
powerless to escape . . . •
His entanglement had
placed him in a quandary,
for he did not know
whether she wished him
well or ill; he could not
make out whether she
loved or hated him. No
hope or despair did he
consider which did not
forbid him either to advance
or retreat—hope and
despair led him to and fro
in unresolved dissension.
Hope spoke to him of love,
despair of hatred. Because
of this discord he could
yield his firm belief neither
to hatred nor yet to love.
Thus his feelings drifted in
an unsure haven—hope
bore him on, despair away.
He found no constancy in
either; they agreed neither
one way or another. When
despair came and told him
that his Blancheflor was
his enemy he faltered and
sought to escape: but at
once came hope, bringing
him her love, and a fond
aspiration, and so perforce
he remained. In the face of
such discord he did not
know where to turn: no-
where could he go forward.
The more he strove to flee,
the more firmly love forced
him back. The harder he
struggled to escape, love
drew him back more firmly.
—GOTTFRIED VON STRASSBURG,
TRISTAN, TRANSLATED BY A . T .
HATTO
Send Mixed Signals 
• 
193
entrance, is critical. To show too much desire for attention is to signal inse-
curity, and will often drive people away; play it too cold and disinterested,
on the other hand, and no one will bother coming near. The trick is
to combine the two attitudes at the same moment. It is the essence of
coquetry.
Perhaps you have a reputation for a particular quality, which im-
mediately comes to mind when people see you. You will better hold their
attention by suggesting that behind this reputation some other quality lies
lurking. No one had a darker, more sinful reputation than Lord Byron.
What drove women wild was that behind his somewhat cold and disdainful
exterior, they could sense that he was actually quite romantic, even spiri-
tual. Byron played this up with his melancholic airs and occasional kind
deed. Transfixed and confused, many women thought that they could be
the one to lead him back to goodness, to make him a faithful lover. Once a
woman entertained such a thought, she was completely under his spell. It is
not difficult to create such a seductive effect. Should you be known as emi-
nently rational, say, hint at something irrational. Johannes, the narrator in
Kierkegaard's The Seducer's Diary, first treats the young Cordelia with
businesslike politeness, as his reputation would lead her to expect. Yet she
very soon overhears him making remarks that hint at a wild, poetic streak
in his character; and she is excited and intrigued.
These principles have applications far beyond sexual seduction. To hold
the attention of a broad public, to seduce them into thinking about you,
you need to mix your signals. Display too much of one quality—even if it
is a noble one, like knowledge or efficiency—and people will feel that you
lack humanity. We are all complex and ambiguous, full of contradictory
impulses; if you show only one side, even if it is your good side, you will
wear on people's nerves. They will suspect you are a hypocrite. Mahatma
Gandhi, a saintly figure, openly confessed to feelings of anger and venge-
fulness. John F. Kennedy, the most seductive American public figure of
modern times, was a walking paradox: an East Coast aristocrat with a love
of the common man, an obviously masculine man—a war hero—with a
vulnerability you could sense underneath, an intellectual who loved popu-
lar culture. People were drawn to Kennedy like the steel filings in Wilde's
fable. A bright surface may have a decorative charm, but what draws your
eye into a painting is a depth of field, an inexpressible ambiguity, a surreal
complexity.
194 
• 
The Art of Seduction
Symbol: The Theater Curtain. Onstage, the curtain's heavy deep-red
folds attract your eye with their hypnotic surface. But what really
fascinates and draws you in is what you think might be happen-
ing behind the curtain—the light peeking through, the
suggestion of a secret, something about to happen.
You feel the thrill of a voyeur about to
watch a performance.
Reversal
T
he complexity you signal to other people will only affect them prop-
erly if they have the capacity to enjoy a mystery. Some people like
things simple, and lack the patience to pursue a person who confuses them.
They prefer to be dazzled and overwhelmed. The great Belle Epoque cour-
tesan known as La Belle Otero would work a complex magic on artists and
political figures who fell for her, but in dealing with the more uncompli-
cated, sensual male she would astound them with spectacle and beauty.
When meeting a woman for the first time, Casanova might dress in the
most fantastic outfit, with jewels and brilliant colors to dazzle the eye; he
would use the target's reaction to gauge whether or not she would demand
a more complicated seduction. Some of his victims, particularly young
girls, needed no more than the glittering and spellbinding appearance,
which was really what they wanted, and the seduction would stay on that
level.
Everything depends on your target: do not bother creating depth for
people who are insensitive to it, or who may even be put off or disturbed
by it. You can recognize such types by their preference for the simpler plea-
sures in life, their lack of patience for a more nuanced story. With them,
keep it simple.
Appear to Be an Object of Desire
—Create Triangles
Few are drawn to the person whom others avoid or ne-
glect; people gather around those who have already at-
tracted interest. We want what other people want. To draw
your victims closer and make them hungry to possess you, you
must create an aura of desirability—of being wanted and
courted by many. It will become a point of vanity for them to
be the preferred object of your attention, to win you away from
a crowd of admirers. Manufacture the illusion of popularity
by surrounding yourself with members of the opposite
sex—friends, former lovers, present suitors. Create tri-
angles that stimulate rivalry and raise your value.
Build a reputation that precedes you: if many
have succumbed to your charms,
there must be a reason.
Creating Triangles
O
ne evening in 1882, the thirty-two-year-old Prussian philosopher
Paul Rée, living in Rome at the time, visited the house of an older
woman who ran a salon for writers and artists. Rée noticed a newcomer
there, a twenty-one-year-old Russian girl named Lou von Salomé, who
had come to Rome on holiday with her mother. Rée introduced himself
and they began a conversation that lasted well into the night. Her ideas
about God and morality were like his own; she talked with such intensity,
yet at the same time her eyes seemed to flirt with him. Over the next few
days Rée and Salomé took long walks through the city. Intrigued by her
mind yet confused by the emotions she aroused, he wanted to spend more
time with her. Then, one day, she startled him with a proposition: she
knew he was a close friend of the philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche, then
also visiting Italy. The three of them, she said, should travel together—no,
actually live together, in a kind of philosophers' menage a trois. A fierce
critic of Christian morals, Rée found this idea delightful. He wrote to his
friend about Salomé, describing how desperate she was to meet him. After
a few such letters, Nietzsche hurried to Rome.
Rée had made this invitation to please Salomé, and to impress her; he
also wanted to see if Nietzsche shared his enthusiasm for the young girl's
ideas. But as soon as Nietzsche arrived, something unpleasant happened:
the great philosopher, who had always been a loner, was obviously smitten
with Salomé. Instead of the three of them sharing intellectual conversa-
tions together, Nietzsche seemed to be conspiring to get the girl alone.
When Rée caught glimpses of Nietzsche and Salomé talking without in-
cluding him, he felt shivers of jealousy. Forget about some philosophers'
menage a trois: Salomé was his, he had discovered her, and he would not
share her, even with his good friend. Somehow he had to get her alone.
Only then could he woo and win her.
Madame Salomé had planned to escort her daughter back to Russia,
but Salomé wanted to stay in Europe. Rée intervened, offering to travel
with the Salomés to Germany and introduce them to his own mother,
who, he promised, would look after the girl and act as a chaperone. (Rée
knew that his mother would be a lax guardian at best.) Madame Salomé
agreed to this proposal, but Nietzsche was harder to shake: he decided to
join them on their northward journey to Rée's home in Prussia. At one
point in the trip, Nietzsche and Salomé took a walk by themselves, and
Let me tell you about a
gentleman I once knew
who, although he was of
pleasing appearance and
modest behavior, and also a
very capable warrior, was
not so outstanding as
regards any of these
qualities that there were
not to be found many who
were his equal and even
better. However, as luck
would have it, a certain
lady fell very deeply in love
with him. She saw that he
felt the same way, and as
her love grew day by day,
there not being any way for
them to speak to each
other, she revealed her
sentiments to another lady,
who she hoped would be of
service to her in this affair.
Now this lady neither in
rank nor beauty was a whit
inferior to the first; and it
came about that when she
heard the young man
(whom she had never seen)
spoken of so affectionately,
and came to realize that
the other woman, whom
she knew was extremely
discreet and intelligent,
loved him beyond words,
she straight away began to
imagine that he must be
the most handsome, the
wisest, the most discreet of
men, and, in short, the
197
198 
• 
The Art of Seduction
when they came back, Rée had the feeling that something physical had
happened between them. His blood boiled; Salomé was slipping from his
grasp.
Finally the group split up, the mother returning to Russia, Nietzsche to
his summer place in Tautenburg, Rée and Salomé staying behind at Rée's
home. But Salomé did not stay long: she accepted an invitation of Nietz-
sche's to visit him, unchaperoned, in Tautenburg. In her absence Rée was
consumed with doubts and anger. He wanted her more than ever, and was
prepared to redouble his efforts. When she finally came back, Rée vented
his bitterness, railing against Nietzsche, criticizing his philosophy, and ques-
tioning his motives toward the girl. But Salomé took Nietzsche's side. Rée
was in despair; he felt he had lost her for good. Yet a few days later she sur-
prised him again: she had decided she wanted to live with him, and with
him alone.
At last Rée had what he had wanted, or so he thought. The couple set-
tled in Berlin, where they rented an apartment together. But now, to Rée's
dismay, the old pattern repeated. They lived together but Salomé was
courted on all sides by young men. The darling of Berlin's intellectuals,
who admired her independent spirit, her refusal to compromise, she was
constantly surrounded by a harem of men, who referred to her as "Her Ex-
cellency." Once again Rée found himself competing for her attention.
Driven to despair, he left her a few years later, and eventually committed
suicide.
In 1911, Sigmund Freud met Salomé (now known as Lou Andreas-
Salomé) at a conference in Germany. She wanted to devote herself to the
psychoanalytical movement, she said, and Freud found her enchanting, al-
though, like everyone else, he knew the story of her infamous affair with
Nietzsche (see page 46, "The Dandy"). Salomé had no background in psy-
choanalysis or in therapy of any kind, but Freud admitted her into the in-
ner circle of followers who attended his private lectures. Soon after she
joined the circle, one of Freud's most promising and brilliant students, Dr.
Victor Tausk, sixteen years younger than Salomé, fell in love with her. Sa-
lomé's relationship with Freud had been platonic, but he had grown ex-
tremely fond of her. He was depressed when she missed a lecture, and
would send her notes and flowers. Her involvement in a love affair with
Tausk made him intensely jealous, and he began to compete for her atten-
tion. Tausk had been like a son to him, but the son was threatening to steal
the father's platonic lover. Soon, however, Salomé left Tausk. Now her
friendship with Freud was stronger than ever, and so it lasted until her
death, in 1937.
Interpretation. Men did not just fall in love with Lou Andreas-Salomé;
they were overwhelmed with the desire to possess her, to wrest her away
from others, to be the proud owner of her body and spirit. They rarely saw
her alone; she always in some way surrounded herself with other men.
man most worthy of her
love in all the world. So,
never having set eyes on
him, she fell in love with
him so passionately that
she set out to win him not
for her friend but for
herself And in this she
succeeded with little effort,
for indeed she was a
woman more to be wooed
than to do the wooing.
And now listen to the
splendid sequel: not long
afterward it happened that
a letter which she had
written to her lover fell into
the hands of another
woman of comparable
rank, charm, and beauty;
and since she, like most
women, was curious and
eager to learn secrets, she
opened the letter and read
it. Realizing that it was
written from the depths of
passion, in the most loving
and ardent terms, she was
at first moved with
compassion, for she knew
very well from whom the
letter came and to whom it
was addressed; then,
however, such was the
power of the words she
read, turning them over in
her mind and considering
what kind of man it must
be who had been able to
arouse such great love, she
at once began to fall in love
with him herself; and the
letter was without doubt far
more effective than if the
young man had himself
written it to her. And just
as it sometimes happens
that the poison prepared for
a prince kills the one who
tastes his food, so that poor
woman, in her greediness,
drank the love potion
prepared for another. 
What
more is there to say? The
affair was no secret, and
things so developed that
many other women besides,
partly to spite the others
and partly to follow their
Appear to Be an Object of Desire—Create Triangles • 
199
When she saw that Rée was interested in her, she mentioned her desire to
meet Nietzsche. This inflamed Rée, and made him want to marry her and
to keep him for himself, but she insisted on meeting his friend. His letters
to Nietzsche betrayed his desire for this woman, and this in turn kindled
Nietzsche's own desire for her, even before he had met her. Every time one
of the two men was alone with her, the other was in the background.
Then, later on, most of the men who met her knew of the infamous
Nietzsche affair, and this only increased their desire to possess her, to com-
pete with Nietzsche's memory. Freud's affection for her, similarly, turned
into potent desire when he had to vie with Tausk for her attention. Salomé
was intelligent and attractive enough on her own account; but her constant
strategy of imposing a triangle of relationships on her suitors made her de-
sirability intense. And while they fought over her, she had the power, being
desired by all and subject to none.
Our desire for another person almost always involves social considera-
tions: we are attracted to those who are attractive to other people. We want
to possess them and steal them away. You can believe all the sentimental
nonsense you want to about desire, but in the end, much of it has to do
with vanity and greed. Do not whine and moralize about people's selfish-
ness, but simply use it to your advantage. The illusion that you are desired
by others will make you more attractive to your victims than your beautiful
face or your perfect body. And the most effective way to create that illusion
is to create a triangle: impose another person between you and your victim,
and subtly make your victim aware of how much this other person wants
you. The third point on the triangle does not have to be just one person:
surround yourself with admirers, reveal your past conquests—in other
words, envelop yourself in an aura of desirability. Make your targets com-
pete with your past and your present. They will long to possess you all to
themselves, giving you great power for as long as you elude their grasp. Fail
to make yourself an object of desire right from the start, and you will end
up the sorry slave to the whims of your lovers—they will abandon you the
moment they lose interest.
[A person] will desire any object so long as he is convinced
that it is desired by another person whom he admires.
—RENÉ 
GIRARD
Keys to Seduction
W
e are social creatures, and are immensely influenced by the tastes and
desires of other people. Imagine a large social gathering. You see a
man alone, whom nobody talks to for any length of time, and who is wan-
dering around without company; isn't there a kind of self-fulfilling isola-
tion about him? Why is he alone, why is he avoided? There has to be a
reason. Until someone takes pity on this man and starts up a conversation
example, put every care
and effort into winning this
man's love, squabbling over
it for a while as boys do
for cherries.
—BALDASSARE CASTIGLIONE,
THE BOOK 
OFTHE 
COURTIER,
TRANSLATED BY GEORGE BULL
Most of the time we prefer
one thing to another
because that is what our
friends already prefer or
because that object has
marked social significance.
Adults, when they are
hungry, are just like
children in that they seek
out the foods that others
take. In their love affairs,
they seek out the man or
woman whom others find
attractive and abandon
those who are not sought
after. When we say of a
man or woman that he or
she is desirable, what we
really mean is that others
desire them. It is not that
they have some particular
quality, but because they
conform to some currently
modish model.
—SERGE MOSCOVICI, THE AGE
OF 
THE 
CROWD:A 
HISTORICAL
TREATISE 
ON MASS 
PSYCHOL-
OGY, TRANSLATED BY J. C.
WHITEHOUSE
It will be greatly to your
advantage to entertain the
lady you would win with
an account of the number
of women who are in love
with you, and of the
decided advances which
they have made to you; for
this will not only prove
that you are a great favorite
with the ladies, and a man
of true honor, but it will
convince her that she may
have the honor of being
enrolled in the same list,
and of being praised in the
200 
• The Art of Seduction
with him, he will look unwanted and unwantable. But over there, in an-
other corner, is a woman surrounded by people. They laugh at her remarks,
and as they laugh, others join the group, attracted by its gaiety. When she
moves around, people follow. Her face is glowing with attention. There has
to be a reason.
In both cases, of course, there doesn't actually have to be a reason at
all. The neglected man may have quite charming qualities, supposing you
ever talk to him; but most likely you won't. Desirability is a social illu-
sion. Its source is less what you say or do, or any kind of boasting or self-
advertisement, than the sense that other people desire you. To turn your
targets' interest into something deeper, into desire, you must make them
see you as a person whom others cherish and covet. Desire is both imitative
(we like what others like) and competitive (we want to take away from oth-
ers what they have). As children, we wanted to monopolize the attention of
a parent, to draw it away from other siblings. This sense of rivalry pervades
human desire, repeating throughout our lives. Make people compete for
your attention, make them see you as sought after by everyone else. The
aura of desirability will envelop you.
Your admirers can be friends or even suitors. Call it the harem effect.
Pauline Bonaparte, sister of Napoleon, raised her value in men's eyes by al-
ways having a group of worshipful men around her at balls and parties. If
she went for a walk, it was never with one man, always with two or three.
Perhaps these men were simply friends, or even just props and hangers-on;
the sight of them was enough to suggest that she was prized and desired, a
woman worth fighting over. Andy Warhol, too, surrounded himself with
the most glamorous, interesting people he could find. To be part of his in-
ner circle meant that you were desirable as well. By placing himself in the
middle but keeping himself aloof from it all, he made everyone compete
for his attention. He stirred people's desire to possess him by holding back.
Practices like these not only stimulate competitive desires, they take aim
at people's prime weakness: their vanity and self-esteem. We can endure
feeling that another person has more talent, or more money, but the sense
that a rival is more desirable than we are—that is unbearable. In the early
eighteenth century, the Duke de Richelieu, a great rake, managed to se-
duce a young woman who was rather religious but whose husband, a dolt,
was often away. He then proceeded to seduce her upstairs neighbor, a
young widow. When the two women discovered that he was going from
one to the other in the same night, they confronted him. A lesser man
would have fled, but not the duke; he understood the dynamic of vanity
and desire. Neither woman wanted to feel that he preferred the other. And
so he managed to arrange a little menage a trois, knowing that now they
would struggle between themselves to be the favorite. When people's vani-
ty is at risk, you can make them do whatever you want. According to
Stendhal, if there is a woman you are interested in, pay attention to her sis-
ter. That will stir a triangular desire.
Your reputation—your illustrious past as a seducer—is an effective way
same way, in the presence
of your 
other female
friends. 
This will greatly
delight her, and you need
not be surprised if she
testifies her admiration of
your character by throwing
her arms around your neck
on the spot.
— L O L A 
MONTEZ, THE ARTS
AND SECRETS OF BEAUTY, WITH
HINTS 
TO 
GENTLEMEN ON THE
ART 
OF FASCINATING
[René] Girard's mimetic
desire occurs when an
individual subject desires
an object because it is
desired by another subject,
here designated as the
rival: desire is modeled on
the wishes or actions of
another. 
Philippe Lacoue-
Labarthe says that "the
basic hypothesis upon
which rests Girard's famous
analysis [is that] every
desire is the desire of the
other (and not immediately
desire of an object), every
structure of desire is
triangular (including the
other—mediator 
or
model—whose 
desire desire
imitates), every desire is
thus from its inception
tapped by hatred and
rivalry; in short, the origin
of desire is mimesis—
mimeticism—and 
no
desire is ever forged which
does not desire forthwith
the death or disappearance
of the model or exemplary
character which gave rise
to it.
—JAMES 
MANDRELL,
DON JUAN AND THE POINT OF
H O N O R
Appear to Be an Object of Desire—Create Triangles • 201
of creating an aura of desirability. Women threw themselves at Errol Flynn's
feet, not because of his handsome face, and certainly not because of his
acting skills, but because of his reputation. They knew that other women
had found him irresistible. Once he had established that reputation, he did
not have to chase women anymore; they came to him. Men who believe
that a rakish reputation will make women fear or distrust them, and should
be played down, are quite wrong. On the contrary, it makes them more at-
tractive. The virtuous Duchess de Montpensier, the Grande Mademoiselle of
seventeenth-century France, began by enjoying a friendship with the rake
Lauzun, but a troubling thought soon occurred to her: if a man with
Lauzun's past did not see her as a possible lover, something had to be wrong
with her. This anxiety eventually pushed her into his arms. To be part of a
great seducer's club of conquests can be a matter of vanity and pride. We
are happy to be in such company, to have our name broadcast as this man or
woman's lover. Your own reputation may not be so alluring, but you must
find a way to suggest to your victim that others, many others, have found
you desirable. It is reassuring. There is nothing like a restaurant full of
empty tables to persuade you not to go in.
A variation on the triangle strategy is the use of contrasts: careful ex-
ploitation of people who are dull or unattractive may enhance your desir-
ability by comparison. At a social affair, for instance, make sure that your
target has to chat with the most boring person available. Come to the res-
cue and your target will be delighted to see you. In The Seducer's Diary, by
Søren Kierkegaard, Johannes has designs on the innocent young Cordelia.
Knowing that his friend Edward is hopelessly shy and dull, he encourages
this man to court her; a few weeks of Edward's attentions will make her
eyes wander in search of someone else, anyone else, and Johannes will make
sure that they settle on him. Johannes chose to strategize and maneuver, but
almost any social environment will contain contrasts you can make use of
almost naturally. The seventeenth-century English actress Nell Gwyn be-
came the main mistress of King Charles II because her humor and unaffect-
edness made her that much more desirable among the many stiff and
pretentious ladies of Charles's court. When the Shanghai actress Jiang Qing
met Mao Zedong, in 1937, she did not have to do much to seduce him;
the other women in his mountain camp in Yenan dressed like men, and
were decidedly unfeminine. The sight alone of Jiang was enough to seduce
Mao, who soon left his wife for her. To make use of contrasts, either de-
velop and display those attractive attributes (humor, vivacity, and so on) that
are the scarcest in your own social group, or choose a group in which your
natural qualities are rare, and will shine.
The use of contrasts has vast political ramifications, for a political figure
must also seduce and seem desirable. Learn to play up the qualities that your
rivals lack. Peter II, czar in eighteenth-century Russia, was arrogant and ir-
responsible, so his wife, Catherine the Great, did all she could to seem
modest and dependable. When Vladimir Lenin returned to Russia in 1917
after Czar Nicholas II had been deposed, he made a show of decisiveness
It's annoying that our new
acquaintance likes the boy.
But aren't the best things
in life free to all? The sun
shines on everyone. The
moon, accompanied by
countless stars, leads even
the beasts to pasture. What
can you think of lovelier
than water? But it flows
for the whole world. Is love
alone then something
furtive rather than
something to be gloried in?
Exactly, 
that's just it—I
don't want any of the good
things of life unless people
are envious of them.
—PETRONIUS, 
THE SATYRICON,
TRANSLATED BY J. P. SULLIVAN
202 
• 
The Art of Seduction
and discipline—precisely what no other leader had at the time. In the
American presidential race of 1980, the irresoluteness of Jimmy Carter
made the single-mindedness of Ronald Reagan look desirable. Contrasts
are eminently seductive because they do not depend on your own words or
self-advertisements. The public reads them unconsciously, and sees what it
wants to see.
Finally, appearing to be desired by others will raise your value, but often
how you carry yourself can influence this as well. Do not let your targets
see you so often; keep your distance, seem unattainable, out of their reach.
An object that is rare and hard to obtain is generally more prized.
Symbol: The Trophy.
What makes you want to win the trophy, and to see it as
something worth having, is the sight of the other competitors. Some,
out of a spirit of kindness, may want to reward everyone for trying, but
the Trophy then loses its value. It must represent not only
your victory but everyone else's defeat.
Reversal
T
here is no reversal. It is essential to appear desirable in the eyes of
others.
Create a Need—
Stir Anxiety and Discontent
A perfectly satisfied
person cannot be seduced. 
Tension and
disharmony must be instilled in your targets' minds. Stir
within them feelings of discontent, an unhappiness with their
circumstances and with themselves: their life lacks adventure, they
have strayed from the ideals of their youth, they have become boring.
The feelings of inadequacy that you create will give you space to in-
sinuate yourself, to make them see you as the answer to their
problems. Pain and anxiety are the proper precursors to
pleasure. Learn to manufacture the need
that 
you 
can fill.
Opening a Wound
I
n the coal-mining town of Eastwood, in central England, David Herbert
Lawrence was considered something of a strange lad. Pale and delicate,
he had no time for games or boyish pursuits, but was interested in litera-
ture; and he preferred the company of girls, who made up most of his
friends. Lawrence often visited the Chambers family, who had been his
neighbors until they moved out of Eastwood to a farm not far away. He
liked to study with the Chambers sisters, particularly Jessie; she was shy and
serious, and getting her to open up and confide in him was a pleasurable
challenge. Jessie grew quite attached to Lawrence over the years, and they
became good friends.
One day in 1906, Lawrence, twenty-one at the time, did not show up
at the usual hour for his study session with Jessie. He finally arrived much
later, in a mood she had never seen before—preoccupied and quiet. Now it
was her turn to make him open up. Finally he talked: he felt she was getting
too close to him. What about her future? Whom would she marry? Cer-
tainly not him, he said, for they were just friends. But it was unfair of him
to keep her from seeing others. They should of course remain friends and
have their talks, but maybe less often. When he finished and left, she felt a
strange emptiness. She had yet to think much about love or marriage. Sud-
denly she had doubts. What would her future be? Why wasn't she thinking
about it? She felt anxious and upset, without understanding why.
Lawrence continued to visit, but everything had changed. He criticized
her for this and that. She wasn't very physical. What kind of wife would
she make anyway? A man needed more from a woman than just talk. He
likened her to a nun. They began to see each other less often. When, some
time later, Lawrence accepted a teaching position at a school outside Lon-
don, she felt part relieved to be rid of him for a while. But when he said
goodbye to her, and intimated that it might be for the last time, she broke
down and cried. Then he started sending her weekly letters. He would
write about girls he was seeing; maybe one of them would be his wife. Fi-
nally, at his behest, she visited him in London. They got along well, as in
the old times, but he continued to badger her about her future, picking at
that old wound. At Christmas he was back in Eastwood, and when he vis-
ited her he seemed exultant. He had decided that it was Jessie he should
marry, that he had in fact been attracted to her all along. They should keep
it quiet for a while; although his writing career was taking off (his first
No one can fall in love if
he is even partially satisfied
with what he has or who
he is. The experience of
falling in love originates in
an extreme depression, an
inability to find something
that has value in everyday
life. The "symptom" of
the predisposition to fall in
love is not the conscious
desire to do so, the intense
desire to enrich our lives; it
is the profound sense of
being worthless and of
having nothing that is
valuable and the shame of
not having it. . . . For this
reason, falling in love
occurs more frequently
among young people, since
they are profoundly
uncertain, unsure of their
worth, and often ashamed
of themselves. 
The same
thing applies to people of
other ages when they lose
something in their lives—
when their youth ends or
when they start to grow
old.
—FRANCESCO ALBERONI,
FALLING IN LOVE, TRANSLATED
BY LAWRENCE VENUTI
205
206 
• 
The Art of Seduction
novel was about to be published), he needed to make more money. Caught
off guard by this sudden announcement, and overwhelmed with happiness,
Jessie agreed to everything, and they became lovers.
Soon, however, the familiar pattern repeated: criticisms, breakups, an-
nouncements that he was engaged to another girl. This only deepened his
hold on her. It was not until 1912 that she finally decided never to see him
again, disturbed by his portrayal of her in the autobiographical novel Sons
and Lovers. But Lawrence remained a lifelong obsession for her.
In 1913, a young English woman named Ivy Low, who had read
Lawrence's novels, began to correspond with him, her letters gushing with
admiration. By now Lawrence was married, to a German woman, the
Baroness Frieda von Richthofen. To Low's surprise, though, he invited her
to visit him and his wife in Italy. She knew he was probably something of a
Don Juan, but was eager to meet him, and accepted his invitation.
Lawrence was not what she had expected: his voice was high-pitched, his
eyes were piercing, and there was something vaguely feminine about him.
Soon they were taking walks together, with Lawrence confiding in Low.
She felt that they were becoming friends, which delighted her. Then sud-
denly, just before she was to leave, he launched into a series of criticisms of
her—she was so unspontaneous, so predictable, less human being than ro-
bot. Devastated by this unexpected attack, she nevertheless had to agree—
what he had said was true. What could he have seen in her in the first
place? Who was she anyway? Low left Italy feeling empty—but then
Lawrence continued to write to her, as if nothing had happened. She soon
realized that she had fallen hopelessly in love with him, despite everything
he had said to her. Or was it not despite what he had said, but because of it?
In 1914, the writer John Middleton-Murry received a letter from
Lawrence, a good friend of his. In the letter, out of nowhere, Lawrence
criticized Middleton-Murry for being passionless and not gallant enough
with his wife, the novelist Katherine Mansfield. Middleton-Murry later
wrote, "I had never felt for a man before what his letter made me feel for
him. It was a new thing, a unique thing, in my experience; and it was to re-
main unique." He felt that beneath Lawrence's criticisms lay some weird
kind of affection. Whenever he saw Lawrence from then on, he felt a
strange physical attraction that he could not explain.
Interpretation. The number of women, and of men, who fell under
Lawrence's spell is astonishing given how unpleasant he could be. In almost
every case the relationship began in friendship—with frank talks, exchanges
of confidences, a spiritual bond. Then, invariably, he would suddenly turn
against them, voicing harsh personal criticisms. He would know them well
by that time, and the criticisms were often quite accurate, and hit a nerve.
This would inevitably trigger confusion in his victims, and a sense of anxi-
ety, a feeling that something was wrong with them. Jolted out of their usual
sense of normality, they would feel divided inside. With half of their minds
"What can Love be
then?" I said. 
"A
mortal?" "Far from it."
"Well, what?" "As in my
previous examples, he is
half-way between mortal
and immortal." 
What 
sort
of being is he then,
Diotima?" "He is a great
spirit, Socrates; everything
that is of the nature of a
spirit is half-god and half-
man." . . . "Who are his
parents?" I asked. 
"That
is rather a long story," she
answered, 
"but I will tell
you. On the day that
Aphrodite was born the
gods were feasting, among
them Contrivance the son
of Invention; and after
dinner, seeing that a party
was in progress, Poverty
came to beg and stood at
the door. Now Contrivance
was drunk with nectar—
wine, I may say, had not
yet been discovered—and
went out into the garden of
Zeus, and was overcome by
sleep. So Poverty, thinking
to alleviate her wretched
condition by bearing a child
to Contrivance, lay with
him and conceived Love.
Since Love was begotten on
Aphrodite's birthday, 
and
since he has also an innate
passion for the beautiful,
and so for the beauty of
Aphrodite herself, he
became her follower and
servant. Again, 
having
Contrivance for 
his father
and Poverty for his
mother, he bears the
following character. He is
always poor, and, far from
being sensitive and
beautiful, as most people
imagine, he is hard and
weather-beaten, 
shoeless
and homeless, always
sleeping out for want of a
bed, on the ground, on
doorsteps, and in the street.
So far he takes after his
mother and lives in want.
But, being also his father's
Create a Need—Stir Anxiety and Discontent 
• 
207
they wondered why he was doing this, and felt he was unfair; with the
other half, they believed it was all true. Then, in those moments of self-
doubt, they would get a letter or a visit from him in which he was his old
charming self.
Now they saw him differently Now they were weak and vulnerable, in
need of something; and he would seem so strong. Now he drew them to
him, feelings of friendship turning into affection and desire. Once they felt
uncertain about themselves, they were susceptible to falling in love.
Most of us protect ourselves from the harshness of life by succumbing
to routines and patterns, by closing ourselves off from others. But underly-
ing these habits is a tremendous sense of insecurity and defensiveness. We
feel we are not really living. The seducer must pick at this wound and bring
these semiconscious thoughts into full awareness. This was what Lawrence
did: his sudden, brutally unexpected jabs would hit people at their weak
spot.
Although Lawrence had great success with his frontal approach, it is
often better to stir thoughts of inadequacy and uncertainty indirectly, by
hinting at comparisons to yourself or to others, and by insinuating some-
how that your victims' lives are less grand than they had imagined. You
want them to feel at war with themselves, torn in two directions, and anx-
ious about it. Anxiety, a feeling of lack and need, is the precursor of all de-
sire. These jolts in the victim's mind create space for you to insinuate your
poison, the siren call of adventure or fulfillment that will make them follow
you into your web. Without anxiety and a sense of lack there can be no
seduction.
Desire and love have for their object things or qualities
which a man does not at present possess but which he
lacks.
—SOCRATES
Keys to Seduction
E
veryone wears a mask in society; we pretend to be more sure of our-
selves than we are. We do not want other people to glimpse that
doubting self within us. In truth, our egos and personalities are much more
fragile than they appear to be; they cover up feelings of confusion and
emptiness. As a seducer, you must never mistake a person's appearance for
the reality. People are always susceptible to being seduced, because in fact
everyone lacks a sense of completeness, feels something missing deep in-
side. Bring their doubts and anxieties to the surface and they can be led and
lured to follow you.
No one can see you as someone to follow or fall in love with unless
they first reflect on themselves somehow, and on what they are missing. Be-
fore the seduction proceeds, you must place a mirror in front of them in
son, he schemes to get for
himself whatever is
beautiful and good; he is
bold and forward and
strenuous, always devising
tricks like a cunning
huntsman."
—PLATO, SYMPOSIUM,
TRANSLATED BY WALTER
HAMILTON
We are all like pieces of the
coins that children break in
half for keepsakes—
making two out of one,
like the flatfish—and each
of us is forever seeking the
half that will tally with
himself . . . And so all
this to-do is a relic of that
original state of ours when
we were whole, and now,
when we are longing for
and following after that
primeval wholeness, we say
we are in love.
—ARISTOPHANES'S SPEECH IN
PLATO'S SYMPOSIUM, QUOTED IN
JAMES 
MANDRELL, 
DON JUAN
AND THE 
POINT OF 
HONOR
Don John: 
Well met,
pretty lass! What! Are
there such handsome
Creatures as you amongst
these Fields, these Trees,
and Rocks? • Charlotta: I
am as you see, Sir. • Don
John: Are you of this
Village? • Charlotta: Yes,
Sir. • Don John: What's
your name? • Charlotta:
Charlotta, Sir, at your
Service. • Don John: Ah
what a fine Person 'tis!
What piercing Eyes! •
Charlotta: Sir, you make
me ashamed. . . . • Don
John: 
Pretty 
Charlotta,
you are not marry'd, are
you? • Charlotta: No, Sir,
but I am soon to be, with
Pierrot, son to Goody
Simonetta. 
• Don John:
What! Shou'd such a one
as you be Wife to a
208 
• The Art of Seduction
which they glimpse that inner emptiness. Made aware of a lack, they now
can focus on you as the person who can fill that empty space. Remember:
most of us are lazy. To relieve our feelings of boredom or inadequacy on
our own takes too much effort; letting someone else do the job is both
easier and more exciting. The desire to have someone fill up our emptiness
is the weakness on which all seducers prey. Make people anxious about the
future, make them depressed, make them question their identity, make
them sense the boredom that gnaws at their life. The ground is prepared.
The seeds of seduction can be sown.
In Plato's dialogue Symposium—the West's oldest treatise on love, and a
text that has had a determining influence on our ideas of desire—the cour-
tesan Diotima explains to Socrates the parentage of Eros, the god of love.
Eros's father was Contrivance, or Cunning, and his mother was Poverty, or
Need. Eros takes after his parents: he is constantly in need, which he is con-
stantly contriving to fill. As the god of love, he knows that love cannot be
induced in another person unless they too feel need. And that is what his
arrows do: piercing people's flesh, they make them feel a lack, an ache, a
hunger. This is the essence of your task as a seducer. Like Eros, you must
create a wound in your victim, aiming at their soft spot, the chink in their
self-esteem. If they are stuck in a rut, make them feel it more deeply, "in-
nocently" bringing it up and talking about it. What you want is a wound,
an insecurity you can expand a little, an anxiety that can best be relieved by
involvement with another person, namely you. They must feel the wound
before they fall in love. Notice how Lawrence stirred anxiety, always hitting
at his victims' weak spot: for Jessie Chambers, her physical coldness; for Ivy
Low, her lack of spontaneity; for Middleton-Murry, his lack of gallantry.
Cleopatra got Julius Caesar to sleep with her the first night he met her,
but the real seduction, the one that made him her slave, began later. In their
ensuing conversations she talked repeatedly of Alexander the Great, the
hero from whom she was supposedly descended. No one could compare to
him. By implication, Caesar was made to feel inferior. Understanding that
beneath his bravado Caesar was insecure, Cleopatra awakened in him an
anxiety, a hunger to prove his greatness. Once he felt this way he was easily
further seduced. Doubts about his masculinity was his tender spot.
When Caesar was assassinated, Cleopatra turned her sights on Mark
Antony, one of Caesar's successors in the leadership of Rome. Antony
loved pleasure and spectacle, and his tastes were crude. She appeared to him
first on her royal barge, then wined and dined and banqueted him. Every-
thing was geared to suggest to him the superiority of the Egyptian way of
life over the Roman, at least when it came to pleasure. The Romans were
boring and unsophisticated by comparison. And once Antony was made to
feel how much he was missing in spending his time with his dull soldiers
and his matronly Roman wife, he could be made to see Cleopatra as the in-
carnation of all that was exciting. He became her slave.
This is the lure of the exotic. In your role of seducer, try to position
yourself as coming from outside, as a stranger of sorts. You represent
Peasant! No, no; that's a
profanation of so much
Beauty. You was not born
to live in a Village. You
certainly deserve a better
Fortune, 
and Heaven,
which knows it well,
brought me hither on
purpose to hinder this
Marriage and do justice to
your Charms; for in short,
fair Charlotta, I love you
with all my Heart, and if
you'll 
consent I'll deliver
you from this miserable
Place, and put you in the
Condition you deserve.
This Love is doubtless
sudden, but 'tis an Effect of
your great Beauty. I love
you as much in a quarter of
an Hour as I shou'd
another in six Months.
—MOLIÈRE, 
DON 
JOHN; 
OR,
THE 
LIBERTINE, TRANSLATED BY
JOHN OZELL, IN OSCAR
MANDEL, ED., THE THEATRE OF
DON JUAN
For I stand tonight facing
west on what was once the
last frontier. From the
lands that stretch three
thousand miles behind me,
the pioneers of old gave up
their safety, their comfort,
and sometimes their lives to
build a new world here in
the 
West. They were not
the captives of their own
doubts, the prisoners of
their own price tags. Their
motto was not "every man
for 
himself—but 
"all 
for
the common cause." They
were determined to make
that new world strong and
free, to overcome its
hazards and its hardships,
to conquer the enemies that
threatened from 
without
and within. . . . • Today
some would say that those
struggles are all over—that
all the horizons have been
explored, that all the
battles have been won, that
there is no longer an
Create a Need—Stir Anxiety and Discontent 
• 
209
change, difference, a breakup of routines. Make your victims feel that by
comparison their lives are boring and their friends less interesting than they
had thought. Lawrence made his targets feel personally inadequate; if you
find it hard to be so brutal, concentrate on their friends, their circum-
stances, the externals of their lives. There are many legends of Don Juan,
but they often describe him seducing a village girl by making her feel that
her life is horribly provincial. He, meanwhile, wears glittering clothes and
has a noble bearing. Strange and exotic, he is always from somewhere else.
First she feels the boredom of her life, then she sees him as her salvation.
Remember: people prefer to feel that if their life is uninteresting, it not be-
cause of themselves but because of their circumstances, the dull people
they know, the town into which they were born. Once you make them feel
the lure of the exotic, seduction is easy.
Another devilishly seductive area to aim at is the victim's past. To grow
old is to renounce or compromise youthful ideals, to become less sponta-
neous, less alive in a way. This knowledge lies dormant in all of us. As a se-
ducer you must bring it to the surface, make it clear how far people have
strayed from their past goals and ideals. You, in turn, present yourself as
representing that ideal, as offering a chance to recapture lost youth through
adventure—through seduction. In her later years, Queen Elizabeth I of En-
gland was known as a rather stern and demanding ruler. She made it a point
not to let her courtiers see anything soft or weak in her. But then Robert
Devereux, the second Earl of Essex, came to court. Much younger than
the queen, the dashing Essex would often chastize her for her sourness.
The queen would forgive him—he was so exuberant and spontaneous, he
could not control himself. But his comments got under her skin; in the pres-
ence of Essex she came to remember all the youthful ideals—spiritedness,
feminine charm—that had since vanished from her life. She also felt a little
of that girlish spirit return when she was around him. He quickly became
her favorite, and soon she was in love with him. Old age is constantly se-
duced by youth, but first the young people must make it clear what the
older ones are missing, how they have lost their ideals. Only then will they
feel that the presence of the young will let them recapture that spark, the
rebellious spirit that age and society have conspired to repress.
This concept has infinite applications. Corporations and politicians
know that they cannot seduce their public into buying what they want
them to buy, or doing what they want them to do, unless they first awaken
a sense of need and discontent. Make the masses uncertain about their
identity and you can help define it for them. It is as true of groups or na-
tions as it is of individuals: they cannot be seduced without being made to
feel some lack. Part of John F. Kennedy's election strategy in 1960 was to
make Americans unhappy about the 1950s, and how far the country had
strayed from its ideals. In talking about the 1950s, he did not mention the
nation's economic stability or its emergence as a superpower. Instead, he
implied that the period was marked by conformity, a lack of risk and ad-
venture, a loss of our frontier values. To vote for Kennedy was to embark
American frontier. • But I
trust that no one in this
vast assemblage will agree
with those sentiments. . . .
• . . . I tell you the New
Frontier is here, whether
we seek it or not. . . . It
would be easier to shrink
back from that frontier, to
look to the safe mediocrity
of the past, to be lulled by
good intentions and high
rhetoric—and 
those who
prefer that course should
not cast their votes for me,
regardless of party. • But I
believe that the times
demand 
invention,
innovation, 
imagination,
decision. I am asking each
of you to be new pioneers
on that New Frontier. My
call is to the young in
heart, regardless of age.
—JOHN F. KENNEDY,
ACCEPTANCE SPEECH AS THE
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE OF THE
DEMOCRATIC PARTY, QUOTED IN
JOHN HELLMANN, THE
KENNEDY 
OBSESSION: 
THE
AMERICAN 
MYTH 
OF 
JFK
The normal rhythm of life
oscillates in general between
a mild satisfaction with
oneself and a slight
discomfort, originating in
the knowledge of one's
personal shortcomings. We
should like to be as
handsome, young, strong or
clever as other people of our
acquaintance. We wish we
could achieve as much as
they do, long for similar
advantages, positions, the
same or greater success. To
be delighted with oneself is
the exception and, often
enough, a smoke screen
which we produce for
ourselves and of course for
others. Somewhere in it is
a lingering feeling of
discomfort with ourselves
and a slight self-dislike. I
assert that an increase of
210 • 
The Art of Seduction
on a collective adventure, to go back to ideals we had given up. But before
anyone joined his crusade they had to be made aware of how much they
had lost, what was missing. A group, like an individual, can get mired in
routine, losing track of its original goals. Too much prosperity saps it of
strength. You can seduce an entire nation by aiming at its collective insecu-
rity, that latent sense that not everything is what it seems. Stirring dissatis-
faction with the present and reminding people about the glorious past can
unsettle their sense of identity. Then you can be the one to redefine it—a
grand seduction.
Symbol: Cupid's Arrow. What awakens desire in the seduced is
not a soft touch or a pleasant sensation; it is a wound. The ar-
row creates a pain, an ache, a need for relief Before desire
there must be pain. Aim the arrow at the victim's
weakest spot, creating a wound that you
can open and reopen.
Reversal
I
f you go too far in lowering the targets' self-esteem they may feel too in-
secure to enter into your seduction. Do not be heavy-handed; like
Lawrence, always follow up the wounding attack with a soothing gesture.
Otherwise you will simply alienate them.
Charm is often a subtler and more effective route to seduction. The
Victorian Prime Minister Benjamin Disraeli always made people feel better
about themselves. He deferred to them, made them the center of attention,
made them feel witty and vibrant. He was a boon to their vanity, and they
grew addicted to him. This is a kind of diffused seduction, lacking in ten-
sion and in the deep emotions that the sexual variety stirs; it bypasses peo-
ple's hunger, their need for some kind of fulfillment. But if you are subtle
and clever, it can be a way of lowering their defenses, creating an unthreat-
ening friendship. Once they are under your spell in this way, you can then
open the wound. Indeed, after Disraeli had charmed Queen Victoria and
established a friendship with her, he made her feel vaguely inadequate in
the establishment of an empire and the realization of her ideals. Everything
depends on the target. People who are riddled with insecurities may re-
quire the gentler variety. Once they feel comfortable with you, aim your
arrows.
this spirit of discontent
renders a person especially
susceptible to "falling in
love." . . . In most cases
this attitude of disquiet is
unconscious, but in some it
reaches the threshold of
awareness in the form of a
slight uneasiness, or a
stagnant dissatisfaction, or
a realization of being upset
without knowing why.
—THEODOR REIK,
OF 
LOVE AND LUST
Master the Art of Insinuation
Making your targets feel dis-
satisfied and in need of your atten-
tion is essential, but if you are too obvious,
they will see through you and grow defensive.
There is no known defense, however,
against insinuation—the art of plant-
ing ideas in people's minds by
dropping elusive hints that
take root days later, even
appearing to them as
their own idea. Insinua-
tion is the supreme means
of influencing people. Cre-
ate a sublanguage—bold state-
ments followed by 
retraction and
apology, ambiguous comments, banal talk
combined with alluring glances—that enters
the target's unconscious to convey your real
meaning. Make everything suggestive.
Insinuating Desire
O
ne evening in the 1770s, a young man went to the Paris Opera to
meet his lover, the Countess de 
. The couple had been fighting,
and he was anxious to see her again. The countess had not arrived yet at
her box, but from an adjacent one a friend of hers, Madame de T 
,
called out to the young man to join her, remarking that it was an excellent
stroke of luck that they had met that evening—he must keep her company
on a trip she had to take. The young man wanted urgently to see the
countess, but Madame was charming and insistent and he agreed to go with
her. Before he could ask why or where, she quickly escorted him to her
carriage outside, which then sped off.
Now the young man enjoined his hostess to tell him where she was
taking him. At first she just laughed, but finally she told him: to her hus-
band's château. The couple had been estranged, but had decided to recon-
cile; her husband was a bore, however, and she felt a charming young man
like himself would liven things up. The young man was intrigued: Madame
was an older woman, with a reputation for being rather formal, though he
also knew she had a lover, a marquis. Why had she chosen him for this ex-
cursion? Her story was not quite credible. Then, as they traveled, she sug-
gested he look out the window at the passing landscape, as she was doing.
He had to lean over toward her to do so, and just as he did, the carriage
jolted. She grabbed his hand and fell into his arms. She stayed there for a
moment, then pulled away from him rather abruptly. After an awkward si-
lence, she said, "Do you intend to convince me of my imprudence in your
regard?" He protested that the incident had been an accident and reassured
her he would behave himself. In truth, however, having her in his arms had
made him think otherwise.
They arrived at the château. The husband came to meet them, and the
young man expressed his admiration of the building: "What you see is
nothing," Madame interrupted, "I must take you to Monsieur's apartment."
Before he could ask what she meant, the subject was quickly changed. The
husband was indeed a bore, but he excused himself after supper. Now
Madame and the young man were alone. She invited him to walk with her
in the gardens; it was a splendid evening, and as they walked, she slipped
her arm in his. She was not worried that he would take advantage of her,
she said, because she knew how attached he was to her good friend the
countess. They talked of other things, and then she returned to the topic of
As we were about to enter
the chamber, she stopped
me. "Remember," she said
gravely, "you are supposed
never to have seen, never
even suspected, the
sanctuary you're about to
enter. . . ." • . . . All this
was like an initiation rite.
She led me by the hand
across a small, dark
corridor. My heart was
pounding as though I were
a young proselyte being put
to the test before the
celebration oj the great
mysteries. . . . • "But
your Countess . . . " she
said, stopping. I was about
to reply when the doors
opened; my answer was
interrupted by admiration.
I was astonished,
delighted, I no longer
know what became of me,
and I began in good faith
to believe in magic. . . . In
truth, I found myself in a
vast cage of mirrors on
which images were so
artistically painted that
they produced the illusion
of all the objects they
represented.
—VIVANT DENON,"NO
TOMORROW," IN MICHEL FEHER,
ED., 
THE 
LIBERTINE READER
213
214 
• 
The Art of Seduction
his lover: "Is she making you quite happy? Oh, I fear the contrary, and this
distresses me. . . . Are you not often the victim of her strange whims?" To
the young man's surprise, Madame began to talk of the countess in a way
that made it seem that she had been unfaithful to him (which was some-
thing he had suspected). Madame sighed—she regretted saying such things
about her friend, and asked him to forgive her; then, as if a new thought
had occurred to her, she mentioned a nearby pavilion, a delightful place,
full of pleasant memories. But the shame of it was, it was locked and she
had no key. And yet they found their way to the pavilion, and lo and be-
hold, the door had been left open. It was dark inside, but the young man
could sense that it was a place for trysts. They entered and sank onto a sofa,
and before he knew what had come over him, he took her in his arms.
Madame seemed to push him away, but then gave in. Finally she came to
her senses: they must return to the house. Had he gone too far? He must
try to control himself.
As they strolled back to the house, Madame remarked, "What a deli-
cious night we've just spent." Was she referring to what had happened in
the pavilion? "There is an even more charming room in the château," she
went on, "but I can't show you anything," implying he had been too for-
ward. She had mentioned this room ("Monsieur's apartment") several times
before; he could not imagine what could be so interesting about it, but by
now he was dying to see it and insisted she show it to him. "If you promise
to be good," she replied, her eyes widening. Through the darkness of the
house she led him into the room, which, to his delight, was a kind of tem-
ple of pleasure: there were mirrors on the walls, trompe l'oeil paintings
evoking a forest scene, even a dark grotto, and a garlanded statue of Eros.
Overwhelmed by the mood of the place, the young man quickly resumed
what he had started in the pavilion, and would have lost all track of time
if a servant had not rushed in and warned them that it was getting light
outside—Monsieur would soon be up.
They quickly separated. Later that day, as the young man prepared to
leave, his hostess said, "Goodbye, Monsieur; I owe you so many pleasures;
but I have paid you with a beautiful dream. Now your love summons you
to return. . . . Don't give the Countess cause to quarrel with me." Reflect-
ing on his experience on the way back, he could not figure out what it
meant. He had the vague sensation of having been used, but the pleasures
he remembered outweighed his doubts.
Interpretation. Madame de T 
is a character in the eighteenth-century
libertine short story "No Tomorrow," by Vivant Denon. The young man is
the story's narrator. Although fictional, Madame's techniques were clearly
based on those of several well-known libertines of the time, masters of
the game of seduction. And the most dangerous of their weapons was
insinuation—the means by which Madame cast her spell on the young man,
making him seem the aggressor, giving her the night of pleasure she desired,
A few short years ago, in
our native city, where fraud
and cunning prosper more
than love or loyalty, there
was a noblewoman of
striking beauty and
impeccable breeding, who
was endowed by Nature
with as lofty a
temperament and shrewd
an intellect as could be
found in any other woman
of her time. . . . • This
lady, being of gentle birth
and finding herself married
off to a master woollen-
draper because he happened
to be very rich, was unable
to stifle her heartfelt
contempt, for she was
firmly of the opinion that
no man of low condition,
however wealthy, was
deserving of a noble wife.
And on discovering that all
he was capable of despite
his massive wealth, was
distinguishing 
wool from
cotton, supervising the
setting up of a loom, or
debating the virtues of a
particular yarn with a
spinner-woman, 
she
resolved that as far as it lay
within her power she
would have nothing
whatsoever to do with his
beastly caresses. Moreover
she was determined to seek
her pleasure elsewhere, in
the company of one who
seemed more worthy of her
affection, and so it was that
she fell deeply in love with
an extremely eligible man
in his middle thirties. And
whenever a day passed
without her having set eyes
upon him, she was restless
for the whole of the
following night. 
•
However, 
the gentleman
suspected nothing of all
this, and took no notice of
her; and for her part, being
very cautious, she would
not venture to declare her
love by dispatching a
maidservant or writing him
Master the Art of Insinuation • 
215
and safeguarding her guiltless reputation, all in one stroke. After all, he was
the one who initiated physical contact, or so it seemed. In truth, she was the
one in control, planting precisely the ideas in his mind that she wanted. That
first physical encounter in the carriage, for instance, that she had set up by
inviting him closer: she later rebuked him for being forward, but what lin-
gered in his mind was the excitement of the moment. Her talk of the
countess made him confused and guilty; but then she hinted that his lover
was unfaithful, planting a different seed in his mind: anger, and the desire for
revenge. Then she asked him to forget what she had said and forgive her
for saying it, a key insinuating tactic: "I am asking you to forget what I have
said, but I know you cannot; the thought will remain in your mind." Pro-
voked this way, it was inevitable he would grab her in the pavilion. She sev-
eral times mentioned the room in the château—of course he insisted on
going there. She enveloped the evening in an air of ambiguity. Even her
words "If you promise to be good" could be read several ways. The young
man's head and heart were inflamed with all of the feelings—discontent,
confusion, desire—that she had indirectly instilled in him.
Particularly in the early phases of a seduction, learn to make everything
you say and do a kind of insinuation. Insinuate doubt with a comment here
and there about other people in the victim's life, making the victim feel
vulnerable. Slight physical contact insinuates desire, as does a fleeting but
memorable look, or an unusually warm tone of voice, both for the briefest
of moments. A passing comment suggests that something about the victim
interests you; but keep it subtle, your words revealing a possibility, creating a
doubt. You are planting seeds that will take root in the weeks to come.
When you are not there, your targets will fantasize about the ideas you have
stirred up, and brood upon the doubts. They are slowly being led into your
web, unaware that you are in control. How can they resist or become de-
fensive if they cannot even see what is happening?
What distinguishes a suggestion from other kinds of psy-
chical influence, such as a command or the giving of a piece
of information or instruction, is that in the case of a sug-
gestion an idea is aroused in another person's brain which
is not examined in regard to its origin but is accepted just
as though it had arisen spontaneously in that brain.
—SIGMUND FREUD
Keys to Seduction
Y
ou cannot pass through life without in one way or another trying to
persuade people of something. Take the direct route, saying exactly
what you want, and your honesty may make you feel good but you are
probably not getting anywhere. People have their own sets of ideas, which
are hardened into stone by habit; your words, entering their minds, com-
a letter, for fear of the
dangers that this might
entail. But having
perceived that he was on
very friendly terms with a
certain priest, a rotund,
uncouth, 
individual who
was nevertheless regarded
as an outstandingly able
friar on account of his very
saintly way of life, she
calculated that this fellow
would serve as an ideal go-
between for her and the
man she loved. And so,
after reflecting on the
strategy she would adopt,
she paid a visit, at an
appropriate hour of the
day, to the church where he
was to be found, and
having sought him out, she
asked him whether he
would agree to confess her.
• Since he could tell at a
glance that she was a lady
of quality, 
the friar gladly
heard her confession, and
when she had got to the
end of it, she continued as
follows: • "Father, as I
shall explain to you
presently, there is a certain
matter about which I am
compelled to seek your
advice and assistance.
Having already told you
my name, I feel sure you
will know my family and
my husband. He loves me
more dearly than life itself,
and since he is enormously
rich, he never has the
slightest difficulty or
hesitation in supplying me
with every single object for
which I display a yearning.
Consequently, my love for
him is quite unbounded,
and if my mere thoughts,
to say nothing of my actual
behavior, were to run
contrary to his wishes and
his honor, I would be more
deserving of hellfire than
the wickedest woman who
ever lived. • "Now, there is
a certain person, of
respectable outward
216 
• 
The Art of Seduction
pete with the thousands of preconceived notions that are already there, and
get nowhere. Besides, people resent your attempt to persuade them, as if
they were incapable of deciding by themselves—as if you knew better.
Consider instead the power of insinuation and suggestion. It requires some
patience and art, but the results are more than worth it.
The way insinuation works is simple: disguised in a banal remark or en-
counter, a hint is dropped. It is about some emotional issue—a possible
pleasure not yet attained, a lack of excitement in a person's life. The hint
registers in the back of the target's mind, a subtle stab at his or her insecuri-
ties; its source is quickly forgotten. It is too subtle to be memorable at the
time, and later, when it takes root and grows, it seems to have emerged
naturally from the target's own mind, as if it was there all along. Insinuation
lets you bypass people's natural resistance, for they seem to be listening only
to what has originated in themselves. It is a language on its own, communi-
cating directly with the unconscious. No seducer, no persuader, can hope
to succeed without mastering the language and art of insinuation.
A strange man once arrived at the court of Louis XV. No one knew
anything about him, and his accent and age were unplaceable. He called
himself Count Saint-Germain. He was obviously wealthy; all kinds of gems
and diamonds glittered on his jacket, his sleeves, his shoes, his fingers. He
could play the violin to perfection, paint magnificently. But the most in-
toxicating thing about him was his conversation.
In truth, the count was the greatest charlatan of the eighteenth
century—a man who had mastered the art of insinuation. As he spoke, a
word here and there would slip out—a vague allusion to the philosopher's
stone, which turned base metal into gold, or to the elixir of life. He did not
say he possessed these things, but he made you associate him with their
powers. Had he simply claimed to have them, no one would have believed
him and people would have turned away. The count might refer to a man
who had died forty years earlier as if he had known him personally; had
this been so, the count would have had to be in his eighties, although he
looked to be in his forties. He mentioned the elixir of life. . . . he seems so
young. . . .
The key to the count's words was vagueness. He always dropped his
hints into a lively conversation, grace notes in an ongoing melody. Only
later would people reflect on what he had said. After a while, people started
to come to him, inquiring about the philosopher's stone and the elixir of
life, not realizing that it was he who had planted these ideas in their minds.
Remember: to sow a seductive idea you must engage people's imaginations,
their fantasies, their deepest yearnings. What sets the wheels spinning is
suggesting things that people already want to hear—the possibility of plea-
sure, wealth, health, adventure. In the end, these good things turn out to be
precisely what you seem to offer them. They will come to you as if on
their own, unaware that you insinuated the idea in their heads.
In 1807, Napoleon Bonaparte decided it was critical for him to win
the Russian Czar Alexander I to his side. He wanted two things out of the
appearance, who unless I
am mistaken is a close
acquaintance of yours. I
really couldn't say what his
name is, but he is tall and
handsome, his clothes are
brown and elegantly cut,
and, possibly because he is
unaware of my resolute
nature, he appears to have
laid siege to me. He turns
up infallibly whenever I
either look out of my
window or stand at the
front door or leave the
house, and I am surprised,
in fact, that he is not here
now. Needless to say, I am
very upset about all this,
because his sort of conduct
frequently gives an honest
woman a bad name, even
though she is quite
innocent. • " . . . For the
love of God, therefore, I
implore you to speak to
him severely and persuade
him to refrain from his
importunities. 
There are
plenty of other women who
doubtless find this sort of
thing amusing, and who
will enjoy being ogled and
spied upon by him, but I
personally have no
inclination for it
whatsoever, and I find his
behavior exceedingly
disagreeable." • And
having reached the end of
her speech, the lady bowed
her head as though she
were going to burst into
tears. • The reverend friar
realized immediately who
it was to whom she was
referring, and having
warmly commended her
purity of mind . . . he
promised to take all
necessary steps to ensure
that the fellow ceased to
annoy her. . . . • Shortly
afterward, the gentleman in
question paid one of his
regular visits to the
reverend friar, and after
they had conversed together
for a while on general
Master the Art of Insinuation • 
217
czar: a peace treaty in which they agreed to carve up Europe and the Mid-
dle East; and a marriage alliance, in which he would divorce his wife
Josephine and marry into the czar's family. Instead of proposing these
things directly, Napoleon decided to seduce the czar. Using polite social
encounters and friendly conversations as his battlefields, he went to work.
An apparent slip of the tongue revealed that Josephine could not bear chil-
dren; Napoleon quickly changed the subject. A comment here and there
seemed to suggest a linking of the destinies of France and Russia. Just be-
fore they were to part one evening, he talked of his desire for children,
sighed sadly, then excused himself for bed, leaving the czar to sleep on
this. He escorted the czar to a play on the themes of glory, honor, and
empire; now, in later conversations, he could disguise his insinuations un-
der the cover of discussing the play. Within a few weeks, the czar was
speaking to his ministers of a marriage alliance and a treaty with France as
if they were his own ideas.
Slips of the tongue, apparently inadvertent "sleep on it" comments, al-
luring references, statements for which you quickly apologize—all of these
have immense insinuating power. They get under people's skin like a poi-
son, and take on a life of their own. The key to succeeding with your in-
sinuations is to make them when your targets are at their most relaxed or
distracted, so that they are not aware of what is happening. Polite banter is
often the perfect front for this; people are thinking about what they will say
next, or are absorbed in their own thoughts. Your insinuations will barely
register, which is how you want it.
In one of his early campaigns, John F. Kennedy addressed a group of
veterans. Kennedy's brave exploits during World War II—the PT-109 inci-
dent had made him a war hero—were known to all; but in the speech, he
talked of the other men on the boat, never mentioning himself. He knew,
however, that what he had done was on everyone's mind, because in fact he
had put it there. Not only did his silence on the subject make them think of
it on their own, it made Kennedy seem humble and modest, qualities that
go well with heroism. In seduction, as the French courtesan Ninon de
l'Enclos advised, it is better not to talk about your love for a person. Let
your target read it in your manner. Your silence on the subject will have
more insinuating power than if you had addressed it directly.
Not only words insinuate; pay attention to gestures and looks. Madame
Récamier's favorite technique was to keep her words banal and the look in
her eyes enticing. The flow of conversation would keep men from thinking
too deeply about these occasional looks, but they would be haunted by
them. Lord Byron had his famous "underlook": while everyone was dis-
cussing some uninteresting subject, he would seem to hang his head, but
then a young woman (the target) would see him glancing upward at her, his
head still tilted. It was a look that seemed dangerous, challenging, but also
ambiguous; many women were hooked by it. The face speaks its own lan-
guage. We are used to trying to read people's faces, which are often better
indicators of their feelings than what they say, which is so easy to control.
topics, the friar drew him to
one side and reproached
him in a very kindly sort of
way for the amorous
glances which, as the lady
had given him to
understand, he believed
him to be casting in her
direction. • Not
unnaturally, 
the gentleman
was amazed, for he had
never so much as looked at
the lady and it was very
seldom that he passed by
her house. . . . • The
gentleman, being rather
more perceptive than the
reverend friar, was not
exactly slow to appreciate
the lady's cleverness, and
putting on a somewhat
sheepish expression, he
promised not to bother her
any more. But after leaving
the friar, he made his way
toward the house of the
lady, who was keeping
continuous vigil at a tiny
little window so that she
would see him if he
happened to pass by. . . .
And from that day
forward, proceeding with
the maximum prudence
and conveying the
impression that he was
engaged in some other
business entirely, he became
a regular visitor to the
neighborhood.
—GIOVANNI BOCCACCIO, THE
DECAMERON, 
TRANSLATED 
BY
G . H . M C W I L L I A M
Glances are the heavy
artillery of the flirt:
everything can be conveyed
in a look, yet that look can
always be denied, for it
cannot be quoted word for
word.
—STENDHAL, 
QUOTED 
IN
RICHARD 
DAVENPORT-HINES,
ED., VICE: 
AN 
ANTHOLOGY
218 
• 
The Art of Seduction
Since people are always reading your looks, use them to transmit the insinu-
ating signals you choose.
Finally, the reason insinuation works so well is not just that it bypasses
people's natural resistance. It is also the language of pleasure. There is too
little mystery in the world; too many people say exactly what they feel or
want. We yearn for something enigmatic, for something to feed our fan-
tasies. Because of the lack of suggestion and ambiguity in daily life, the
person who uses them suddenly seems to have something alluring and full
of promise. It is a kind of titillating game—what is this person up to? What
does he or she mean? Hints, suggestions, and insinuations create a seductive
atmosphere, signaling that their victim is no longer involved in the routines
of daily life but has entered another realm.
Symbol: The Seed.
The soil is carefully prepared. The seeds are planted
months in advance. Once they are in the ground, no one
knows what hand threw them there. They are part of the
earth. Disguise your manipulations by planting seeds
that take root on their own.
Reversal
T
he danger in insinuation is that when you leave things ambiguous your
target may misread them. There are moments, particularly later on in a
seduction, when it is best to communicate your idea directly, particularly
once you know the target will welcome it, Casanova often played things
that way. When he could sense that a woman desired him, and needed little
preparation, he would use a direct, sincere, gushing comment to go straight
to her head like a drug and make her fall under his spell. When the rake
and writer Gabriele D'Annunzio met a woman he desired, he rarely de-
layed. Flattery flowed from his mouth and pen. He would charm with his
"sincerity" (sincerity can be feigned, and is just one stratagem among oth-
ers). This only works, however, when you sense that the target is easily
yours. If not, the defenses and suspicions you raise by direct attack will
make your seduction impossible. When in doubt, indirection is the better
route.
Enter Their Spirit
Most
people are locked in their
own worlds, making them stubborn
and hard to persuade. The way to lure
them out of their shell and set up your seduction is
to enter their spirit. Play by their rules, enjoy what they
enjoy, adapt yourself to their moods. In doing so you will
stroke their deep-rooted narcissism and lower their defenses.
Hypnotized by the mirror image you present, they will open up,
becoming vulnerable to your subtle influence. Soon you can
shift the dynamic: once you have entered their spirit you
can make them enter yours, at a point when it is
too late to turn back. Indulge your targets'
every mood and whim, giving them
nothing to react against or
resist.
The Indulgent Strategy
I
n October of 1961, the American journalist Cindy Adams was granted
an exclusive interview with President Sukarno of Indonesia. It was a re-
markable coup, for Adams was a little-known journalist at the time, while
Sukarno was a world figure in the midst of a crisis. A leader of the fight for
Indonesia's independence, he had been the country's president since 1949,
when the Dutch finally gave up the colony. By the early 1960s, his daring
foreign policy had made him hated in the United States, some calling him
the Hitler of Asia.
Adams decided that in the interests of a lively interview, she would not
be cowed or overawed by Sukarno, and she began the conversation by jok-
ing with him. To her pleasant surprise, her ice-breaking tactic seemed to
work: Sukarno warmed up to her. He let the interview run well over an
hour, and when it was over he loaded her with gifts. Her success was re-
markable enough, but even more so were the friendly letters she began
to receive from Sukarno after she and her husband had returned to New
York. A few years later, he proposed that she collaborate with him on his
autobiography.
Adams, who was used to doing puff pieces on third-rate celebrities, was
confused. She knew Sukarno had a reputation as a devilish Don Juan—le
grand seducteur, the French called him. He had had four wives and hundreds
of conquests. He was handsome, and obviously he was attracted to her, but
why choose her for this prestigious task? Perhaps his libido was too power-
ful for him to care about such things. Nevertheless, it was an offer she could
not refuse.
In January of 1964, Adams returned to Indonesia. Her strategy, she had
decided, would stay the same: she would be the brassy, straight-talking lady
who had seemed to charm Sukarno three years earlier. During her first in-
terview with him for the book, she complained in rather strong terms
about the rooms she had been given as lodgings. As if he were her secre-
tary, she dictated a letter to him, which he was to sign, detailing the special
treatment she was to be given by one and all. To her amazement, he duti-
fully copied out the letter, and signed it.
Next on Adams's schedule was a tour of Indonesia to interview people
who had known Sukarno in his youth. So she complained to him about the
plane she had to fly on, which she said was unsafe. "I tell you what, honey,"
she told him, "I think you should give me my own plane." "Okay," he an-
You're anxious to keep
your mistress? \ Convince
her she's knocked you all of
a heap \ With her stunning
looks. If it's purple she's
wearing, praise purple; \
When she's in a silk dress,
say silk \ Suits her best of
all. . . Admire \ Her
singing voice, her gestures
as she dances, \ Cry
"Encore!" when she stops.
You can even praise \ Her
performance in bed, her
talent for 
love-making— 
\
Spell out what turned you
on. \ Though she may
show fiercer in action than
any Medusa, \ Her lover
will always describe her as
kind \ And gentle. But
take care not to give
yourself away while \
Making such 
tongue-in-
cheek compliments, don't
allow \ Your expression to
ruin the message. Art's
most effective \ When
concealed. Detection
discredits you for good.
— O V I D , THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
The little boy (or girl) seeks
to fascinate his or her
parents. In Oriental
literature, imitation is
221
222 
• 
The Art of Seduction
swered, apparently somewhat abashed. One, however, was not enough, she
went on; she required several planes, and a helicopter, and her own per-
sonal pilot, a good one. He agreed to everything. The leader of Indonesia
seemed to be not just intimidated by Adams but totally under her spell. He
praised her intelligence and wit. At one point he confided, "Do you know
why I'm doing this biography? . . . Only because of you, that's why." He
paid attention to her clothes, complimenting her outfits, noticing any
change in them. He was more like a fawning suitor than the "Hitler of
Asia."
Inevitably, of course, he made passes at her. She was an attractive
woman. First there was the hand on top of her hand, then a stolen kiss. She
spurned him every time, making it clear she was happily married, but she
was worried: if all he had wanted was an affair, the whole book deal could
fall apart. Once again, though, her straightforward strategy seemed the
right one. Surprisingly, he backed down without anger or resentment. He
promised that his affection for her would remain platonic. She had to admit
that he was not at all what she had expected, or what had been described to
her. Perhaps he liked being dominated by a woman.
The interviews continued for several months, and she noticed slight
changes in him. She still addressed him familiarly, spicing the conversation
with brazen comments, but now he returned them, delighting in this kind
of saucy banter. He assumed the same lively mood that she strategically
forced on herself. At first he had dressed in military uniform, or in his Ital-
ian suits. Now he dressed casually, even going barefoot, conforming to the
casual style of their relationship. One night he remarked that he liked the
color of her hair. It was Clairol, blue-black, she explained. He wanted to
have the same color; she had to bring him a bottle. She did as he asked,
imagining he was joking, but a few days later he requested her presence at
the palace to dye his hair for him. She did so, and now they had the exact
same hair color.
The book, Sukarno: An Autobiography as Told to Cindy Adams, was pub-
lished in 1965. To American readers' surprise, Sukarno came across as re-
markably charming and lovable, which was indeed how Adams described
him to one and all. If anyone argued, she would say that they did not know
him the way she did. Sukarno was well pleased, and had the book distrib-
uted far and wide. It helped gain sympathy for him in Indonesia, where he
was now being threatened with a military coup. And Sukarno was not
surprised—he had known all along that Adams would do a far better job
with his memoirs than any "serious" journalist.
Interpretation. Who was seducing whom? It was Sukarno who was doing
the seducing, and his seduction of Adams followed a classical sequence.
First, he chose the right victim. An experienced journalist would have re-
sisted the lure of a personal relationship with the subject, and a man would
have been less susceptible to his charm. And so he picked a woman, and
reckoned to be one of the
ways of attracting. The
Sanskrit texts, for
example, give an important
part to the trick of the
woman copying the dress,
expressions, and speech of
her beloved. This kind of
mimetic drama is urged on
the woman who, "being
unable to unite with her
beloved, imitates him to
distract his thoughts." •
The child too, using the
devices of imitating
attitudes, dress, and so on,
seeks to fascinate, until a
magical intention, the
father or mother and thus
to "distract its thoughts."
Identification means that
one is abandoning and not
abandoning 
amorous
desires. It is a lure which
the child uses to capture his
parents and which, it must
be admitted, they fall for.
The same is true for the
masses, who imitate their
leader, bear his name and
repeat his gestures. They
bow to him, but at the
same time they are
unconsciously baiting a trap
to hold him. Great
ceremonies and
demonstrations are just as
much occasions when the
multitudes charm the
leader as vice versa.
—SERGE 
MOSCOVICI, 
THE AGE
OF THE CROWD, TRANSLATED BY
J. C.WHITEHOUSE
My sixth brother, he who
had both his lips cut off,
Prince of the Faithful, is
called Shakashik. • In his
youth he was very poor.
One day, as he was
begging in the streets of
Baghdad, he passed by a
splendid mansion, at the
gates of which stood an
impressive array of
attendants. 
Upon inquiry
my brother was informed
Enter Their Spirit • 223
one whose journalistic experience lay elsewhere. At his first meeting with
Adams, he sent mixed signals: he was friendly to her, but hinted at another
kind of interest as well. Then, having insinuated a doubt in her mind (Per-
haps he just wants an affair?), he proceeded to mirror her. He indulged her
every mood, retreating every time she complained. Indulging a person is a
form of entering their spirit, letting them dominate for the time being.
Perhaps Sukarno's passes at Adams showed his uncontrollable libido at
work, or perhaps they were more cunning. He had a reputation as a Don
Juan; failing to make a pass at her would have hurt her feelings. (Women
are often less offended at being found attractive than one imagines, and
Sukarno was clever enough to have given each of his four wives the im-
pression that she was his favorite.) The pass out of the way, he moved fur-
ther into her spirit, taking on her casual air, even slightly feminizing himself
by adopting her hair color. The result was that she decided he was not what
she had expected or feared him to be. He was not in the least threatening,
and after all, she was the one in control. What Adams failed to realize was
that once her defenses were lowered, she was oblivious to how deeply he
had engaged her emotions. She had not charmed him, he had charmed her.
What he wanted all along was what he got: a personal memoir written by a
sympathetic foreigner, who gave the world a rather engaging portrait of a
man of whom many were suspicious.
Of all the seductive tactics, entering someone's spirit is perhaps the
most devilish of all. It gives your victims the feeling that they are seducing
you. The fact that you are indulging them, imitating them, entering their
spirit, suggests that you are under their spell. You are not a dangerous se-
ducer to be wary of, but someone compliant and unthreatening. The atten-
tion you pay to them is intoxicating—since you are mirroring them,
everything they see and hear from you reflects their own ego and tastes.
What a boost to their vanity. All this sets up the seduction, the series of ma-
neuvers that will turn the dynamic around. Once their defenses are down,
they are open to your subtle influence. Soon you will begin to take over the
dance, and without even noticing the shift, they will find themselves enter-
ing your spirit. This is the endgame.
Women are not at their ease except with those who take
chances with them, and enter into their spirit.
—NINON DE L'ENCLOS
Keys to Seduction
O
ne of the great sources of frustration in our lives is other people's
stubbornness. How hard it is to reach them, to make them see things
our way. We often have the impression that when they seem to be listening
to us, and apparently agreeing with us, it is all superficial—the moment we
are gone, they revert to their own ideas. We spend our lives butting up
that the house belonged to
a member of the wealthy
and powerful Barmecide
family. 
Shakashik
approached the door-
keepers and solicited alms.
• "Go in," they said,
"and our master will give
you all that you desire." •
My brother entered the
lofty vestibule and
proceeded to a spacious,
marble-paved hall, hung
with tapestry and
overlooking a beautiful
garden. He stood
bewildered for a moment,
not knowing where to turn
his steps, and then
advanced to the far end of
the hall. There, among the
cushions, reclined a
handsome old man with a
long beard, whom my
brother recognized at once
as the master of the house.
• "What can I do for you,
my friend?" asked the old
man, as he rose to welcome
my brother. • When
Shakashik replied that he
was a hungry beggar,
the old man expressed the
deepest compassion and
rent his fine robes, crying:
"Is it possible that there
should be a man as hungry
as yourself in a city where
I am living? It is, indeed, a
disgrace that I cannot
endure!" Then he
comforted my brother,
adding: "I insist that you
stay with me and partake
of my dinner." • With this
the master of the house
clapped his hands and
called out to one of the
slaves: "Bring in the basin
and ewer." Then he said to
my brother: 
"Come
forward, my friend, and
wash your hands." •
Shakashik rose to do so,
but saw neither ewer nor
basin. He was bewildered
to see his host make
gestures as though he were
pouring water on his hands
224 
• 
The Art of Seduction
against people, as if they were stone walls. But instead of complaining
about how misunderstood or ignored you are, why not try something dif-
ferent: instead of seeing other people as spiteful or indifferent, instead of
trying to figure out why they act the way they do, look at them through
the eyes of the seducer. The way to lure people out of their natural in-
tractability and self-obsession is to enter their spirit.
All of us are narcissists. When we were children our narcissism was
physical: we were interested in our own image, our own body, as if it were
a separate being. As we grow older, our narcissism grows more psychologi-
cal: we become absorbed in our own tastes, opinions, experiences. A hard
shell forms around us. Paradoxically, the way to entice people out of this
shell is to become more like them, in fact a kind of mirror image of them.
You do not have to spend days studying their minds; simply conform to
their moods, adapt to their tastes, play along with whatever they send your
way. In doing so you will lower their natural defensiveness. Their sense of
self-esteem does not feel threatened by your strangeness or different habits.
People truly love themselves, but what they love most of all is to see their
ideas and tastes reflected in another person. This validates them. Their ha-
bitual insecurity vanishes. Hypnotized by their mirror image, they relax.
Now that their inner wall has crumbled, you can slowly draw them out,
and eventually turn the dynamic around. Once they are open to you, it be-
comes easy to infect them with your own moods and heat. Entering the
other person's spirit is a kind of hypnosis; it is the most insidious and effec-
tive form of persuasion known to man.
In the eighteenth-century Chinese novel The Dream of the Red Cham-
ber, all the young girls in the prosperous house of Chia are in love with the
rakish Pao Yu. He is certainly handsome, but what makes him irresistible is
his uncanny ability to enter a young girl's spirit. Pao Yu has spent his youth
around girls, whose company he has always preferred. As a result, he never
comes over as threatening and aggressive. He is granted entry to girls'
rooms, they see him everywhere, and the more they see him the more they
fall under his spell. It is not that Pao Yu is feminine; he remains a man, but
one who can be more or less masculine as the situation requires. His famil-
iarity with young girls allows him the flexibility to enter their spirit.
This is a great advantage. The difference between the sexes is what
makes love and seduction possible, but it also involves an element of fear
and distrust. A woman may fear male aggression and violence; a man is
often unable to enter a woman's spirit, and so he remains strange and
threatening. The greatest seducers in history, from Casanova to John F.
Kennedy, grew up surrounded by women and had a touch of femininity
themselves. The philosopher Søren Kierkegaard, in his novel The Seducer's
Diary, recommends spending more time with the opposite sex, getting to
know the "enemy" and its weaknesses, so that you can turn this knowledge
to your advantage.
Ninon de l'Enclos, one of the greatest seductresses who ever lived, had
definite masculine qualities. She could impress a man with her intense
from an invisible vessel and
then drying them with an
invisible towel. When he
finished, the host called out
to his attendants: "Bring
in the table!" • Numerous
servants hurried in and out
of the hall, as though they
were preparing for a meal.
My brother could still see
nothing. Yet his host
invited him to sit at the
imaginary table, saying,
"Honor me by eating of
this meat." • The old man
moved his hands about as
though he were touching
invisible dishes, and also
moved his jaws and lips as
though he were chewing.
Then said he to
Shakashik: "Eat your fill,
my friend, for you must be
famished." 
• My brother
began to move his jaws, to
chew and swallow, as
though he were eating,
while the old man still
coaxed him, saying: 
"Eat,
my friend, and note the
excellence of this bread and
its whiteness. " • "This
man," thought Shakashik,
"must be fond of practical
jokes. " So he said, "It is,
sir, the whitest bread I have
ever seen, and I have never
tasted the like in all my
life. " • "This bread," said
the host, "was baked by a
slave girl whom I bought
for five hundred dinars."
Then he called out to one
of his slaves: "Bring in the
meat pudding, and let there
be plenty of fat in it!"
• . . . Thereupon the host
moved his fingers as though
to pick up a morsel from an
imaginary dish, and
popped the invisible
delicacy into my brother's
mouth. • The old man
continued to enlarge upon
the excellences of the
various dishes, while my
brother became so
ravenously hungry that he
would have willingly died
Enter Their Spirit • 
225
philosophical keenness, and charm him by seeming to share his interest in
politics and warfare. Many men first formed deep friendships with her,
only to later fall madly in love. The masculine in a woman is as soothing to
men as the feminine in a man is to women. To a man, a woman's strange-
ness can create frustration and even hostility. He may be lured into a sexual
encounter, but a longer-lasting spell cannot be created without an accom-
panying mental seduction. The key is to enter his spirit. Men are often
seduced by the masculine element in a woman's behavior or character.
In the novel Clarissa (1748) by Samuel Richardson, the young and de-
vout Clarissa Harlowe is being courted by the notorious rake Lovelace.
Clarissa knows Lovelace's reputation, but for the most part he has not acted
as she would expect: he is polite, seems a little sad and confused. At one
point she finds out that he has done a most noble and charitable deed to a
family in distress, giving the father money, helping the man's daughter get
married, giving them wholesome advice. At last Lovelace confesses to
Clarissa what she has suspected: he wants to repent, to change his ways. His
letters to her are emotional, almost religious in their passion. Perhaps she
will be the one to lead him to righteousness? But of course Lovelace has
trapped her: he is using the seducer's tactic of mirroring her tastes, in this
case her spirituality. Once she lets her guard down, once she believes she
can reform him, she is doomed: now he can slowly insinuate his own spirit
into his letters and encounters with her. Remember: the operative word is
"spirit," and that is often exactly where to take aim. By seeming to mirror
someone's spiritual values you can seem to establish a deep-rooted harmony
between the two of you, which can then be transferred to the physical
plane.
When Josephine Baker moved to Paris, in 1925, as part of an all-black
revue, her exoticism made her an overnight sensation. But the French are
notoriously fickle, and Baker sensed that their interest in her would quickly
pass to someone else. To seduce them for good, she entered their spirit. She
learned French and began to sing in it. She started dressing and acting as a
stylish French lady, as if to say that she preferred the French way of life to
the American. Countries are like people: they have vast insecurities, and
they feel threatened by other customs. It is often quite seductive to a people
to see an outsider adopting their ways. Benjamin Disraeli was born and
lived all his life in England, but he was Jewish by birth, and had exotic fea-
tures; the provincial English considered him an outsider. Yet he was more
English in his manners and tastes than many an Englishman, and this was
part of his charm, which he proved by becoming the leader of the Conser-
vative Party. Should you be an outsider (as most of us ultimately are), turn
it to advantage: play on your alien nature in such a way as to show the
group how deeply you prefer their tastes and customs to your own.
In 1752, the notorious rake Saltykov determined to be the first man in
the Russian court to seduce the twenty-three-year-old grand duchess, the
future Empress Catherine the Great. He knew that she was lonely; her hus-
band Peter ignored her, as did many of the other courtiers. And yet the ob-
for a crust of barley bread.
• "Have you ever tasted
anything more delicious,"
went on the old man,
"than the spices in these
dishes?" • "Never,
indeed," replied
Shakashik. 
• "Eat
heartily, then," said his
host, "and do not be
ashamed!" • "I thank
you, sir," answered
Shakashik, 
"but I have
already eaten my fill. " •
Presently, however, the old
man clapped his hands
again and cried: "Bring in
the wine!" • . . . "Sir,"
said Shakashik, 
"your
generosity 
overwhelms
me!" He lifted the invisible
cup to his lips, and made
as if to drain it at one gulp.
• "Health and joy to
you!" exclaimed the old
man, as he pretended to
pour himself some wine
and drink it off. He
handed another cup to his
guest, and they both
continued to act in this
fashion 
until 
Shakashik,
feigning 
himself drunk,
began to roll his head from
side to side. Then, taking
his bounteous host
unawares, he suddenly
raised his arm so high that
the white of his armpit
could be seen, and dealt
him a blow on the neck
which made the hall echo
with the sound. And this
he followed by a second
blow. • The old man rose
in anger and cried: "What
are you doing, vile
creature?" • "Sir" replied
my brother, "you have
received your humble slave
into your house and loaded
him with your generosity;
you have fed him with the
choicest food and quenched
his thirst with the most
potent wines. Alas, he
became drunk, and forgot
his manners! But you are
so noble, sir, that you will
226 
• 
The Art of Seduction
stacles were immense: she was spied on day and night. Still, Saltykov man-
aged to befriend the young woman, and to enter her all-too-small circle.
He finally got her alone, and made it clear to her how well he understood
her loneliness, how deeply he disliked her husband, and how much he
shared her interest in the new ideas that were sweeping Europe. Soon he
found himself able to arrange further meetings, where he gave her the im-
pression that when he was with her, nothing else in the world mattered.
Catherine fell deeply in love with him, and he did in fact become her first
lover. Saltykov had entered her spirit.
When you mirror people, you focus intense attention on them. They
will sense the effort you are making, and will find it flattering. Obviously
you have chosen them, separating them out from the rest. There seems to
be nothing else in your life but them—their moods, their tastes, their spirit.
The more you focus on them, the deeper the spell you produce, and the in-
toxicating effect you have on their vanity.
Many of us have difficulty reconciling the person we are right now
with the person we want to be. We are disappointed that we have compro-
mised our youthful ideals, and we still imagine ourselves as that person
who had so much promise, but whom circumstances prevented from real-
izing it. When you are mirroring someone, do not stop at the person they
have become; enter the spirit of that ideal person they wanted to be. This
is how the French writer Chateaubriand managed to become a great se-
ducer, despite his physical ugliness. When he was growing up, in the latter
eighteenth century, romanticism was coming into fashion, and many
young women felt deeply oppressed by the lack of romance in their lives.
Chateaubriand would reawaken the fantasy they had had as young girls of
being swept off their feet, of fulfilling romantic ideals. This form of enter-
ing another's spirit is perhaps the most effective kind, because it makes peo-
ple feel better about themselves. In your presence, they live the life of the
person they had wanted to be—a great lover, a romantic hero, whatever it
is. Discover those crushed ideals and mirror them, bringing them back to
life by reflecting them back to your target. Few can resist such a lure.
Symbol: The
Hunter's Mirror. The lark is a sa-
vory bird, but difficult to catch. In the field, the
hunter places a mirror on a stand. The lark lands in
front of the glass, steps back and forth, entranced by its own
moving image and by the imitative mating dance it sees per-
formed before its eyes. Hypnotized, the bird loses all sense of its
surroundings, until the hunter's net traps it against the mirror.
surely pardon his offence. "
• When he heard these
words, the old man burst
out laughing and said:
"For a long time I have
jested with all types of
men, but no one has ever
had the patience or the wit
to enter into my humors as
you have done. Now,
therefore, I pardon you,
and ask you in truth to cat
and drink with me, and to
he my companion as long
as I live. " • Then the old
man ordered his attendants
to serve all the dishes
which they had consumed
in fancy, and when he and
my brother had eaten their
fill they repaired to the
drinking chamber, where
beautiful 
young women
sang and made music. The
old Barmecide gave
Shakashik a robe of honor
and made him his constant
companion.
— " T H E TALE OF SHAKASHIK,
THE BARBER'S SIXTH BROTHER,"
TALES 
FROM THE 
THOUSAND
AND 
ONE NIGHTS, TRANSLATED
BY N.J. DAWOOD
Enter Their Spirit • 
227
Reversal
I
n 1897 in Berlin, the poet Rainer Maria Rilke, whose reputation would
later circle the world, met Lou Andreas-Salomé, the Russian-born writer
and beauty who was notorious for having broken Nietzsche's heart. She
was the darling of Berlin intellectuals, and although Rilke was twenty-two
and she was thirty-six, he fell head over heels in love with her. He flooded
her with love letters, which showed that he had read all her books and
knew her tastes intimately. The two became friends. Soon she was editing
his poetry, and he hung on her every word.
Salomé was flattered by Rilke's mirroring of her spirit, enchanted by
the intense attention he paid her and the spiritual communion they began
to develop. She became his lover. But she was worried about his future; it
was difficult to make a living as a poet, and she encouraged him to learn
her native language, Russian, and become a translator. He followed her ad-
vice so avidly that within months he could speak Russian. They visited
Russia together, and Rilke was overwhelmed by what he saw—the peas-
ants, the folk customs, the art, the architecture. Back in Berlin, he turned
his rooms into a kind of shrine to Russia, and started wearing Russian peas-
ant blouses and peppering his conversation with Russian phrases. Now the
charm of his mirroring soon wore off. At first Salomé had been flattered
that he shared her interests so intensely, but now she saw this as something
else: he seemed to have no real identity. He had become dependent on her
for his own self-esteem. It was all so slavish. In 1899, much to his horror,
she broke off the relationship.
The lesson is simple: your entry into a person's spirit must be a tactic, a
way to bring him or her under your spell. You cannot be simply a sponge,
soaking up the other person's moods. Mirror them for too long and they
will see through you and be repelled by you. Beneath the similarity to them
that you make them see, you must have a strong underlying sense of your
own identity. When the time comes, you will want to lead them into your
spirit; you cannot live on their turf. Never take mirroring too far, then. It is
only useful in the first phase of a seduction; at some point the dynamic
must be reversed.
This desire for a double of
the other sex that resembles
us absolutely while still
being other, for a magical
creature who is ourself
while possessing the
advantage, over all our
imaginings, of an
autonomous existence. . . .
We find traces of it in even
the most banal
circumstances of love: in
the attraction linked to any
change, any disguise, as in
the importance of unison
and the repetition of self in
the other. . . . The great,
the implacable amorous
passions are all linked to
the fact that a being
imagines he sees his most
secret self spying upon him
behind the curtain of
another's eyes.
—ROBERT MUSIL, QUOTED IN
DENIS DE ROUGEMONT, LOVE
DECLARED, TRANSLATED BY
RICHARD HOWARD
Create Temptation
Lure the target deep into your seduction by creating the
proper temptation: a glimpse of the pleasures to come. As
the serpent tempted Eve with the promise of forbidden
knowledge, you must awaken a desire in your tar-
gets that they cannot control. Find that weakness
of theirs, that fantasy that has yet to be real-
ized, and hint that you can lead them toward
it. It could be wealth, it could be adventure, it
could be forbidden and guilty pleasures; the
key is to keep it vague. Dangle the prize before
their eyes, postponing satisfaction, and let their
minds do the rest. The future seems ripe with possi-
bility. Stimulate a curiosity stronger than the doubts
and anxieties that go with it, and they will follow you.
The Tantalizing Object
S
ome time in the 1880s, a gentleman named Don Juan de Todellas was
wandering through a park in Madrid when he saw a woman in her early
twenties getting out of a coach, followed by a two-year-old child and a
nursemaid. The young woman was elegantly dressed, but what took Don
Juan's breath away was her resemblance to a woman he had known nearly
three years before. Surely she could not be the same person. The woman he
had known, Cristeta Moreruela, was a showgirl in a second-rate theater.
She had been an orphan and was quite poor—her circumstances could not
have changed that much. He moved closer: the same beautiful face. And
then he heard her voice. He was so shocked that he had to sit down: it was
indeed the same woman.
Don Juan was an incorrigible seducer, whose conquests were innu-
merable and of every variety. But he remembered his affair with Cristeta
quite clearly, because she had been so young—the most charming girl he
had ever met. He had seen her in the theater, had courted her assiduously,
and had managed to persuade her to take a trip with him to a seaside town.
Although they had separate rooms, nothing could stop Don Juan: he made
up a story about business troubles, gained her sympathy, and in a tender
moment took advantage of her weakness. A few days later he left her, on
the pretext that he had to attend to business. He believed he would never
see her again. Feeling a little guilty—a rare occurrence with him—he sent
her 5,000 pesetas, pretending he would eventually rejoin her. Instead he
went to Paris. He had only recently returned to Madrid.
As he sat and remembered all this, an idea troubled him: the child.
Could the boy possibly be his? If not, she must have married almost imme-
diately after their affair. How could she do such a thing? She was obviously
wealthy now. Who could her husband be? Did he know her past? Mixed
with his confusion was intense desire. She was so young and beautiful. Why
had he given her up so easily? Somehow, even if she was married, he had to
get her back.
Don Juan began to frequent the park every day. He saw her a few more
times; their eyes met, but she pretended not to notice him. Tracing the
nursemaid during one of her errands, he struck up a conversation with her,
and asked her about her mistress's husband. She told him the man's name
was Señor Martínez, and that he was away on an extended business trip; she
also told him where Cristeta now lived. Don Juan gave her a note to give to
For these two crimes
Tantalus was punished
with the ruin of his
kingdom and, after his
death by Zeus's own hand,
with eternal torment in the
company of Ixion,
Sisyphus, 
Tityus, the
Danaids, and others. Now
he hangs, perennially
consumed by thirst and
hunger, from the bough of
a fruit tree which leans over
a marshy lake. Its waves
lap against his waist, and
sometimes reach his chin,
yet whenever he bends
down to drink, they slip
away, and nothing remains
but the black mud at his
feet; or, if he ever succeeds
in scooping up a handful of
water, it slips through his
fingers before he can do
more than wet his cracked
lips, leaving him thirstier
than ever. The tree is laden
with pears, shining apples,
sweet figs, ripe olives and
pomegranates, 
which
dangle against his
shoulders; but whenever he
reaches for the luscious
fruit, a gust of wind whirls
them out of his reach.
—ROBERT 
GRAVES, 
THE GREEK
MYTHS, VOLUME 2
231
232 
• 
The Art of Seduction
her mistress. Then he strolled by Cristeta's house—a beautiful palace. His
worst suspicions were confirmed: she had married for money.
Cristeta refused to see him. He persisted, sending more notes. Finally,
to avoid a scene, she agreed to meet him, just once, in the park. He pre-
pared for the meeting carefully: seducing her again would be a delicate op-
eration. But when he saw her coming toward him, in her beautiful clothes,
his emotions, and his lust, got the better of him. She could only belong to
him, never to another man, he told her. Cristeta took offense at this; obvi-
ously her present circumstances prevented even one more meeting. Still,
beneath her coolness he could sense strong emotions. He begged to see her
again, but she left without promising anything. He sent her more letters,
meanwhile wracking his brains trying to piece it all together: Who was this
Señor Martínez? Why would he marry a showgirl? How could Cristeta be
wrested away from him?
Finally Cristeta agreed to meet Don Juan one more time, in the theater,
where he dared not risk a scandal. They took a box, where they could talk.
She reassured him the child was not his. She said he only wanted her now
because she belonged to another, because he could not have her. No, he
said, he had changed; he would do anything to get her back. Disconcert-
ingly, at moments her eyes seemed to be flirting with him. But then she
seemed to be about to cry, and rested her head on his shoulder—only to
get up immediately, as if realizing this was a mistake. This was their last
meeting, she said, and quickly fled. Don Juan was beside himself. She was
playing with him; she was a coquette. He had only been claiming to have
changed, but perhaps it was true: no woman had ever treated him this way
before. He would never have allowed it.
For the next few nights Don Juan slept poorly. All he could think about
was Cristeta. He had nightmares about killing her husband, about growing
old and being alone. It was all too much. He had to leave town. He sent
her a goodbye note, and to his amazement, she replied: she wanted to see
him, she had something to tell him. By now he was too weak to resist. As
she had requested, he met her on a bridge, at night. This time she made no
effort to control herself: yes, she still loved Don Juan, and was ready to run
away with him. But he should come to her house tomorrow, in broad day-
light, and take her away. There could be no secrecy.
Beside himself with joy, Don Juan agreed to her demands. The next day
he showed up at her palace at the appointed hour, and asked for Señora
Martinez. There was no one there by that name, said the woman at the
door. Don Juan insisted: her name is Cristeta. Ah, Cristeta, the woman said:
she lives in the back, with the other tenants. Confused, Don Juan went to
the back of the palace. There he thought he saw her son, playing in the
street in dirty clothes. But no, he said to himself, it must be some other
child. He came to Cristeta's door, and instead of her servant, Cristeta herself
opened it. He entered. It was the room of a poor person. Hanging on im-
provised racks, however, were Cristeta's elegant clothes. As if in a dream, he
sat down, dumbfounded, and listened as Cristeta revealed the truth.
Don Juan: Arminta, listen
to the truth—-for are not
women friends of truth? I
am a nobleman, heir to the
ancient family 
of the
Tenorios, the conquerors of
Seville. After the king, my
father is the most powerful
and considered man at
court. . . . By chance I
happened on this road and
saw you. Love sometimes
behaves in a manner that
surprises even himself. . . .
• Arminta: I don't know if
what you're saying is truth
or lying rhetoric. I am
married to Batricio,
everybody knows it. How
can the marriage be
annulled, even if he
abandons me? • Don Juan:
When the marriage is not
consummated, 
whether by
malice or deceit, it can be
annulled. . . . • Arminta:
You are right. But, God
help me, won't you desert
me the moment you have
separated me from my
husband? . . . • Don
Juan: Arminta, 
light of my
eyes, tomorrow your
beautiful feet will slip into
polished silver slippers with
buttons of the purest gold.
And your alabaster throat
will be imprisoned in
beautiful necklaces; on
your fingers, rings set with
amethysts will shine like
stars, and from your ears
will da ngle orien tal pearls.
• Arminta: I am yours.
—TIRSO DE MOLINA,
THE 
PLAYBOY 
OF 
SEVILLE,
TRANSLATED BY ADRIENNE M.
SCHIZZANO 
AND OSCAR
MANDLL, IN MANDEL, ED.,
THE THEATRE 
OF 
DON JUAN
Now the serpent was more
subtle than any other wild
creature that the LORD
GOD had made. He said
to the woman, "Did God
say, 'You shall not cat of
Create Temptation 
• 233
She was not married, she had no child. Months after he had left her,
she had realized that she had been the victim of a consummate seducer. She
still loved Don Juan, but she was determined to turn the tables. Finding out
through a mutual friend that he had returned to Madrid, she took the five
thousand pesetas he had sent her and bought expensive clothes. She bor-
rowed a neighbor's child, asked the neighbor's cousin to play the child's
nursemaid, and rented a coach—all to create an elaborate fantasy that ex-
isted only in his mind. Cristeta did not even have to lie: she never actually
said she was married or had a child. She knew that being unable to have her
would make him want her more than ever. It was the only way to seduce a
man like him.
Overwhelmed by the lengths she had gone to, and by the emotions she
had so skillfully stirred in him, Don Juan forgave Cristeta and offered to
marry her. To his surprise, and perhaps to his relief, she politely declined.
The moment they married, she said, his eyes would wander elsewhere.
Only if they stayed as they were could she maintain the upper hand. Don
Juan had no choice but to agree.
Interpretation. Cristeta and Don Juan are characters in the novel Dulce y
Sabrosa (Sweet and Savory, 1891), by the Spanish writer Jacinto Octavio
Picon. Most of Picon's work deals with male seducers and their feminine
victims, a subject he studied and knew much about. Abandoned by Don
Juan, and reflecting on his nature, Cristeta decided to kill two birds with
one stone: she would get revenge and get him back. But how could she
lure such a man? The fruit once tasted, he no longer wanted it. What came
easily to him, or fell into his arms, held no allure for him. What would
tempt Don Juan into desiring Cristeta again, into pursuing her, was the
sense that she was already taken, that she was forbidden fruit. That was his
weakness—that was why he pursued virgins and married women, women
he was not supposed to have. To a man, she reasoned, the grass always
seems greener somewhere else. She would make herself that distant, allur-
ing object, just out of reach, tantalizing him, stirring up emotions he could
not control. He knew how charming and desirable she had once been to
him. The idea of possessing her again, and the pleasure he imagined it
would bring, were too much for him: he swallowed the bait.
Temptation is a twofold process. First you are coquettish, flirtatious;
you stimulate a desire by promising pleasure and distraction from daily life.
At the same time, you make it clear to your targets that they cannot have
you, at least not right away. You are establishing a barrier, some kind of
tension.
In days gone by such barriers were easy to create, by taking advantage
of preexisting social obstacles—of class, race, marriage, religion. Today the
barriers have to be more psychological: your heart is taken by someone
else; you are really not interested in the target; some secret holds you back;
the timing is bad; you are not good enough for the other person; the other
any tree of the garden'?"
And the woman said to the
serpent, "We may eat of
the fruit of the trees of the
garden; but God said,
'You shall not eat of the
fruit of the tree which is in
the midst of the garden,
neither shall you touch it,
lest you die.' " But the
serpent said to the woman,
"You will not die. For
God knows that when you
eat of it your eyes will be
opened, and you will be
like God, knowing good
and evil. " So when the
woman saw that the tree
was good for food, and that
it was a delight to the eyes,
and that the tree was to be
desired to make one wise,
she took of its fruit and
ate; and she also gave some
to her husband, and he ate.
—GENESIS 3:1 , O L D TESTAMENT
Thou strong seducer,
Opportunity.
—-JOHN DRYDEN
As he listened, Masetto
experienced such a longing
to go and stay with these
nuns that his whole body
tingled with excitement, for
it was clear from what he
had heard that he should
be able to achieve what he
had in mind. Realizing,
however, that he would get
nowhere by revealing his
intentions to Nuto, he
replied: • "How right you
were to come away from
the [nunnery]! What sort
of a life can any man lead
when he's surrounded by a
lot of women? He might as
well be living with a pack
of devils. Why, six times
out oj seven they don't
even know their own
minds." 
• But when they
234 
• 
The Art of Seduction
person is not good enough for you; and so on. Conversely, you can choose
someone who has a built-in barrier: they are taken, they are not meant to
want you. These barriers are more subtle than the social or religious variety,
but they are barriers nevertheless, and the psychology remains the same.
People are perversely excited by what they cannot or should not have.
Create this inner conflict—there is excitement and interest, but you are
unavailable—and you will have them grasping like Tantalus for water. And
as with Don Juan and Cristeta, the more you make your targets pursue you,
the more they imagine that it is they who are the aggressors. Your seduc-
tion is perfectly disguised.
The only way to get rid of temptation is to yield to it.
—OSCAR WILDE.
Keys to Seduction
M
ost of the time, people struggle to maintain security and a sense of
balance in their lives. If they were always uprooting themselves in
pursuit of every new person or fantasy that passed them by, they could not
survive the daily grind. They usually win the struggle, but it does not come
easy. The world is full of temptation. They read about people who have
more than they do, about adventures others are having, about people who
have found wealth and happiness. The security that they strive for, and that
they seem to have in their lives, is actually an illusion. It covers up a con-
stant tension.
As a seducer, you can never mistake people's appearance for reality. You
know that their fight to keep order in their lives is exhausting, and that they
are gnawed by doubts and regrets. It is hard to be good and virtuous, always
having to repress the strongest desires. With that knowledge in mind, se-
duction is easier. What people want is not temptation; temptation happens
every day. What people want is to give into temptation, to yield. That is the
only way to get rid of the tension in their lives. It costs much more to resist
temptation than to surrender.
Your task, then, is to create a temptation that is stronger than the daily
variety. It has to be focused on them, aimed at them as individuals—at their
weakness. Understand: everyone has a principal weakness, from which oth-
ers stem. Find that childhood insecurity, that lack in their life, and you hold
the key to tempting them. Their weakness may be greed, vanity, boredom,
some deeply repressed desire, a hunger for forbidden fruit. They signal it in
little details that elude their conscious control: their style of clothing, an
offhand comment. Their past, and particularly their past romances, will be
littered with clues. Give them a potent temptation, tailored to their weak-
ness, and you can make the hope of pleasure that you stir in them figure
more prominently than the doubts and anxieties that accompany it.
In 1621, King Philip III of Spain desperately wanted to forge an al-
had finished talking,
Masetto began to consider
what steps he ought to take
so that he could go and
stay with them. Knowing
himself to be perfectly
capable of carrying out the
duties mentioned by Nuto,
he had no worries about
losing the job on that
particular score, but he was
afraid lest he should be
turned down because of his
youth and his unusually
attractive appearance. And
so, having rejected a
number of other possible
expedients, 
he eventually
thought to himself: "The
convent is a long way off,
and there's nobody there
who knows me. If I can
pretend to be dumb, they'll
take me on for sure."
Clinging firmly to this
conjecture, he therefore
dressed himself in pauper's
rags and slung an ax over
his shoulder, and without
telling anyone where he
was going, he set out for
the convent. On his
arrival, he wandered into
the courtyard, where as
luck would have it he came
across the steward, and
with the aid of gestures
such as dumb people use,
he conveyed the impression
that he was begging for
something to eat, in return
for which he would attend
to any wood-chopping that
needed to be done. • The
steward gladly provided
him with something to eat,
after which he presented
him with a pile of logs that
Nuto had been unable to
chop. . . . Mow, when the
steward had discovered
what an excellent gardener
he was, he gestured to
Masetto, asking him
whether he would like to
stay there, and the latter
made signs to indicate that
he was willing to do
whatever the steward
Create Temptation 
• 235
liance with England by marrying his daughter to the son of the English
king, James I. James seemed open to the idea, but he stalled for time.
Spain's ambassador to the English court, a man called Gondomar, was given
the task of advancing Philip's plan. He set his sights on the king's favorite,
the Duke (former Earl) of Buckingham.
Gondomar knew the duke's main weakness: vanity. Buckingham hun-
gered for the glory and adventure that would add to his fame; he was bored
with his limited tasks, and he pouted and whined about this. The ambas-
sador first flattered him profusely—the duke was the ablest man in the
country and it was a shame he was given so little to do. Then, he began to
whisper to him of a great adventure. The duke, as Gondomar knew, was in
favor of the match with the Spanish princess, but these damned marriage
negotiations with King James were taking so long, and getting nowhere.
What if the duke were to accompany the king's son, his good friend Prince
Charles, to Spain? Of course, this would have to be done in secret, without
guards or escorts, for the English government and its ministers would never
sanction such a trip. But that would make it all the more dangerous and ro-
mantic. Once in Madrid, the prince could throw himself at Princess
Maria's feet, declare his undying love, and carry her back to England in tri-
umph. What a chivalrous deed it would be and all for love. The duke
would get all the credit and it would make his name famous for centuries.
The duke fell for the idea, and convinced Charles to go along; after
much arguing, they also convinced a reluctant King James. The trip was a
near disaster (Charles would have had to convert to Catholicism to win
Maria), and the marriage never happened, but Gondomar had done his job.
He did not bribe the duke with offers of money or power—he aimed at
the childlike part of him that never grew up. A child has little power to re-
sist. It wants everything, now, and rarely thinks of the consequences. A
child lies lurking in everyone—a pleasure that was denied them, a desire
that was repressed. Hit at that point, tempt them with the proper toy (ad-
venture, money, fun), and they will slough off their normal adult reason-
ableness. Recognize their weakness by whatever childlike behavior they
reveal in daily life—it is the tip of the iceberg.
Napoleon Bonaparte was appointed the supreme general of the French
army in 1796. His commission was to defeat the Austrian forces that had
taken over northern Italy. The obstacles were immense: Napoleon was only
twenty-six at the time; the generals below him were envious of his position
and doubtful of his abilities. His soldiers were tired, underfed, underpaid,
and grumpy. How could he motivate this group to fight the highly experi-
enced Austrian army? As he prepared to cross the Alps into Italy, Napoleon
gave a speech to his troops that may have been the turning point in his ca-
reer, and in his life: "Soldiers, you are half starved and half naked. The gov-
ernment owes you much, but can do nothing for you. Your patience, your
courage, do you honor, but give you no glory. . . . I will lead you into the
most fertile plains of the world. There you will find flourishing cities,
teeming provinces. There you will reap honor, glory, and wealth." The
wanted. . . . • Now, one
day, when Masetto
happened to he taking a
rest after a spell of
strenuous work, he was
approached by two very
young nuns who were out
walking in the garden.
Since he gave them the
impression that he was
asleep, they began to stare
at him, and the bolder of
the two said to her
companion: • "If I could
be sure that you would
keep it a secret, I would
tell you about an idea that
has often crossed my mind,
and one that might well
work out to our mutual
benefit." 
• "Do tell me,"
replied the other. "You can
be quite certain that I
shan't talk about it to
anyone. " • The bold one
began to speak more
plainly. • "I wonder," she
said, "whether you have
ever considered what a
strict life we have to lead,
and how the only men who
ever dare set foot in this
place are the steward, who
is elderly, and this dumb
gardener of ours. Yet I have
often heard it said, by
several of the ladies who
have come to visit us, that
all other pleasures in the
world are mere trifles by
comparison with the one
experienced by a woman
when she goes with a man.
I have thus been thinking,
since I have nobody else to
hand, that I would like to
discover with the aid of this
dumb fellow whether they
are telling the truth. As it
happens, there couldn't be
a better man for the
purpose, because even if he
wanted to let the cat out of
the bag, he wouldn't be
able to. He wouldn't even
know how to explain, for
you can see for yourself
what a mentally retarded,
dim-witted hulk of a youth
236 
• 
The Art of Seduction
speech had a powerful effect. Days later these same soldiers, after a rough
climb over the mountains, gazed down on the Piedmont valley. Napoleon s
words echoed in their ears, and a ragged, grumbling gang became an
inspired army that would sweep across northern Italy in pursuit of the
Austrians.
Napoleon's use of temptation had two elements: behind you is a grim
past; ahead of you is a future of wealth and glory, if you follow me. Integral
to the temptation strategy is a clear demonstration that the target has noth-
ing to lose and everything to gain. The present offers little hope, the future
can be full of pleasure and excitement. Remember to keep the future gains
vague, though, and somewhat out of reach. Be too specific and you will
disappoint; make the promise too close at hand, and you will not be able to
postpone satisfaction long enough to get what you want.
The barriers and tensions in temptation are there to stop people from
giving in too easily and too superficially. You want them to struggle, to
resist, to be anxious. Queen Victoria surely fell in love with her prime
minister, Benjamin Disraeli, but there were barriers of religion (he was a
dark-skinned Jew), class (she, of course, was a queen), social taste (she was
a paragon of virtue, he a notorious dandy). The relationship was never
consummated, but what deliciousness those barriers gave to their daily en-
counters, which were full of constant flirtation.
Many such social barriers are gone today, so they have to be
manufactured—it is the only way to put spice into seduction. Taboos of
any kind are a source of tension, and they are psychological now, not reli-
gious. You are looking for some repression, some secret desire that will
make your victim squirm uncomfortably if you hit upon it, but will tempt
them all the more. Search in their past; whatever they seem to fear or flee
from might hold the key. It could be a yearning for a mother or father fig-
ure, or a latent homosexual desire. Perhaps you can satisfy that desire by
presenting yourself as a masculine woman or a feminine man. For others
you play the Lolita, or the daddd—someone they are not supposed to have,
the dark side of their personality. Keep the connection vague—you want
them to reach for something elusive, something that comes out of their
own mind.
In London in 1769, Casanova met a young woman named Charpillon.
She was much younger than he, as beautiful a woman as he had ever
known, and with a reputation for destroying men. In one of their first en-
counters she told him straight out that he would fall for her and she would
ruin him. To everyone's disbelief, Casanova pursued her. In each encounter
she hinted she might give in—perhaps the next time, if he was nice to her.
She inflamed his curiosity—what pleasure she would yield; he would be
the first, he would tame her. "The venom of desire penetrated my whole
being so completely," he later wrote, "that had she so wished it, she could
have despoiled me of everything I possessed. I would have beggared myself
for one little kiss." This "affair" indeed proved his ruin; she humiliated him.
Charpillon had rightly gauged that Casanova's primary weakness was his
the fellow is. I would be
glad to know what you
think of the idea." •
"Dear me!" said the other.
"Don't you realize that we
have promised God to
preserve our virginity?" •
"Pah!" she said. 
"We are
constantly 
making Him
promises that we never
keep! What does it matter
if we fail to keep this
one? He can always
find other girls to preserve
their virginity for Him. " •
. . . Before the time came
for them to leave, they had
each made repeated trials of
the dumb fellow's riding
ability, and later on, when
they were busily swapping
tales about it all, they
agreed that it was every bit
as pleasant an experience
as they had been led to
believe, indeed more so.
And from 
then on,
whenever the opportunity
arose, they whiled away
many a pleasant hour in
the dumb fellow's arms. •
One day, however, a
companion of theirs
happened to look out from
the window of her cell, saw
the goings-on, and drew
the attention of two others
to what was afoot. Having
talked the matter over
between themselves, they at
first decided to report the
pair to the abbess. But then
they changed their minds,
and by common agreement
with the other two, they
took up shares in Masetto 's
holding. And because of
various indiscretions, these
five were subsequently
joined by the remaining
three, one after the other. •
Finally, the abbess, who
was still unaware of all
this, was taking a stroll one
very hot day in the garden,
all by herself when she
came across Masetto
stretched out fast asleep in
the shade of an almond
Create Temptation • 237
need for conquest, to overcome challenge, to taste what no other man had
tasted. Beneath this was a kind of masochism, a pleasure in the pain a
woman could give him. Playing the impossible woman, enticing and then
frustrating him, she offered the ultimate temptation. What will often do the
trick is to give the target the sense that you are a challenge, a prize to be
won. In possessing you they will get what no other has had. They may even
get pain; but pain is close to pleasure, and offers its own temptations.
In the Old Testament we read that "David arose from his couch and
was walking upon the roof of the king's house . . . [and] he saw from the
roof a woman bathing; and the woman was very beautiful." The woman
was Bathsheba. David summoned her, seduced her (supposedly), then pro-
ceeded to get rid of her husband, Uriah, in battle. In fact, however, it was
Bathsheba who had seduced David. She bathed on her roof at an hour
when she knew he would be standing on his balcony. After tempting a man
she knew had a weakness for women, she played the coquette, forcing him
to come after her. This is the opportunity strategy: give someone weak the
chance to have what they lust after by merely placing yourself within their
reach, as if by accident. Temptation is often a matter of timing, of crossing
the path of the weak at the right moment, giving them the opportunity to
surrender.
Bathsheba used her entire body as a lure, but it is often more effective
to use only a part of the body, creating a fetishlike effect. Madame Re-
camier would let you glimpse her body beneath the sheer dresses she wore,
but only briefly, when she took off her overgarment to dance. Men would
leave that evening dreaming of what little they had seen. Empress Josephine
made a point of baring her beautiful arms in public. Give the target only a
part of you to fantasize about, thereby creating a constant temptation in
their mind.
tree. Too much riding by
night had left him with
very little strength for the
day's labors, and so there
he lay, with his clothes
ruffled up in front by the
wind, leaving him all
exposed. Finding herself
alone, the lady stood with
her eyes riveted to this
spectacle, and she was
seized by the same craving
to which her young charges
had already succumbed.
So, having roused Masetto,
she led him away to her
room, where she kept him
for several days, thus
provoking bitter complaints
from the nuns over the fact
that the handyman had
suspended work in the
garden. Before sending him
back to his own quarters,
she repeatedly savored the
one pleasure for which she
had always reserved her
most fierce disapproval,
and from then on she
demanded regular
supplementary 
allocations,
amounting to considerably
more than her fair share.
—GIOVANNI BOCCACCIO,
THE DECAMERON, TRANSLATED
B Y G . H . M C W I L L I A M
Symbol:
The Apple in the Garden
of Eden. 
The fruit looks deeply
inviting, and you are not supposed to
eat of it; it is forbidden. But that is pre-
cisely why you think of it day and night.
You see it but cannot have it. And the
only way to get rid of this tempta-
tion is to yield and taste
the fruit.
238 
• 
The Art of Seduction
Reversal
T
he reverse of temptation is security or satisfaction, and both are fatal to
seduction. If you cannot tempt someone out of their habitual com-
fort, you cannot seduce them. If you satisfy the desire you have awakened,
the seduction is over. There is no reversal to temptation. Although some
stages can be passed over, no seduction can proceed without some form of
temptation, so it is always better to plan it carefully, tailoring it to the weak-
ness and childishness in your particular target.
Phase Two
Lead Astray—
Creating Pleasure and Confusion
Your victims are sufficiently intrigued and their desire for you is
growing, but their attachment is weak and at any moment they could
decide to turn back. The goal in this phase is to lead your victims so
far astray—keeping them emotional and confused, giving them plea-
sure but making them want more—that retreat is no longer possible.
Springing on them a pleasant surprise will make them see you as de-
lightfully unpredictable, but will also keep them off balance (9: Keep
them in suspense—what comes next?). The artful use of soft and
pleasant words will intoxicate them and stimulate fantasies (10: Use
the demonic power of words to sow confusion). Aesthetic touches and
pleasant little rituals will titillate their senses, distract their minds
(11: Pay attention to detail).
Your greatest danger in this phase is the mere hint of routine or famil-
iarity. You need to maintain some mystery, to keep a little distance so
that in your absence your victims become obsessed with you (12: Poeti-
cize your presence). They may realize they are falling for you, but
they must never suspect how much of this has come from your manipu-
lations. A well-timed display of your weakness, of how emotional you
have become under their influence will help cover your tracks (13: Dis-
arm through strategic weakness and vulnerability). To excite your vic-
tims and make them highly emotional, you must give them the feeling
that they are actually living some of the fantasies you have stirred in
their imagination (14: Confuse desire and reality). By giving them
only a part of the fantasy, you will keep them coming back for more.
Focusing your attention on them so that the rest of the world fades
away, even taking them on a trip, will lead them far astray (15: Isolate
your victim). There is no turning back.
Keep Them in Suspense-
What Comes Next?
The moment people feel they know what to expect from
you, your spell on them is broken. More: you have ceded
them power. The only way to lead the seduced along and
keep the upper hand is to create suspense, a calculated sur-
prise. People love a mystery, and this is the key to luring
them further into your web. Behave in a way that leaves
them wondering, What are you up to? Doing something
they do not expect from you will give them a delightful
sense of spontaneity—they will not be able to fore-
see what comes next. You are always one step
ahead and in control. Give the victim a
thrill with a sudden change of
direction.
The Calculated Surprise
I
n 1753, the twenty-eight-old Giovanni Casanova met a young girl
named Caterina with whom he fell in love. Her father knew what kind
of man Casanova was, and to prevent some mishap before he could marry
her off, he sent her away to a convent on the Venetian island of Murano,
where she was to remain for four years.
Casanova, however, was not one to be daunted. He smuggled letters to
Caterina. He began to attend Mass at the convent several times a week,
catching glimpses of her. The nuns began to talk among themselves: who
was this handsome young man who appeared so often? One morning, as
Casanova, leaving Mass, was about to board a gondola, a servant girl from
the convent passed by and dropped a letter at his feet. Thinking it might be
from Caterina, he picked it up. It was indeed intended for him, but it was
not from Caterina; its author was a nun at the convent, who had noticed
him on his many visits and wanted to make his acquaintance. Was he inter-
ested? If so, he should come to the convent's parlor at a particular time,
when the nun would be receiving a visitor from the outside world, a friend
of hers who was a countess. He could stand at a distance, observe her, and
decide whether she was to his liking.
Casanova was most intrigued by the letter: its style was dignified, but
there was something naughty about it as well—particularly from a nun. He
had to find out more. At the appointed day and time, he stood to the side
in the convent parlor and saw an elegantly dressed woman talking with a
nun seated behind a grating. He heard the nun's name mentioned, and was
astonished: it was Mathilde M., a well-known Venetian in her early twen-
ties, whose decision to enter a convent had surprised the whole city. But
what astonished him most was that beneath her nun's habit, he could see
that she was a beautiful young woman, particularly in her eyes, which were
a brilliant blue. Perhaps she needed a favor done, and intended that he
would serve as her cat's-paw.
His curiosity got the better of him. A few days later he returned to the
convent and asked to see her. As he waited for her, his heart was beating a
mile a minute—he did not know what to expect. She finally appeared and
sat down behind the grating. They were alone in the room, and she said
that she could arrange for them to have supper together at a little villa
nearby. Casanova was delighted, but wondered what kind of nun he was
dealing with. "And—have you no lover but me?" he asked. "I have a
I count upon taking [the
French people] by surprise.
A bold deed upsets people's
equanimity, and they are
dumbfounded by a great
novelty.
—NAPOLEON BONAPARTE,
QUOTED IN EMIL LUDWIG,
NAPOLEON, 
TRANSLATED 
BY
EDEN AND CEDAR PAUL
The first care of any dandy
is to never do what one
expects them to do, to
always go beyond. . . .
The unexpected can be
nothing more than a
gesture, but a gesture that
is totally uncommon.
Alcibiades cut off the tail of
his dog in order to surprise
people. When he saw the
looks on his friends as they
gazed upon the mutilated
animal, he said: "Ah, that
is precisely what I wanted
to happen: as long as the
Athenians gossip 
about
this, they will not say
anything worse about me."
• Attracting attention is
not the only goal of a
dandy, he wants to hold it
by unexpected, even
ridiculous means. After
Alcibiades, 
how many
apprentice dandies cut off
the tails of their dogs! The
243
244 
• The Art of Seduction
friend, who is also absolutely my master," she replied. "It is to him I owe
my wealth." She asked if he had a lover. Yes, he replied. She then said, in a
mysterious tone, "I warn you that if you once allow me to take her place in
your heart, no power on earth can tear me from it." She then gave him the
key to the villa and told him to meet her there in two nights. He kissed her
through the grating and left in a daze. "I passed the next two days in a state
of feverish impatience," he wrote, "which prevented me from sleeping or
eating. Over and above birth, beauty, and wit, my new conquest possessed
an additional charm: she was forbidden fruit. I was about to become a rival
of the Church." He imagined her in her habit, and with her shaven head.
He arrived at the villa at the appointed hour. Mathilde was waiting for
him. To his surprise, she wore an elegant dress, and somehow she had
avoided having her head shaved, for her hair was in a magnificent chignon.
Casanova began to kiss her. She resisted, but only slightly, and then pulled
back, saying a meal was ready for them. Over dinner she filled in a few
more of the gaps: her money allowed her to bribe certain people, so that
she could escape from the convent every so often. She had mentioned
Casanova to her friend and master, and he had approved their liaison. He
must be old? Casanova asked. No, she replied, a glint in her eye, he is in his
forties, and quite handsome. After supper, a bell rang—her signal to hurry
back to the convent, or she would be caught. She changed back into her
habit and left.
A beautiful vista now seemed to stretch before Casanova, of months
spent in the villa with this delightful creature, all of it courtesy of the mys-
terious master who paid for it all. He soon returned to the convent to
arrange the next meeting. They would rendezvous in a square in Venice,
then retire to the villa. At the appointed time and place, Casanova saw a
man approach him. Fearing it was her mysterious friend, or some other
man sent to kill him, he recoiled. The man circled behind him, then came
up close: it was Mathilde, wearing a mask and men's clothes. She laughed at
the fright she had given him. What a devilish nun. He had to admit that
dressed as a man she excited him even more.
Casanova began to suspect that all was not as it seemed. For one, he
found a collection of libertine novels and pamphlets in Mathilde's house.
Then she made blasphemous comments, for example about the joy they
would have together during Lent, "mortifying their flesh." Now she re-
ferred to her mysterious friend as her lover. A plan evolved in his mind to
take her away from this man and from the convent, eloping with her and
possessing her himself.
A few days later he received a letter from her, in which she made a con-
fession: during one of their more passionate trysts at the villa, her lover
had hidden in a closet, watching the whole thing. The lover, she told him,
was the French ambassador to Venice, and Casanova had impressed him.
Casanova was not one to be fooled with like this, yet the next day he was
back at the convent, submissively arranging for another tryst. This time she
showed up at the hour they had named, and he embraced her—only to
baron of Saint-Cricq, for
example, with his ice cream
boots: one very hot day, he
ordered at Tortonis two ice
creams, the vanilla served
in his right boot, the
strawberry in his left
boot. . . . The Count
Saint-Germain 
loved to
bring his friends to the
theater, in his voluptuous
carriage lined in pink satin
and drawn by two black
horses with enormous tails;
he asked his friends in that
inimitable tone of his:
"Which piece of
entertainment did you wish
to see? Vaudeville, the
Variety show, the Palais-
Royal theater? I took the
liberty of purchasing a box
for all three of them."
Once the choice was made,
with a look of great
disdain, he would take the
unused tickets, roll them
up, and use them to light
his cigar.
— M A U D DE BELLEROCHE,
DU DANDY AU PLAY-BOY
While Shahzaman sat at
one of the windows
overlooking the king's
garden, he saw a door open
in the palace, through
which came twenty slave
girls and twenty negroes.
In their midst was his
brother's [King
Shahriyar's] 
queen, a
woman 
of surpassing
beauty. They made their
way to the fountain, where
they all undressed and sat
on the grass. The king's
wife then called out:
"Come Mass'ood!" and
there promptly came to her
a black slave, who mounted
her after smothering her
with embraces and kisses.
So also did the negroes
with the slave girls, reveling
together till the approach of
night. . . . • . . . And so
Keep Them in Suspense—What Comes Next? • 
245
find that he was embracing Caterina, dressed up in Mathilde's clothes.
Mathilde had befriended Caterina and learned her story. Apparently taking
pity on her, she had arranged it so that Caterina could leave the convent for
the evening, and meet up with Casanova. Only a few months before
Casanova had been in love with this girl, but he had forgotten about her.
Compared to the ingenious Mathilde, Caterina was a simpering bore. He
could not conceal his disappointment. He burned to see Mathilde.
Casanova was angry at the trick Mathilde had played. But a few days
later, when he saw her again, all was forgiven. As she had predicted during
their first interview, her power over him was complete. He had become her
slave, addicted to her whims, and to the dangerous pleasures she offered.
Who knows what rash act he might have committed on her behalf had
their affair not been cut short by circumstance.
Interpretation. Casanova was almost always in control in his seductions.
He was the one who led, taking his victim on a trip to an unknown desti-
nation, luring her into his web. In all of his memoirs the story of Mathilde
is the only seduction in which the tables are happily turned: he is the se-
duced, the bewildered victim.
What made Casanova Mathilde's slave was the same tactic he had used
on countless girls: the irresistible lure of being led by another person, the
thrill of being surprised, the power of mystery. Each time he left Mathilde
his head was spinning with questions. Her ability to go on surprising him
kept her always in his mind, deepening her spell and blotting Caterina out.
Each surprise was carefully calculated for the effect it would produce. The
first unexpected letter piqued his curiosity, as did that first sight of her in
the waiting room; suddenly seeing her dressed as an elegant woman stirred
intense desire; then seeing her dressed as a man intensified the excitingly
transgressive nature of their liaison. The surprises put him off balance, yet
left him quivering with anticipation of the next one. Even an unpleasant
surprise, such as the encounter with Caterina that Mathilde had set up, kept
him emotional and weak. Meeting the somewhat bland Caterina at that
moment only made him long that much more for Mathilde.
In seduction, you need to create constant tension and suspense, a feel-
ing that with you nothing is predictable. Do not think of this as a painful
challenge. You are creating drama in real life, so pour your creative energies
into it, have some fun. There are all kinds of calculated surprises you can
spring on your victims—sending a letter from out of the blue, showing up
unexpectedly, taking them to a place they have never been. But best of all
are surprises that reveal something new about your character. This needs to
be set up. In those first few weeks, your targets will tend to make certain
snap judgments about you, based on appearances. Perhaps they see you as
a bit shy, practical, puritanical. You know that this is not the real you, but it
is how you act in social situations. Let them, however, have these impres-
sions, and in fact accentuate them a little, without overacting: for instance,
Shahzaman 
related to [his
brother King Shahriyar] all
that he had seen in the
king's garden that day. . . .
• Upon this Shahriyar
announced his intention to
set forth on another
expedition. 
The troops
went out of the city with
the tents, and King
Shahriyar followed 
them.
And after he had stayed a
while in the camp, he gave
orders to his slaves that no
one was to be admitted to
the king's tent. He then
disguised himself and
returned unnoticed to the
palace, where his brother
was waiting for him. They
both sat at one of the
windows overlooking the
garden; and when they had
been there a short time, the
queen and her women
appeared with the black
slaves, and behaved as
Shahzaman 
had
described. . . . • As soon
as they entered the palace,
King Shahriyar put his
wife to death, together with
her women and the black
slaves. Thenceforth he
made it his custom to take
a virgin in marriage to his
bed each night, and kill her
the next morning. This he
continued to do for three
years, until a clamor rose
among the people, some of
whom fled the country with
their daughters. • Now the
vizier had two daughters.
The elder was called
Shahrazad, and the
younger 
Dunyazad.
Shahrazad possessed 
many
accomplishments and was
versed in the wisdom of the
poets and the legends of
ancient kings. • That day
Shahrazad noticed her
father's anxiety and asked
him what it was that
troubled him. When the
vizier told her of his
predicament, she said:
"Give me in marriage to
246 
• 
The Art of Seduction
seem a little more reserved than usual. Now you have room to suddenly
surprise them with some bold or poetic or naughty action. Once they have
changed their minds about you, surprise them again, as Mathilde did with
Casanova—first a nun who wants an affair, then a libertine, then a seduc-
tress with a sadistic streak. As they strain to figure you out, they will be
thinking about you all of the time, and will want to know more about you.
Their curiosity will lead them further into your web, until it is too late for
them to turn back.
This is always the law for the interesting. . . . If one just
knows how to surprise, one always wins the game. The en-
ergy of the person involved is temporarily suspended; one
makes it impossible for her to act.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD
Keys to Seduction
A
child is usually a willful, stubborn creature who will deliberately do
the opposite of what we ask. But there is one scenario in which chil-
dren will happily give up their usual willfulness: when they are promised a
surprise. Perhaps it is a present hidden in a box, a game with an unforesee-
able ending, a journey with an unknown destination, a suspenseful story
with a surprise finish. In those moments when children are waiting for a
surprise, their willpower is suspended. They are in your thrall for as long as
you dangle possibility before them. This childish habit is buried deep
within us, and is the source of an elemental human pleasure: being led by a
person who knows where they are going, and who takes us on a journey.
(Maybe our joy in being carried along involves a buried memory of being
literally carried, by a parent, when we are small.)
We get a similar thrill when we watch a movie or read a thriller: we are
in the hands of a director or author who is leading us along, taking us
through twists and turns. We stay in our seats, we turn the pages, happily
enslaved by the suspense. It is the pleasure a woman has in being led by a
confident dancer, letting go of any defensiveness she may feel and letting
another person do the work. Falling in love involves anticipation; we are
about to head off in a new direction, enter a new life, where everything
will be strange. The seduced wants to be led, to be carried along like a
child. If you are predictable, the charm wears off; everyday life is pre-
dictable. In the Arabian Tales from the Thousand and One Nights, each night
King Shahriyar takes a virgin as his wife, then kills her the following morn-
ing. One such virgin, Shahrazad, manages to escape this fate by telling the
king a story that can only be completed the following day. She does this
night after night, keeping the king in constant suspense. When one story
finishes, she quickly starts up another. She does this for nearly three years,
until the king finally decides to spare her life. You are like Shahrazad: with-
this king; either I shall die
and be a ransom for the
daughters of Moslems, or
live and be the cause of
their deliverance." He
earnestly pleaded with her
against such a hazard; but
Shahrazad was resolved,
and would not yield to her
father's entreaties. . . . •
So the vizier arrayed his
daughter in bridal garments
and decked her with jewels
and made ready to
announce 
Shahrazad's
wedding to the king. •
Before saying farewell to
her sister, Shahrazad gave
her these instructions:
"When I am received by
the king, I shall send for
you. Then when the king
has finished his act with
me, you must say: 'Tell
me, my sister, some tale of
marvel to beguile the
night.' Then I will tell you
a tale which, if Allah wills,
shall be the means of our
deliverance. " • The vizier
went with his daughter to
the king. And when the
king had taken the maiden
Shahrazad to his chamber
and had lain with her, she
wept and said: "I have a
young sister to whom I
wish to bid farewell." •
The king sent for
Dunyazad. 
When 
she
arrived, she threw her arms
around her sister's neck,
and seated herself by her
side. 
• Then Dunyazad
said to Shahrazad: 
"Tell
us, my sister, a tale of
marvel, so that the night
may pass pleasantly." •
"Gladly," 
she answered,
"if the king permits. " •
And the king, who was
troubled with sleeplessness,
eagerly listened to the tale
of Shahrazad: Once upon
the time, in the city of
Basrah, there lived a
prosperous tailor who was
fond of sport and
merriment. . . . • [Nearly
Keep Them in 
Suspense—What 
Comes Next? • 
247
out new stories, without a feeling of anticipation, your seduction will die.
Keep stoking the fires night after night. Your targets must never know
what's coming next—what surprises you have in store for them. As with
King Shahriyar, they will be under your control for as long as you can keep
them guessing.
In 1765, Casanova met a young Italian countess named Clementina
who lived with her two sisters in a château. Clementina loved to read, and
had little interest in the men who swarmed around her. Casanova added
himself to their number, buying her books, engaging her in literary discus-
sions, but she was no less indifferent to him than she had been to them.
Then one day he invited the entire family on a little trip. He would not tell
them where they were going. They piled into the carriage, all the way try-
ing to guess their destination. A few hours later they entered Milan—what
joy, the sisters had never been there. Casanova led them to his apartment,
where three dresses had been laid out—the most magnificent dresses the
girls had ever seen. There was one for each of the sisters, he told them, and
the green one was for Clementina. Stunned, she put it on, and her face lit
up. The surprises did not stop—there was a delicious meal, champagne,
games. By the time they returned to the château, late in the evening,
Clementina had fallen hopelessly in love with Casanova.
The reason was simple: surprise creates a moment when people's de-
fenses come down and new emotions can rush in. If the surprise is pleasur-
able, the seductive poison enters their veins without their realizing it. Any
sudden event has a similar effect, striking directly at our emotions before
we get defensive. Rakes know this power well.
A young married woman in the court of Louis XV, in eighteenth-
century France, noticed a handsome young courtier watching her, first at
the opera, then in church. Making inquiries, she found it was the Duc de
Richelieu, the most notorious rake in France. No woman was safe from
this man, she was warned; he was impossible to resist, and she should avoid
him at all costs. Nonsense, she replied, she was happily married. He could
not possibly seduce her. Seeing him again, she laughed at his persistence.
He would disguise himself as a beggar and approach her in the park, or his
coach would suddenly come alongside hers. He was never aggressive, and
seemed harmless enough. She let him talk to her at court; he was charming
and witty, and even asked to meet her husband.
The weeks passed, and the woman realized she had made a mistake: she
looked forward to seeing the marquis. She had let down her guard. This
had to stop. Now she started avoiding him, and he seemed to respect her
feelings: he stopped bothering her. Then one day, weeks later, she was at
the country manor of a friend when the marquis suddenly appeared. She
blushed, trembled, walked away, but his unexpected appearance had caught
her unawares—it had pushed her over the edge. A few days later she be-
came another of Richelieu's victims. Of course he had set the whole thing
up, including the supposed surprise encounter.
Not only does suddenness create a seductive jolt, it conceals manipula-
three years pass.] Now
during this time
Shahrazad 
had borne King
Shahriyar three sous. On
the thousand and first
night, when she had ended
the tale of Ma'aruf she
rose and kissed the ground
before him, saying: "Great
King, for a thousand and
one nights I have been
recounting to you the fables
of past ages and the
legends of ancient kings.
May I be so bold as to
crave a favor of your
majesty?" 
• The king
replied: "Ask, and it shall
be granted. " • Shahrazad
called out to the nurses,
saying: "Bring me my
children. " • . . . "Behold
these three [little boys]
whom Allah has granted to
us. For their sake I implore
you to spare my life. For if
you destroy the mother of
these infants, they will find
none among women to love
them as I would." • The
king embraced his three
sous, and his eyes filled
with tears as he answered:
"I swear by Allah,
Shahrazad, that you were
already pardoned before the
coming of these children.
I loved you because I
found you chaste and
tender, wise and eloquent.
May Allah bless you,
and bless your father and
mother, your ancestors,
and all your descendants.
O, Shahrazad, this
thousand and first night
is brighter for us than
the day!"
—TALES 
FROM 
THE 
THOUSAND
AND 
ONE 
NIGHTS, TRANSLATED
BY N.J. DAWOOD
248 
• 
The Art of Seduction
tions. Appear somewhere unexpectedly, say or do something sudden, and
people will not have time to figure out that your move was calculated. Take
them to some new place as if it only just occurred to you, suddenly reveal
some secret. Made emotionally vulnerable, they will be too bewildered to
see through you. Anything that happens suddenly seems natural, and any-
thing that seems natural has a seductive charm.
Only months after arriving in Paris in 1926, Josephine Baker had com-
pletely charmed and seduced the French public with her wild dancing. But
less than a year later she could feel their interest wane. Since childhood she
had hated feeling out of control of her life. Why be at the mercy of the
fickle public? She left Paris and returned a year later, her manner com-
pletely altered—now she played the part of an elegant Frenchwoman, who
happened to be an ingenious dancer and performer. The French fell in love
again; the power was back on her side. If you are in the public eye, you
must learn from this trick of surprise. People are bored, not only with their
own lives but with people who are meant to keep them from being bored.
The minute they feel they can predict your next step, they will eat you
alive. The artist Andy Warhol kept moving from incarnation to incarna-
tion, and no one could predict the next one—artist, filmmaker, society
man. Always keep a surprise up your sleeve. To keep the public's attention,
keep them guessing. Let the moralists accuse you of insincerity, of having
no core or center. They are actually jealous of the freedom and playfulness
you reveal in your public persona.
Finally, you might think it wiser to present yourself as someone reliable,
not given to caprice. If so, you are in fact merely timid. It takes courage
and effort to mount a seduction. Reliability is fine for drawing people in,
but stay reliable and you stay a bore. Dogs are reliable, a seducer is not. If,
on the other hand, you prefer to improvise, imagining that any kind of
planning or calculation is antithetical to the spirit of surprise, you are mak-
ing a grave mistake. Constant improvisation simply means you are lazy, and
thinking only about yourself. What often seduces a person is the feeling
that you have expended effort on their behalf. You do not need to trumpet
this too loudly, but make it clear in the gifts you make, the little journeys
you plan, the little teases you lure people with. Little efforts like these will
be more than amply rewarded by the conquest of the heart and willpower
of the seduced.
Symbol: The Roller Coaster.
The car rises slowly to the top, then suddenly hurtles you into
space, whips you to the side, throws you upside down, in every possible direction.
The riders laugh and scream. What thrills them is to let go, to grant control to someone else,
who propels them in unexpected directions. What new thrill awaits them around the next corner?
Keep Them in Suspense—What Comes Next? • 
249
Reversal
S
urprise can be unsurprising if you keep doing the same thing again and
again. Jiang Qing would try to surprise her husband Mao Zedong with
sudden changes of mood, from harshness to kindness and back. At first he
was captivated; he loved the feeling of never knowing what was coming.
But it went on for years, and was always the same. Soon, Madame Mao's
supposedly unpredictable mood swings just annoyed him. You need to vary
the method of your surprises. When Madame de Pompadour was the lover
of the inveterately bored King Louis XV, she made each surprise different—
a new amusement, a new game, a new fashion, a new mood. He could
never predict what would come next, and while he waited for the next sur-
prise, his willpower was temporarily suspended. No man was ever more of
a slave to a woman than was Louis to Madame de Pompadour. When you
change direction, make the new direction truly new.
Use the Demonic Power of Words
to Sow Confusion
It
is hard to make
people listen; they are consumed
with their own thoughts and desires, and
have little time for yours. The trick to making them
listen is to say what they want to hear, to fill their ears
with whatever is pleasant to them. This is the essence of seduc-
tive language. Inflame people's emotions with loaded phrases,
flatter them, comfort their insecurities, envelop them in fantasies,
sweet words, and promises, and not only will they listen to
you, they will lose their will to resist you. Keep your lan-
guage vague, letting them read into it what
they want. Use writing to stir up fantasies
and to create an idealized
portrait of your-
self.
Seductive Oratory
O
n May 13, 1958, right-wing Frenchmen and their sympathizers in the
army seized control of Algeria, which was then a French colony.
They had been afraid that France's socialist government would grant Alge-
ria its independence. Now, with Algeria under their control, they threat-
ened to take over all of France. Civil war seemed imminent.
At this dire moment all eyes turned to General Charles de Gaulle, the
World War II hero who had played a crucial role in liberating France from
the Nazis. For the last ten years de Gaulle had stayed away from politics, dis-
gusted with the infighting among the various parties. He remained very
popular, and was generally seen as the one man who could unite the country,
but he was also a conservative, and the right-wingers felt certain that if he
came to power he would support their cause. Days after the May 13 coup,
the French government—the Fourth Republic—collapsed, and the parlia-
ment called on de Gaulle to help form a new government, the Fifth Repub-
lic. He asked for and was granted full powers for four months. On June 4,
days after becoming the head of government, de Gaulle flew to Algeria.
The French colonials were ecstatic. It was their coup that had indirectly
brought de Gaulle to power; surely, they imagined, he was coming to thank
them, and to reassure them that Algeria would remain French. When he
arrived in Algiers, thousands of people filled the city's main plaza. The
mood was extremely festive—there were banners, music, and endless chants
of "Algérie française," the French-colonial slogan. Suddenly de Gaulle ap-
peared on a balcony overlooking the plaza. The crowd went wild. The
general, an extremely tall man, raised his arms above his head, and the
chanting doubled in volume. The crowd was begging him to join in. In-
stead he lowered his arms until silence fell, then opened them wide, and
slowly intoned, in his deep voice, "Je vous ai compris"—I have understood
you. There was a moment of quiet, and then, as his words sank in, a deaf-
ening roar: he understood them. That was all they needed to hear.
De Gaulle proceeded to talk of the greatness of France. More cheers.
He promised there would be new elections, and "with those elected repre-
sentatives we will see how to do the rest." Yes, a new government, just what
the crowd wanted—more cheers. He would "find the place for Algeria" in
the French "ensemble." There must be "total discipline, without qualifica-
tion and without conditions"—who could argue with that? He closed with
a loud call: "Vive la République! Vive la France!" the emotional slogan that
After Operation Sedition,
we are being treated to
Operation 
Seduction.
— M A U R I C E KRIEGEL-
VALRIMONT ON CHARLES DE
GAULLE, SHORTLY AFTER THE
GENERAL ASSUMED POWER
My mistress staged a lock-
out. . . . \ I went back to
verses and compliments, \
My natural weapons. Soft
words \ Remove harsh
door-chains. There's magic
in poetry, its power \ Can
pull down the bloody
moon, \ Turn bach the
sun, make serpents burst
asunder \ Or rivers flow
upstream. \ Doors are no
match for such
spellbinding, 
the toughest \
Locks can be opeu-sesamed
by its charms. \ But epic's a
dead loss for me. I'll get
nowhere with swift-footed \
Achilles, or with either of
Atreus' sons. \ Old what's-
his-name 
wasting twenty
years on war and travel, \
Poor Hector dragged in the
dust— 
\ No good. But
lavish fine words on some
young girl's profile \ And
sooner or later shell tender
herself as the fee, \ An
ample reward for your
253
254 
• 
The Art of Seduction
had been the rallying cry in the fight against the Nazis. Everyone shouted it
back. In the next few days de Gaulle made similar speeches around Algeria,
to equally delirious crowds.
Only after de Gaulle had returned to France did the words of his
speeches sink in: not once had he promised to keep Algeria French. In fact
he had hinted that he might give the Arabs the vote, and might grant an
amnesty to the Algerian rebels who had been fighting to force the French
from the country. Somehow, in the excitement his words had created, the
colonists had failed to focus on what they had actually meant. De Gaulle
had duped them. And indeed, in the months to come, he worked to grant
Algeria its independence—a task he finally accomplished in 1962.
Interpretation. De Gaulle cared little about an old French colony, and
about what it symbolized to some French people. Nor did he have any
sympathy for anyone who fomented civil war. His one concern was to
make France a modern power. And so, when he went to Algiers, he had a
long-term plan: weaken the right-wingers by getting them to fight among
themselves, and work toward Algerian independence. His short-term goal
had to be to defuse the tension and buy himself some time. He would not
lie to the colonials by saying he supported their cause—that would cause
trouble back home. Instead he would beguile them with seductive oratory,
intoxicate them with words. His famous "I have understood you" could
easily have meant, "I understand what a danger you represent." But a jubi-
lant crowd expecting his support read it the way they wanted. To keep
them at a fever pitch, de Gaulle made emotional references—to the French
Resistance during World War II, for example, and to the need for "disci-
pline," a word with great appeal to right-wingers. He filled their ears with
promises—a new government, a glorious future. He got them to chant,
creating an emotional bond. He spoke with dramatic pitch and quivering
emotion. His words created a kind of delirium.
De Gaulle was not trying to express his feelings or speak the truth; he
was trying to produce an effect. This is the key to seductive oratory.
Whether you are talking to a single individual or to a crowd, try a little ex-
periment: rein in your desire to speak your mind. Before you open your
mouth, ask yourself a question: what can I say that will have the most
pleasant effect on my listeners? Often this entails flattering their egos,
assuaging their insecurities, giving them vague hopes for the future, sympa-
thizing with their travails ("I have understood you"). Start off with some-
thing pleasant and everything to come will be easy: people's defenses will
go down. They will grow amenable, open to suggestion. Think of your
words as an intoxicating drug that will make people emotional and con-
fused. Keep your language vague and ambiguous, letting your listeners fill
in the gaps with their fantasies and imaginings. Instead of tuning you out,
getting irritated or defensive, being impatient for you to shut up, they will
be pliant, happy with your sweet-sounding words.
labors. So farewell, heroic \
Figures of legend—the
quid \ Pro quo you offer
won't tempt me. A bevy of
beauties \ All swooning
over my love-songs—that's
what I want.
—OVID, 
THE AMORES,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
When she has received a
letter, when its sweet
poison has entered her
blood, then a word is
sufficient to wake her love
burst forth. . . . My
personal presence will
prevent ecstasy. If I am
present only in a letter,
then she can easily cope
with me; to some extent,
she mistakes me for a more
universal creature who
dwells in her love. Then,
too, in a letter one can
more readily have free rein;
in a letter I can throw
myself at her feet in superb
fashion, 
etc.—something
that would easily seem like
nonsense if I did it in
person, and the illusion
would be lost. . . . • On
the whole, letters are and
will continue to be a
priceless means of making
an impression on a young
girl; the dead letter of
writing often has much
more influence than the
living word. A letter is a
secretive 
communication;
one is master of the
situation, feels no pressure
from anyone's actual
presence, and I do believe a
young girl would prefer to
be alone with her ideal.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD,
THE 
SEDUCER'S 
DIARY,
TRANSLATED BY HOWARD V.
HONG AND EDNA H. H O N G
Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion • 255
Seductive Writing
O
ne spring afternoon in the late 1830s, in a street in Copenhagen, a
man named Johannes caught a glimpse of a beautiful young girl. Self-
absorbed yet delightfully innocent, she fascinated him, and he followed her,
from a distance, and found out where she lived. Over the next few weeks
he made inquiries and found out more about her. Her name was Cordelia
Wahl, and she lived with her aunt. The two led a quiet existence; Cordelia
liked to read, and to be alone. Seducing young girls was Johannes's specialty,
but Cordelia would be a catch: she had already turned down several eligible
suitors.
Johannes imagined that Cordelia might hunger for something more
out of life, something grand, something resembling the books she had
read and the daydreams that presumably filled her solitude. He arranged
an introduction and began to frequent her house, accompanied by a friend
of his named Edward. This young man had his own thoughts of court-
ing Cordelia, but he was awkward, and strained to please her. Johannes,
on the other hand, virtually ignored her, instead befriending her aunt.
They would talk about the most banal things—farm life, whatever was in
the news. Occasionally Johannes would veer off into a more philosophical
discussion, for he had noticed, out of the corner of his eye, that on these
occasions Cordelia would listen to him closely, while still pretending to lis-
ten to Edward.
This went on for several weeks. Johannes and Cordelia barely spoke,
but he could tell that he intrigued her, and that Edward irritated her to no
end. One morning, knowing her aunt was out, he visited their house. It
was the first time he and Cordelia had been alone together. As dryly and
politely as possible, he proceeded to propose to her. Needless to say she was
shocked and flustered. A man who had shown not the slightest interest in
her suddenly wanted to marry her? She was so surprised that she referred
the matter to her aunt, who, as Johannes had expected, gave her approval.
Had Cordelia resisted, her aunt would have respected her wishes; but she
did not.
On the outside, everything had changed. The couple were engaged. Jo-
hannes now came to the house alone, sat with Cordelia, held her hand,
talked with her. But inwardly he made sure things were the same. He re-
mained distant and polite. He would sometimes warm up, particularly
when talking about literature (Cordelia's favorite subject), but at a certain
point he always went back to more mundane matters. He knew this frus-
trated Cordelia, who had expected that now he would be different. Yet
even when they went out together, he took her to formal socials arranged
for engaged couples. How conventional! Was this what love and marriage
were supposed to be about, these prematurely aged people talking about
houses and their own drab futures? Cordelia, who was shy at the best of
times, asked Johannes to stop dragging her to these affairs.
The battlefield was prepared. Cordelia was confused and anxious.
Let wax pave the way for
you, spread out on smooth
tablets, \ Let wax go before
as witness to your mind—
\ Bring her your flattering
words, words that ape the
lover: \ And remember,
whoever you are, to throw
in some good \ Entreaties.
Entreaties are what made
Achilles give back \
Hector's Body to Priam;
even an angry god \ Is
moved by the voice of
prayer. Make promises,
what's the harm in \
Promising? Here's where
anyone 
can play 
rich....
\ A persuasive letter's \ The
thing to lead off with,
explore her mind, \
Reconnoiter the landscape.
A message scratched on an
apple \ Betrayed Cydippe:
she was snared by her own
words. \ My advice, then,
young men of Rome, is to
learn the noble \ Advocate's
arts—not 
only to let you
defend \ Some trembling
client: a woman, no less
than the populace, \ Elite
senator, or grave judge, \
Will surrender to
eloquence. 
Nevertheless,
dissemble \ Your powers,
avoid long words, \ Don't
look too highbrow. Who
but a mindless ninny \
Declaims to his mistress?
An overlettered style \
Repels girls as often as not.
Use ordinary language, \
Familiar yet coaxing
words—as though \ You
were there, in her presence.
If she refuses your letter, \
Sends it back unread,
persist.
— O V I D , THE ART OF LOVE.,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
256 
• The Art of Seduction
Then, a few weeks after their engagement, Johannes sent her a letter. Here
he described the state of his soul, and his certainty that he loved her. He
spoke in metaphor, suggesting that he had been waiting for years, lantern in
hand, for Cordelia's appearance; metaphor melted into reality, back and
forth. The style was poetic, the words glowed with desire, but the whole
was delightfully ambiguous—Cordelia could reread the letter ten times
without being sure what it said. The next day Johannes received a response.
The writing was simple and straightforward, but full of sentiment: his letter
had made her so happy, Cordelia wrote, and she had not imagined this side
to his character. He replied by writing that he had changed. He did not say
how or why, but the implication was that it was because of her.
Now his letters came almost daily. They were mostly of the same
length, in a poetic style that had a touch of madness to it, as if he were in-
toxicated with love. He talked of Greek myth, comparing Cordelia to a
nymph and himself to a river that fell in love with a maiden. His soul, he
said, merely reflected back her image; she was all he could see or think of.
Meanwhile he detected changes in Cordelia: her letters became more po-
etic, less restrained. Without realizing it she repeated his ideas, imitating his
style and his imagery as if they were her own. Also, when they saw each
other in person, she was nervous. He made a point of remaining the same,
aloof and regal, but he could tell that she saw him differently, sensing
depths in him that she could not fathom. In public she hung on his every
word. She must have memorized his letters, for she referred to them con-
stantly in their talks. It was a secret life they shared. When she held his
hand, she did so more tightly than before. Her eyes expressed an impa-
tience, as if she were hoping that at any moment he would do something
bold.
Johannes made his letters shorter but more numerous, sometimes
sending several in one day. The imagery became more physical and more
suggestive, the style more disjointed, as if he could barely organize his
thoughts. Sometimes he sent a note of just a sentence or two. Once, at a
party at Cordelia's house, he dropped such a note into her knitting basket
and watched as she ran away to read it, her face flushed. In her letters he
saw signs of emotion and turmoil. Echoing a sentiment he had hinted at in
an earlier letter, she wrote that she hated the whole engagement business—
it was so beneath their love.
Everything was ready. Soon she would be his, the way he wanted it.
She would break off the engagement. A rendezvous in the country would
be simple to arrange—in fact she would be the one to propose it. This
would be his most skillful seduction.
Interpretation. Johannes and Cordelia are characters in the loosely auto-
biographical novel The Seducer's Diary (1843), by the Danish philosopher
Søren Kierkegaard. Johannes is a most experienced seducer, who specializes
in working on his victim's mind. This is precisely where Cordelia's previous
Therefore, the person who
is unable to write letters
and notes never becomes a
dangerous seducer.
—SØREN 
KIERKEGAARD,
EITHER/OR, 
TRANSLATED 
BY
HOWARD V. HONG
AND EDNA H. HONG
Standing on a crag of
Olympus 
\ 
Gold-throned
Hera saw her brother, \
Who was her husband's
brother too, \ Busy on the
fields of human glory, \
And her heart sang. 
Then
she saw Zeus \ Sitting on
the topmost peak of Ida \
And was filled with
resentment. 
Cow-eyed
Hera \ Mused for a while
on how to trick \ The mind
of Zeus Aegis-holder, 
\
And the plan that seemed
best to her \ Was to make
herself up and go to Ida, \
Seduce him, and then shed
on his eyelids \ And
cunning mind a sleep
gentle and warm. . . . \
When 
everything was
perfect, she stepped \ Out
of her room and called
Aphrodite \ And had a
word with her in private: \
"My dear child, will you
do something for me, \ I
wonder, or will you refuse,
angry because \ I favor the
Greeks and you the
Trojans?" \ And Zeus'
daughter 
Aphrodite
replied: \ "Goddess revered
as Cronus's daughter, \
Speak your mind. Tell me
what you want \And I'll
oblige you if I possibly
can." \And Hera, 
with
every intention to deceive: \
"Give me now the Sex
and Desire \ You use to
subdue immortals and
humans. 
. . . " 
\And
Aphrodite, who loved to
smile: \ "How could I, or
would I, refuse someone \
Who sleeps in the anus of
Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion • 257
suitors have failed: they have begun by imposing themselves, a common
mistake. We think that by being persistent, by overwhelming our targets
with romantic attention, we are convincing them of our affection. Instead
we are convincing them of our impatience and insecurity. Aggressive atten-
tion is not flattering because it is not personalized. It is unbridled libido at
work; the target sees through it. Johannes is too clever to begin so obvi-
ously. Instead, he takes a step back, intriguing Cordelia by acting a little
cold, and carefully creating the impression of a formal, somewhat secretive
man. Only then does he surprise her with his first letter. Obviously there is
more to him than she has thought, and once she has come to believe this,
her imagination runs rampant. Now he can intoxicate her with his letters,
creating a presence that haunts her like a ghost. His words, with their im-
ages and poetic references, are constantly in her mind. And this is the ulti-
mate seduction: to possess her mind before moving to conquer her body.
The story of Johannes shows what a weapon in a seducer's armory a
letter can be. But it is important to learn how to incorporate letters in se-
duction. It is best not to begin your correspondence until at least several
weeks after your initial contact. Let your victims get an impression of you:
you seem intriguing, yet you show no particular interest in them. When
you sense that they are thinking about you, that is the time to hit them
with your first letter. Any desire you express for them will come as a sur-
prise; their vanity will be tickled and they will want more. Now make your
letters frequent, in fact more frequent than your personal appearances. This
will give them the time and space to idealize you, which would be more
difficult if you were always in their face. After they have fallen under your
spell, you can always take a step back, making the letters fewer—let them
think you are losing interest and they will be hungry for more.
Design your letters as homages to your targets. Make everything you
write come back to them, as if they were all you could think about—a
delirious effect. If you tell an anecdote, make it somehow relate to them.
Your correspondence is a kind of mirror you are holding up to them—they
get to see themselves reflected through your desire. If for some reason they
do not like you, write to them as if they did. Remember: the tone of your
letters is what will get under their skin. If your language is elevated, poetic,
creative in its praise, it will infect them despite themselves. Never argue,
never defend yourself, never accuse them of being heartless. That would
ruin the spell.
A letter can suggest emotion by seeming disordered, rambling from one
subject to another. Clearly it is hard for you to think; your love has un-
hinged you. Disordered thoughts are exciting thoughts. Do not waste time
on real information; focus on feelings and sensations, using expressions that
are ripe with connotation. Plant ideas by dropping hints, writing sugges-
tively without explaining yourself. Never lecture, never seem intellectual or
superior—you will only make yourself pompous, which is deadly. Far bet-
ter to speak colloquially, though with a poetic edge to lift the language
above the commonplace. Do not become sentimental—it is tiring, and too
almighty Zeus?" \ And
with that she unbound
from her breast \ An ornate
sash inlaid with magical
charms. \ Sex is in it, and
Desire, and seductive \
Sweet Talk, that fools even
the wise. . . . \ Hera was
fast approaching Gargarus,
\ Ida's highest peak, when
Zeus saw her. \ And when
he saw her, lust enveloped
him, \ Just as it had the
first time they made love, \
Slipping off to bed behind
their parents' backs. \ He
stood close to her and said:
\ "Hera, why have you left
Olympus? \ And where are
your horses and chariot?" \
And Hera, with every
intention to deceive: \ "I'm
off to visit the ends of the
earth \ And Father Ocean
and Mother Tethys \ Who
nursed and doted on me in
their house. . . . " \ And
Zeus, clouds scudding
about him: \ "You can go
there later just as well. \
Let's get in bed now ami
make love. \ No goddess or
woman has ever \ Made
me feel so overwhelmed
with lust. . . . \ I've never
loved anyone as I love you
now, \ Never been in the
grip of desire so sweet. " \
And Hera, with every
intention to deceive: \
"What a thing to say, my
awesome lord. \ The
thought of us lying down
here on Ida \ Ami making
love outdoors in broad
daylight! \ What if one of
the Immortals saw us \
Asleep, and went to all the
other gods \Aud told
them? I could never get up
\ And go back home. It
would be shameful. \ But if
you really do want to do
this, \ There is the bedroom
your dear son Hephaestus \
Built for you, with good
solid doors. Let's go \
There and lie down, since
you're in the mood. " \
258 
• 
The Art of Seduction
direct. Better to suggest the effect your target has on you than to gush
about how you feel. Stay vague and ambiguous, allowing the reader the
space to imagine and fantasize. The goal of your writing is not to ex-
press yourself but to create emotion in the reader, spreading confusion and
desire.
You will know that your letters are having the proper effect when your
targets come to mirror your thoughts, repeating words you wrote, whether
in their own letters or in person. This is the time to move to the more
physical and erotic. Use language that quivers with sexual connotation, or,
better still, suggest sexuality by making your letters shorter, more frequent,
and even more disordered than before. There is nothing more erotic than
the short abrupt note. Your thoughts are unfinished; they can only be com-
pleted by the other person.
Sganarelle to Don Juan: Well, what I have to say is . . . I
don't know what to say; for you turn things in such a
manner with your words, that it seems that you are right;
and yet, the truth of it is, you are not. I had the finest
thoughts in the world, and your words have totally scram-
bled them up.
—MOLIÈRE
Keys to Seduction
W
e rarely think before we talk. It is human nature to say the first thing
that comes into our head—and usually what comes first is some-
thing about ourselves. We primarily use words to express our own feelings,
ideas, and opinions. (Also to complain and to argue.) This is because we are
generally self-absorbed—the person who interests us most is our own self.
To a certain extent this is inevitable, and through much of our lives there is
nothing much wrong with it; we can function quite well this way. In se-
duction, however, it limits our potential.
You cannot seduce without an ability to get outside your own skin and
inside another person's, piercing their psychology. The key to seductive
language is not the words you utter, or your seductive tone of voice; it is a
radical shift in perspective and habit. You have to stop saying the first thing
that comes to your mind—you have to control the urge to prattle and vent
your opinions. The key is to see words as a tool not for communicating
true thoughts and feelings but for confusing, delighting, and intoxicating.
The difference between normal language and seductive language is like
the difference between noise and music. Noise is a constant in modern life,
something irritating we tune out if we can. Our normal language is like
noise—people may half-listen to us as we go on about ourselves, but just as
often their thoughts are a million miles away. Every now and then their ears
prick up when something we say touches on them, but this lasts only until
And Zeus, who masses the
clouds, replied: \ "Hera,
don't worry about any god
or man \ Seeing us. I'll
enfold you in a cloud so
dense \ And golden not
even Helios could spy on
us, \ And his light is the
sharpest vision there is."
— H O M E R , 
THE ILIAD,
TRANSLATED BY STANLEY
LOMBARDO
ANTONY: 
Friends,
Romans, 
countrymen, 
lend
me your ears; \ I come to
bury Caesar, not to praise
him. \ The evil that men
do lives after them; \ The
good is oft interred with
their bones. \ So let it be
with Caesar. . . . \ I speak
not to disprove what
Brutus spoke, \ But here I
am to speak what I do
know. \ You all did love
him once, not without
cause. \ What cause
withholds you then to
mourn for him? \ O
judgment, thou art fled to
brutish beasts, \ And men
have lost their reason! Bear
with me. \ My heart is in
the coffin there with Caesar,
\And I must pause till it
come back to me. . . . \
PLEBEIAN: Poor soul! his
eyes are red as f i r e with
weeping. 
\ 
PLEBEIAN:
There's not a nobler man
in Rome than Antony. \
PLEBEIAN: 
Now mark
him. He begins again to
speak. \ 
ANTONY: 
But
yesterday the word of
Caesar might \ Have stood
against the world. Now
lies he there, \ And none so
poor to do him reverence. \
O masters! If I were
disposed to stir \ Your
hearts and minds to
mutiny and rage, \ I should
do Brutus wrong, and
Cassius wrong, \ Who,
you all know, are
Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion • 259
we return to yet another story about ourselves. As early as childhood we
learn to tune out this kind of noise (particularly when it comes from our
parents).
Music, on the other hand, is seductive, and gets under our skin. It is in-
tended for pleasure. A melody or rhythm stays in our blood for days after we
have heard it, altering our moods and emotions, relaxing or exciting us. To
make music instead of noise, you must say things that please—things that re-
late to people's lives, that touch their vanity. If they have many problems,
you can produce the same effect by distracting them, focusing their attention
away from themselves by saying things that are witty and entertaining, or
that make the future seem bright and hopeful. Promises and flattery are mu-
sic to anyone's ears. This is language designed to move people and lower
their resistance. It is language designed for them, not directed at them.
The Italian writer Gabriele D'Annunzio was physically unattractive, yet
women could not resist him. Even those who knew of his Don Juan repu-
tation and disliked him for it (the actress Eleanora Duse and the dancer
Isadora Duncan, for instance) fell under his spell. The secret was the flow of
words in which he enveloped a woman. His voice was musical, his language
poetic, and most devastating of all, he knew how to flatter. His flattery was
aimed precisely at a woman's weaknesses, the areas where she needed vali-
dation. A woman was beautiful, yet lacked confidence in her own wit and
intelligence? He made sure to say that he was bewitched not by her beauty
but by her mind. He might compare her to a heroine of literature, or to a
carefully chosen mythological figure. Talking to him, her ego would dou-
ble in size.
Flattery is seductive language in its purest form. Its purpose is not to
express a truth or a real feeling, but only to create an effect on the recipient.
Like D'Annunzio, learn to aim your flattery directly at a person's insecuri-
ties. For instance, if a man is a fine actor and feels confident about his pro-
fessional skills, to flatter him about his acting will have little effect, and may
even accomplish the opposite—he could feel that he is above the need to
have his ego stroked, and your flattery will seem to say otherwise. But let us
say that this actor is an amateur musician or painter. He does this work on
his own, without professional support or publicity, and he is well aware that
others make their living at it. Flattery of his artistic pretensions will go
straight to his head and earn you double points. Learn to sniff out the parts
of a person's ego that need validation. Make it a surprise, something no one
else has thought to flatter before—something you can describe as a talent or
positive quality that others have not noticed. Speak with a little tremor, as if
your target's charms had overwhelmed you and made you emotional.
Flattery can be a kind of verbal foreplay. Aphrodite's powers of seduc-
tion, which were said to come from the magnificent girdle she wore, in-
volved a sweetness of language—a skill with the soft, flattering words that
prepare the way for erotic thoughts. Insecurities and nagging self-doubts
have a dampening effect on the libido. Make your targets feel secure and al-
luring through your flattering words and their resistance will melt away.
honorable men. \ I will not
do them wrong. . . . \ But
here's a parchment with the
seal of Caesar. \ I found it
in his closet; 'tis his will. \
Let but the commons hear
this testament, \ Which
(pardon me) I do not mean
to read, \And they would
go and kiss dead Caesar's
wounds \ And dip their
napkins in his sacred
blood. . . . \ 
PLEBEIAN:
We'll hear the will! Read
it, Mark Antony. \ ALL:
The will, the will! We will
hear Caesar's will! \
ANTONY: 
Have patience,
gentle friends; I must not
read it. \ It is not meet you
know how Caesar loved
you. \ You are not wood,
you are not stones, but
men; \ And being men,
hearing the will of Caesar,
\ It will inflame you, it
will make you mad. \ 'Tis
good you know not that
you are his heirs; \ For if
you should, O, what
would come of it? . . . \ If
you have tears, prepare to
shed them now. \ You all
do know this mantle. I
remember \ The first time
ever Caesar put it on. . . .
\ Look, in this place ran
Cassius' 
dagger through. \
See what a rent the
envious Casca made. \
Through this the well-
beloved Brutus stabbed; \
And as he plucked his
cursed steel away, \ Mark
how the blood of Caesar
followed it. . . . \ For
Brutus, as you know, was
Caesar's angel. \ Judge, O
you gods, how dearly
Caesar loved him! \ This
was the most unkindest cut
of all; \ For when the noble
Caesar saw him stab, \
Ingratitude, more strong
than traitors' arms, \ Quite
vanquished him. . . . \ O,
now you weep, and I
perceive you feel \ The dint
of pity. These are gracious
260 
• The Art of Seduction
Sometimes the most pleasant thing to hear is the promise of something
wonderful, a vague but rosy future that is just around the corner. President
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, in his public speeches, talked little about spe-
cific programs for dealing with the Depression; instead he used rousing
rhetoric to paint a picture of America's glorious future. In the various leg-
ends of Don Juan, the great seducer would immediately focus women's at-
tention on the future, a fantastic world to which he promised to whisk
them off. Tailor your sweet words to your targets' particular problems and
fantasies. Promise something realizable, something possible, but do not
make it too specific; you are inviting them to dream. If they are mired in
dull routine, talk of adventure, preferably with you. Do not discuss how it
will be accomplished; speak as if it magically already existed, somewhere in
the future. Lift people's thoughts into the clouds and they will relax, their
defenses will come down, and it will be that much easier to maneuver and
lead them astray. Your words become a kind of elevating drug.
The most anti-seductive form of language is argument. How many
silent enemies do we create by arguing? There is a superior way to get peo-
ple to listen and be persuaded: humor and a light touch. The nineteenth-
century English politician Benjamin Disraeli was a master at this game. In
Parliament, to fail to reply to an accusation or slanderous comment was a
deadly mistake: silence meant the accuser was right. Yet to respond angrily,
to get into an argument, was to look ugly and defensive. Disraeli used a dif-
ferent tactic: he stayed calm. When the time came to reply to an attack, he
would slowly make his way to the speaker's table, pause, then utter a hu-
morous or sarcastic retort. Everyone would laugh. Now that he had
warmed people up, he would proceed to refute his enemy, still mixing in
amusing comments; or perhaps he would simply move on to another sub-
ject, as if he were above it all. His humor took out the sting of any attack
on him. Laughter and applause have a domino effect: once your listeners
have laughed, they are more likely to laugh again. In this lighthearted mood
they are also more apt to listen. A subtle touch and a bit of irony give you
room to persuade them, move them to your side, mock your enemies. That
is the seductive form of argument.
Shortly after the murder of Julius Caesar, the head of the band of con-
spirators who had killed him, Brutus, addressed an angry mob. He tried to
reason with the crowd, explaining that he had wanted to save the Roman
Republic from dictatorship. The people were momentarily convinced—
yes, Brutus seemed a decent man. Then Mark Antony took the stage, and
he in turn delivered a eulogy for Caesar. He seemed overwhelmed with
emotion. He talked of his love for Caesar, and of Caesar's love for the
Roman people. He mentioned Caesar's will; the crowd clamored to hear it,
but Antony said no, for if he read it they would know how deeply Caesar
had loved them, and how dastardly this murder was. The crowd again in-
sisted he read the will; instead he held up Caesar's bloodstained cloak, not-
ing its rents and tears. This was where Brutus had stabbed the great general,
he said; Cassius had stabbed him here. Then finally he read the will, which
drops. \ Kind souls, what
weep you when you but
behold \ Our Caesar's
vesture wounded? Look
you here! \ Here is himself,
marred as you see until
traitors.
—WILLIAM 
SHAKESPEARE,
JULIUS CAESAR
Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion • 261
told how much wealth Caesar had left to the Roman people. This was the
coup de grace—the crowd turned against the conspirators and went off to
lynch them.
Antony was a clever man, who knew how to stir a crowd. According to
the Greek historian Plutarch, "When he saw that his oratory had cast a spell
over the people and that they were deeply stirred by his words, he began to
introduce into his praises [of Caesar] a note of pity and of indignation at
Caesar's fate." Seductive language aims at people's emotions, for emotional
people are easier to deceive. Antony used various devices to stir the crowd:
a tremor in his voice, a distraught and then an angry tone. An emotional
voice has an immediate, contagious effect on the listener. Antony also
teased the crowd with the will, holding off the reading of it to the end,
knowing it would push people over the edge. Holding up the cloak, he
made his imagery visceral.
Perhaps you are not trying to whip a crowd into a frenzy; you just want
to bring people over to your side. Choose your strategy and words carefully.
You might think it is better to reason with people, explain your ideas. But
it is hard for an audience to decide whether an argument is reasonable as
they listen to you talk. They have to concentrate and listen closely, which
requires great effort. People are easily distracted by other stimuli, and if
they miss a part of your argument, they will feel confused, intellectually in-
ferior, and vaguely insecure. It is more persuasive to appeal to people's
hearts than their heads. Everyone shares emotions, and no one feels inferior
to a speaker who stirs up their feelings. The crowd bonds together, every-
one contagiously experiencing the same emotions. Antony talked of Cae-
sar as if he and the listeners were experiencing the murder from Caesar's
point of view. What could be more provocative? Use such changes of per-
spective to make your listeners feel what you are saying. Orchestrate your
effects. It is more effective to move from one emotion to another than to
just hit one note. The contrast between Antony's affection for Caesar and
his indignation at the murderers was much more powerful than if he had
stayed with one feeling or the other.
The emotions you are trying to arouse should be strong ones. Do not
speak of friendship and disagreement; speak of love and hate. And it is cru-
cial to try to feel something of the emotions you are trying to elicit. You
will be more believable that way. This should not be difficult: imagine the
reasons for loving or hating before you speak. If necessary, think of some-
thing from your past that fills you with rage. Emotions are contagious; it is
easier to make someone cry if you are crying yourself. Make your voice an
instrument, and train it to communicate emotion. Learn to seem sincere.
Napoleon studied the greatest actors of his time, and when he was alone he
would practice putting emotion into his voice.
The goal of seductive speech is often to create a kind of hypnosis: you
are distracting people, lowering their defenses, making them more vulnera-
ble to suggestion. Learn the hypnotist's lessons of repetition and affirma-
tion, key elements in putting a subject to sleep. Repetition involves using
262 
• 
The Art of Seduction
the same words over and over, preferably a word with emotional content:
"taxes," "liberals," "bigots." The effect is mesmerizing—ideas can be per-
manently implanted in people's unconscious simply by being repeated often
enough. Affirmation is simply the making of strong positive statements,
like the hypnotist's commands. Seductive language should have a kind of
boldness, which will cover up a multitude of sins. Your audience will be so
caught up in your bold language that they won't have time to reflect on
whether or not it is true. Never say "I don't think the other side made a
wise decision"; say "We deserve better," or "They have made a mess of
things." Affirmative language is active language, full of verbs, imperatives,
and short sentences. Cut out "I believe," "Perhaps," "In my opinion." Head
straight for the heart.
You are learning to speak a different kind of language. Most people
employ symbolic language—their words stand for something real, the feel-
ings, ideas, and beliefs they really have. Or they stand for concrete things in
the real world. (The origin of the word "symbolic" lies in a Greek word
meaning "to bring things together"—in this case, a word and something
real.) As a seducer you are using the opposite: diabolic language. Your words
do not stand for anything real; their sound, and the feelings they evoke, are
more important than what they are supposed to stand for. (The word "dia-
bolic" ultimately means to separate, to throw things apart—here, words and
reality.) The more you make people focus on your sweet-sounding lan-
guage, and on the illusions and fantasies it conjures, the more you diminish
their contact with reality. You lead them into the clouds, where it is hard to
distinguish truth from untruth, real from unreal. Keep your words vague
and ambiguous, so people are never quite sure what you mean. Envelop
them in demonic, diabolical language and they will not be able to focus on
your maneuvers, on the possible consequences of your seduction. And the
more they lose themselves in illusion, the easier it will be to lead them
astray and seduce them.
Symbol: The Clouds. In the clouds it is hard to see
the exact forms of things. Everything seems vague;
the imagination runs wild, seeing things that are
not there. Your words must lift people into
the clouds, where it is easy for them
to lose their way.
Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion • 
263
Reversal
D
o not confuse flowery language with seduction: in using flowery lan-
guage you run the risk of wearing on people's nerves, of seeming
pretentious. Excess verbiage is a sign of selfishness, of your inability to rein
in your natural tendencies. Often with language, less is more; the elusive,
vague, ambiguous phrase leaves the listener more room for imagination
than does a sentence full of bombast and self-indulgence.
You must always think first of your targets, and of what will be pleasant
to their ears. There will be many times when silence is best. What you do
not say can be suggestive and eloquent, making you seem mysterious. In
the eleventh-century Japanese court diary The Pillow Book of Sei Shonagon,
the counselor Yoshichika is intrigued by a lady he sees in a carriage, silent
and beautiful. He sends her a note, and she sends one back; he is the only
one to read it, but by his reaction everyone can tell it is in bad taste, or
badly written. It spoils the effect of her beauty. Shonagon writes, "I have
heard people suggest that no reply at all is better than a bad one." If you are
not eloquent, if you cannot master seductive language, at least learn to curb
your tongue—use silence to cultivate an enigmatic presence.
Finally, seduction has a pace and rhythm. In phase one, you are cautious
and indirect. It is often best to disguise your intentions, to put your target at
ease with deliberately neutral words. Your conversation should be harmless,
even a bit bland. In this second phase, you turn more to the attack; this is
the time for seductive language. Now when you envelop them in your se-
ductive words and letters, it comes as a pleasant surprise. It gives them the
immensely pleasing feeling that they are the ones to suddenly inspire you
with such poetry and intoxicating words.
Pay Attention to Detail
Lofty
words and grand
gestures can be suspi-
cious: why are you trying
so hard to please? The details
of a seduction—the subtle ges-
tures, the offhand things you do—
are 
often 
more 
charming 
and
revealing. You must learn to distract
your victims with a myriad of pleasant
little rituals—thoughtful gifts tailored
just for them, clothes and adornments
designed to please them, gestures that
show the time and attention you are
paying them. All of their senses are
engaged in the details you orchestrate.
Create spectacles to dazzle their
eyes; mesmerized by what they
see, they will not notice what
you are really up to. Learn to
suggest the proper feelings
and moods through
details.
The Mesmerizing Effect
I
n December 1898, the wives of the seven major Western ambassadors to
China received a strange invitation: the sixty-three-year-old Empress
Dowager Tzu Hsi was hosting a banquet in their honor in the Forbidden
City in Beijing. The ambassadors themselves had been quite displeased
with the empress dowager, for several reasons. She was a Manchu, a race of
northerners who had conquered China in the early seventeenth century,
establishing the Ching Dynasty and ruling the country for nearly three
hundred years. By the 1890s, the Western powers had begun to carve up
parts of China, a country they considered backward. They wanted China
to modernize, but the Manchus were conservative, and resisted all reform.
Earlier in 1898, the Chinese Emperor Kuang Hsu, the empress dowager's
twenty-seven-year-old nephew, had actually begun a series of reforms,
with the blessings of the West. Then, one hundred days into this period of
reform, word reached the Western diplomats from the Forbidden City that
the emperor was quite ill, and that the empress dowager had taken power.
They suspected foul play; the empress had probably acted to stop the re-
forms. 
The emperor was being mistreated, probably poisoned—
perhaps he was already dead. When the seven ambassadors' wives were
preparing for their unusual visit, their husbands warned them: Do not trust
the empress dowager. A wily woman with a cruel streak, she had risen from
obscurity to become the concubine of a previous emperor and had man-
aged over the years to accumulate great power. Far more than the emperor,
she was the most feared person in China.
On the appointed day, the women were borne into the Forbidden City
in a procession of sedan chairs carried by court eunuchs in dazzling uni-
forms. The women themselves, not to be outdone, wore the latest Western
fashions—tight corsets, long velvet dresses with leg-of-mutton sleeves, bil-
lowing petticoats, tall plumed hats. The residents of the Forbidden City
looked at their clothes in amazement, and particularly at the way their
dresses displayed their prominent bosoms. The wives felt sure they had im-
pressed their hosts. At the Audience Hall they were greeted by princes and
princesses, as well as lower royalty. The Chinese women were wearing
magnificent Manchu costumes with the traditional high, jewel-encrusted
black headdresses; they were arranged in a hierarchical order reflected in
the color of their dresses, an astounding rainbow of color.
The wives were served tea in the most delicate porcelain cups, then
The barge she sat in, like a
burnish'd throne, 
\Burn'd
on the water: the poop was
beaten gold; \ Purple the
sails, and so perfumed that
\ The winds were love-sick
with them; the oars were
silver, \ Which to the tune
of flutes kept stroke, and
made \ The water which
they beat to follow faster, \
As amorous of their
strokes. For her own
person, \ It beggar'd all
description: she did lie \ In
her 
pavilion—cloth-of-gold
of tissue— \ O'er picturing
that Venus where we see \
The fancy outwork nature:
on each side her \ Stood
pretty dimpled boys, like
smiling Cupids, \ With
divers-colour'd fans, whose
wind did seem \ To glow
the delicate cheeks which
they did cool, \ And
what they undid did. . . . \
Her gentlewomen, 
like the
Nereids, \ So many
mermaids, tended her i' the
eyes, \ And made their
bends adornings: at the
helm \ A seeming mermaid
steers: the silken tackle \
Swell with the touches of
those flower-soft hands \
That yarely frame the
office. From the barge \ A
strange invisible perfume
hits the sense \ Of the
267
268 
• 
The Art of Seduction
were escorted into the presence of the empress dowager. The sight took
their breath away. The empress was seated on the Dragon Throne, which
was studded with jewels. She wore heavily brocaded robes, a magnificent
headdress bearing diamonds, pearls, and jade, and an enormous necklace of
perfectly matched pearls. She was a tiny woman, but on the throne, in that
dress, she seemed a giant. She smiled at the ladies with much warmth and
sincerity. To their relief, seated below her on a smaller throne was her
nephew the emperor. He looked pale, but he greeted them enthusiastically
and seemed in good spirits. Maybe he was indeed simply ill.
The empress shook the hand of each of the women. As she did so, an
attendant eunuch handed her a large gold ring set with a large pearl, which
she slipped onto each woman's hand. After this introduction, the wives
were escorted into another room, where they again took tea, and then were
led into a banqueting hall, where the empress now sat on a chair of yellow
satin—yellow being the imperial color. She spoke to them for a while; she
had a beautiful voice. (It was said that her voice could literally charm birds
out of trees.) At the end of the conversation, she took the hand of each
woman again, and with much emotion, told them, "One family—all one
family." The women then saw a performance in the imperial theater. Fi-
nally the empress received them one last time. She apologized for the per-
formance they had just seen, which was certainly inferior to what they
were used to in the West. There was one more round of tea, and this time,
as the wife of the American ambassador reported it, the empress "stepped
forward and tipped each cup of tea to her own lips and took a sip, then
lifted the cup on the other side, to our lips, and said again, 'One family—all
one family' " The women were given more gifts, then were escorted back
to their sedan chairs and borne out of the Forbidden City.
The women relayed to their husbands their earnest belief that they had
all been wrong about the empress. The American ambassador's wife re-
ported, "She was bright and happy and her face glowed with good will.
There was no trace of cruelty to be seen. . . . Her actions were full of free-
dom and warmth. . . . [We left] full of admiration for her majesty and
hopes for China." The husbands reported back to their governments: the
emperor was fine, and the empress could be trusted.
Interpretation. The foreign contingent in China had no idea what was
really happening in the Forbidden City. In truth, the emperor had con-
spired to arrest and possibly murder his aunt. Discovering the plot, a terri-
ble crime in Confucian terms, she forced him to sign his own abdication,
had him confined, and told the outside world that he was ill. As part of his
punishment, he was to appear at state functions and act as if nothing had
happened.
The empress dowager loathed Westerners, whom she considered bar-
barians. She disliked the ambassadors' wives, with their ugly fashions and
simpering ways. The banquet was a show, a seduction, to appease the West-
adjacent wharfs. The city
cast \ Her people out upon
her; and Antony, \
Enthron'd 
i' the market-
place, did sit alone, \
Whistling to the air;
which, but for vacancy, \
Had gone to gaze on
Cleopatra too \ And made
a gap in nature.
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
ANTONY 
AND 
CLEOPATRA
In the palmy days of the
gay quarters at Edo there
was a connoisseur of
fashion 
named 
Sakakura
who grew intimate with the
great courtesan Chitose.
This woman was much
given to drinking sake; as
a side dish she relished the
so-called flower crabs, to be
found in the Mogami
River in the East, and
these she had pickled in
salt for her enjoyment.
Knowing this, 
Sakakura
commissioned a painter of
the Kano School to execute
her bamboo crest in
powdered gold on the tiny
shells of these crabs; he
fixed the price of each
painted shell at one
rectangular piece of gold,
and presented them to
Chitose throughout the
year, so that she never
lacked for them.
—IHARA SAIKAKU, THE LIFE OF
AN 
AMOROUS 
WOMAN, 
AND
OTHER 
WRITINGS, 
TRANSLATED
BY IVAN MORRIS
For such men as have
practised love, have ever
held this a sound maxim
that there is naught to be
compared with a woman in
her clothes. Again when
you reflect how a man doth
brave, rumple, squeeze and
make light of his lady's
finery, and how he doth
Pay Attention to Detail • 269
ern powers, which had been threatening invasion if the emperor had been
killed. The goal of the seduction was simple: dazzle the wives with color,
spectacle, theater. The empress applied all her expertise to the task, and she
was a genius for detail. She had designed the spectacles in a rising order—
the uniformed eunuchs first, then the Manchu ladies in their headdresses,
and finally the empress herself. It was pure theater, and it was overwhelm-
ing. Then the empress brought the spectacle down a notch, humanizing it
with gifts, warm greetings, the reassuring presence of the emperor, teas,
and entertainments, which were in no way inferior to anything in the West.
She ended the banquet on another high note—the little drama with the
sharing of the teacups, followed by even more magnificent gifts. The
women's heads were spinning when they left. In truth they had never seen
such exotic splendor—and they never understood how carefully its details
had been orchestrated by the empress. Charmed by the spectacle, they trans-
ferred their happy feelings to the empress and gave her their approval—all
that she required.
The key to distracting people (seduction is distraction) is to fill their
eyes and ears with details, little rituals, colorful objects. Detail is what
makes things seem real and substantial. A thoughtful gift won't seem to
have an ulterior motive. A ritual full of charming little actions is so enjoy-
able to watch. Jewelry, handsome furnishings, touches of color in clothing,
dazzle the eye. It is a childish weakness of ours: we prefer to focus on the
pleasant little details rather than on the larger picture. The more senses you
appeal to, the more mesmerizing the effect. The objects you use in your se-
duction (gifts, clothes, etc.) speak their own language, and it is a powerful
one. Never ignore a detail or leave one to chance. Orchestrate them into a
spectacle and no one will notice how manipulative you are being.
The Sensuous Effect
O
ne day a messenger told Prince Genji—the aging but still consum-
mate seducer in the Heian court of late-tenth-century Japan—that
one of his youthful conquests had suddenly died, leaving behind an or-
phan, a young woman named Tamakazura. Genji was not Tamakazura s fa-
ther, but he decided to bring her to court and be her protector anyway.
Soon after her arrival, men of the highest rank began to woo her. Genji
had told everyone she was a lost daughter of his; as a result, they assumed
that she was beautiful, for Genji was the handsomest man in the court. (At
the time, men rarely saw a young girl's face before marriage; in theory, they
were allowed to talk to her only if she was on the other side of a screen.)
Genji showered her with attention, helping her sort through all the love
letters she was receiving and advising her on the right match.
As Tamakazura's protector, Genji was able to see her face, and she was
indeed beautiful. He fell in love with her. What a shame, he thought, to
give this lovely creature away to another man. One night, overwhelmed by
work ruin and loss to the
grand cloth of gold and web
of silver, to tinsel
and silken stuffs, pearls and
precious stones, 'tis plain
how his ardour and
satisfaction be increased
manifold—far 
more than
with some simple
shepherdess or other woman
of like quality, be she as
fair as she may. • And why
of yore was Venus found so
fair and so desirable, if not
that with all her beauty she
was always gracefully
attired likewise, and
generally scented, that she
did ever smell sweet an
hundred paces away? For it
hath ever been held of all
how that perfumes be a
great incitement to love. •
This is the reason why the
Empresses and great dames
of Rome did make much
usage of these perfumes, as
do likewise our great ladies
of France—and above all
those of Spain and Italy,
which from the oldest times
have been more curious and
more exquisite in luxury
than Frenchwomen, as well
in perfumes as in costumes
and magnificent attire,
whereof the fair ones of
France have since borrowed
the patterns and copied the
dainty 
workmanship.
Moreover the others, Italian
and Spanish, had learned
the same from old models
and ancient statues of
Roman ladies, the which
are to be seen among
sundry other antiquities yet
extant in Spain and Italy;
the which, if any man will
regard them carefully, will
be found very perfect in
mode of hair-dressing and
fashion of robes, and very
meet to incite love.
—SEIGNEUR 
DE 
BRANTÔME,
LIVES 
OF FAIR 
& GALLANT
LADIES, TRANSLATED BY A. R.
ALLINSON
270 
• 
The Art of Seduction
her charms, he held her hand and told her how much she resembled her
mother, whom he once had loved. She trembled—not with excitement,
however, but with fear, for although he was not her father, he was supposed
to be her protector, not a suitor. Her attendants were away and it was a
beautiful night. Genji silently threw off his perfumed robe and pulled her
down beside him. She began to cry, and to resist. Always a gentleman,
Genji told her that he would respect her wishes, he would always care for
her, and she had nothing to fear. He then politely excused himself.
Several days later Genji was helping Tamakazura with her correspon-
dence when he read a love letter from his younger brother, Prince Hotaru,
who numbered among her suitors. In the letter, Hotaru berated Tama-
kazura for not letting him get physically close enough to talk to her and tell
her his feelings. Tamakazura had not replied; unused to the manners of the
court, she had felt shy and intimidated. As if to help her, Genji got one of
his servants to write to Hotaru in her name. The letter, written on beauti-
ful perfumed paper, warmly invited the prince to visit her.
Hotaru appeared at the appointed hour. He smelled a beguiling in-
cense, mysterious and seductive. (Mixed into this scent was Genji's own
perfume.) The prince felt a wave of excitement. Approaching the screen
behind which Tamakazura sat, he confessed his love for her. Without mak-
ing a sound, she retreated to another screen, farther away. Suddenly there
was a flash of light, as if a torch had flared up, and Hotaru saw her profile
behind the screen: she was more beautiful than he had imagined. Two
things delighted the prince: the sudden, mysterious flash of light, and the
brief glimpse of his beloved. Now he was truly in love.
Hotaru began to court her assiduously. Meanwhile, feeling reassured that
Genji was no longer chasing her, Tamakazura saw her protector more often.
And now she could not help noticing little details: Genji's robes seemed to
glow, in pleasing and vibrant colors, as if dyed by unworldly hands. Hotaru's
robes seemed drab by comparison. And the perfumes burned into Genji's
garments, how intoxicating they were. No one else bore such a scent. Ho-
taru's letters were polite and well written, but the letters Genji sent her were
on magnificent paper, perfumed and dyed, and they quoted lines of poetry,
always surprising yet always appropriate for the occasion. Genji also grew
and gathered flowers—wild carnations, for instance—that he gave as gifts
and that seemed to symbolize his unique charm.
One evening Genji proposed to teach Tamakazura how to play the
koto. She was delighted. She loved to read romance novels, and whenever
Genji played the koto, she felt as if she were transported into one of her
books. No one played the instrument better than Genji; she would be hon-
ored to learn from him. Now he saw her often, and the method of his
lessons was simple: she would choose a song for him to play, and then
would try to imitate him. After they played, they would lie down side by
side, their heads resting on the koto, staring up at the moon. Genji would
have torches set up in the garden, giving the view the softest glow.
The more Tamakazura saw of the court—of Prince Hotaru, the other
For years after her entry
into the palace, a large
number 
of court-maidens
were especially set aside for
preparing Kuei-fei 's
dresses, which were chosen
and fashioned according to
the flowers of the season.
For instance, for New Year
(spring) she had blossoms
of apricot, plum and
narcissus; for summer, she
adopted the lotus; for
autumn, 
she patterned
them after the peony; for
winter, she employed the
chrysanthemum. 
Of
jewelry she was fondest of
pearls, and the finest
products of the world found
their way into her boudoir
and were frequently
embroidered on her
numerous dresses. • Kuei-
fei was the embodiment of
all that was lovely and
extravagant. 
No wonder
that no king, prince,
courtier or humble
attendant who ever met her
could resist the allurement
of her charms. Besides, she
was the most artful of
women and knew how to
use her natural gifts to the
best purpose. . . . The
Emperor Ming 
Huang,
supreme in the land and
with thousands of the most
handsome maidens to
choose from, became a
complete slave to her
magnetic powers . . .
spending day and night in
her company and giving up
his whole kingdom
for her sake.
— S H U - C H I U N G , YANG KUEI-
FEI: 
THE 
MOST FAMOUS
BEAUTY 
OF CHINA
Then [Pao-yu] called
Bright Design to him and
said to her, "Go and see
what [Black Jade] is doing.
If she asks about me, just
say that I am quite all
Pay Attention to Detail 
• 
271
suitors, the emperor himself—the more she realized that none could com-
pare to Genji. He was supposed to be her protector, yes, that was still true,
but was it such a sin to fall in love with him? Confused, she found herself
giving in to the caresses and kisses that he began to surprise her with, now
that she was too weak to resist.
Interpretation. Genji is the protagonist in the eleventh-century novel The
Tale of Genji, written by Murasaki Shikibu, a woman of the Heian court.
The character was most likely inspired by the real-life seducer Fujiwara no
Korechika.
In his seduction of Tamakazura, Genji's strategy was simple: he would
make her realize indirectly how charming and irresistible he was by sur-
rounding her with unspoken details. He also brought her in contact with
his brother; comparison with this drab, stiff figure would make Genji's su-
periority clear. The night Hotaru first visited her, Genji set everything up,
as if to support Hotaru's seducing—the mysterious scent, then the flash of
light by the screen. (The light came from a novel effect: earlier in the eve-
ning, Genji had collected hundreds of fireflies in a cloth bag. At the proper
moment he let them all go at once.) But when Tamakazura saw Genji en-
couraging Hotaru's pursuit of her, her defenses against her protector re-
laxed, allowing her senses to be filled by this master of seductive effects.
Genji orchestrated every possible detail—the scented paper, the colored
robes, the lights in the garden, the wild carnations, the apt poetry, the koto
lessons which induced an irresistible feeling of harmony. Tamakazura found
herself dragged into a sensual whirlpool. Bypassing the shyness and mistrust
that words or actions would only have worsened, Genji surrounded his
ward with objects, sights, sounds, and scents that symbolized the pleasure of
his company far more than his actual physical presence would have—in fact
his presence could only have been threatening. He knew that a young girl's
senses are her most vulnerable point.
The key to Genji's masterful orchestration of detail was his attention to
the target of his seduction. Like Genji, you must attune your own senses to
your targets, watching them carefully, adapting to their moods. You sense
when they are defensive and retreat. You also sense when they are giving in,
and move forward. In between, the details you set up—gifts, entertain-
ments, the clothes you wear, the flowers you choose—are aimed precisely
at their tastes and predilections. Genji knew he was dealing with a young
girl who loved romantic novels; his wild flowers, koto playing, and poetry
brought their world to life for her. Attend to your targets' every move and
desire, and reveal your attentiveness in the details and objects you surround
them with, filling their senses with the mood you need to inspire. They can
argue with your words, but not with the effect you have on their senses.
right now. " • "You'll have
to think of a better excuse
than that," Bright Design
said. 
"Isn't there anything
that you can send or want
to borrow? I don't want to
go there and feel like a fool
without anything to say. " •
Pao-yu 
thought for a
moment and then took two
handkerchiefs from under
his pillow and gave them
to the maid, saying, "Well
then, tell her that I sent
you with these," • "What
a strange present to send"
the maid smiled. 
"What
does she want two old
handkerchiefs for? She will
be angry again and say
that you are trying to make
fun of her." • "Don't
worry" Pao-yu assured her.
"She will understand." •
Black Jade had already
retired when Bright Design
arrived at the Bamboo
Retreat. 
"What 
brought
you at this hour?" Black
Jade asked. 
• "[Pao-yu]
asked me to bring these
handkerchiefs for [Black
Jade]." • For a moment
Black Jade was at a loss to
see why Pao-yu should
send her such a present at
that particular moment.
She said, "I suppose they
must be something unusual
that somebody gave him.
Tell him to keep them
himself or give them to
someone who will
appreciate them. I have no
need of them." • 
"They
are nothing unusual,"
Bright Design said. "Just
two ordinary handkerchiefs
that he happened to have
around. " Black Jade was
even more puzzled, and
then it suddenly dawned
upon her: Pao-yu knew
that she would weep for
him and so sent two
handkerchiefs of his own. •
"You can leave them,
then," she said to Bright
Design, who in turn was
272 
• 
The Art of Seduction
Therefore in my view when the courtier wishes to declare
his love he should do so by his actions rather than by
speech, for a man's feelings are sometimes more clearly re-
vealed by . . . a gesture of respect or a certain shyness than
by volumes of words.
—BALDASSARE CASTIGLIONE
Keys to Seduction
W
hen we were children, our senses were much more active. The col-
ors of a new toy, or a spectacle such as a circus, held us in thrall; a
smell or a sound could fascinate us. In the games we created, many of them
reproducing something in the adult world on a smaller scale, what pleasure
we took in orchestrating every detail. We noticed everything.
As we grow older our senses get dulled. We no longer notice as much,
for we are constantly hurrying to get things done, to move on to the next
task. In seduction, you are always trying to bring the target back to the
golden moments of childhood. A child is less rational, more easily de-
ceived. A child is also more attuned to the pleasures of the senses. So when
your targets are with you, you must never give them the feeling they nor-
mally get in the real world, where we are all rushed, ruthless, out for our-
selves. You need to deliberately slow things down, and return them to the
simpler times of their youth. The details that you orchestrate—colors, gifts,
little ceremonies—are aimed at their senses, at the childish delight we take
in the immediate charms of the natural world. Their senses filled with de-
lightful things, they grow less capable of reason and rationality. Pay atten-
tion to detail and you will find yourself assuming a slower pace; your targets
will not focus on what you might be after (sexual favors, power, etc.) be-
cause you seem so considerate, so attentive. In the childish realm of the
senses in which you envelop them, they get a clear sense that you are in-
volving them in something distinct from the real world—an essential ingre-
dient of seduction. Remember: the more you get people to focus on the
little things, the less they will notice your larger direction. The seduction
will assume the slow, hypnotic pace of a ritual, in which the details have a
heightened importance and the moments are full of ceremony.
In eighth-century China, Emperor Ming Huang caught a glimpse of a
beautiful young woman, combing her hair beside an imperial pool. Her
name was Yang Kuei-fei, and even though she was the concubine of the
emperor's son, he had to have her for himself. Since he was emperor, no-
body could stop him. The emperor was a practical man—he had many
concubines, and they all had their charms, but he had never lost his head
over a woman. Yang Kuei-fei, though, was different. Her body exuded the
most wonderful fragrance. She wore gowns made of the sheerest silk gauze,
each embroidered with different flowers, depending on the season. In
walking she seemed to float, her tiny steps invisible beneath her gown. She
surprised that Black Jade
did not take offense at
what seemed to her a crude
joke. • As Black Jade
thought over the signif-
icance of the handkerchiefs
she was happy and sad by
turns: happy because Pao-
yu read her innermost
thoughts and sad because
she wondered if what was
uppermost in her thoughts
would ever be fulfilled.
Thinking thus to herself of
the future and of the past,
she could not fall asleep.
Despite Purple 
Cuckoo's
remonstrances, she had her
lamp relit and began to
compose a series of
quatrains, writing them
directly on the
handkerchiefs 
which
Pao-yu had sent.
— T S A O HSUEH CHIN,
DREAM 
OF 
THE 
RED 
CHAMBER,
TRANSLATED BY C H I - C H E N
WANG
Pay Attention to Detail 
• 273
danced to perfection, wrote songs in his honor that she sang magnificently,
had a way of looking at him that made his blood boil with desire. She
quickly became his favorite.
Yang Kuei-fei drove the emperor to distraction. He built palaces for her,
spent all his time with her, satisfied her every whim. Before long his king-
dom was bankrupt and ruined. Yang Kuei-fei was an artful seductress who
had a devastating effect on all of the men who crossed her path. There were
so many ways her presence charmed—the scents, the voice, the movements,
the witty conversation, the artful glances, the embroidered gowns. These
pleasurable details turned a mighty king into a distracted baby.
Since time immemorial, women have known that within the most ap-
parently self-possessed man is an animal whom they can lead by filling his
senses with the proper physical lures. The key is to attack on as many fronts
as possible. Do not ignore your voice, your gestures, your walk, your
clothes, your glances. Some of the most alluring women in history have so
distracted their victims with sensual detail that the men fail to notice it is all
an illusion.
From the 1940s on into the early 1960s, Pamela Churchill Harriman
had a series of affairs with some of the most prominent and wealthy men in
the world—Averill Harriman (whom years later she married), Gianni Agnelli
(heir to the Fiat fortune), Baron Elie de Rothschild. What attracted these
men, and kept them in thrall, was not her beauty or her lineage or her viva-
cious personality, but her extraordinary attention to detail. It began with
her attentive look as she listened to your every word, soaking up your
tastes. Once she found her way into your home, she would fill it with your
favorite flowers, get your chef to cook that dish you had tasted only in the
finest restaurants. You mentioned an artist you liked? A few days later that
artist would be attending one of your parties. She found the perfect an-
tiques for you, dressed in the way that most pleased or excited you, and she
did this without your saying a word—she spied, gathered information from
third parties, overheard you talking to someone else. Harriman's attention
to detail had an intoxicating effect on all the men in her life. It had some-
thing in common with the pampering of a mother, there to bring order
and comfort into their lives, attending to their needs. Life is harsh and
competitive. Attending to detail in a way that is soothing to the other per-
son makes them dependent upon you. The key is probing their needs in a
way that is not too obvious, so that when you make precisely the right ges-
ture, it seems uncanny, as if you had read their mind. This is another way of
returning your targets to childhood, when all of their needs were met.
In the eyes of women all over the world, Rudolph Valentino reigned
as the Great Lover through much of the 1920s. The qualities behind his
appeal certainly included his handsome, almost pretty face, his dancing
skills, the strangely exciting streak of cruelty in his manner. But his perhaps
most endearing trait was his time-consuming approach to courtship. His
films would show him seducing a woman slowly, with careful details—
sending her flowers (choosing the variety to match the mood he wanted to
274 
• 
The Art of Seduction
induce), taking her hand, lighting her cigarette, escorting her to romantic
places, leading her on the dance floor. These were silent movies, and his
audiences never got to hear him speak—it was all in his gestures. Men came
to hate him, for their wives and girlfriends now expected the slow, careful
Valentino treatment.
Valentino had a feminine streak; it was said that he wooed a woman the
way another woman would. But femininity need not figure in this ap-
proach to seduction. In the early 1770s, Prince Gregory Potemkin began
an affair with Empress Catherine the Great of Russia that was to last many
years. Potemkin was a manly man, and not at all handsome. But he man-
aged to win the empress's heart by the many little things he did, and con-
tinued to do long after the affair had begun. He spoiled her with wonderful
gifts, never tired of writing her long letters, arranged for all kinds of enter-
tainments for her, composed songs to her beauty. Yet he would appear be-
fore her barefoot, hair uncombed, clothes wrinkled. There was no kind of
fussiness in his attention, which, however, did make it clear he would go to
the ends of the earth for her. A woman's senses are more refined than a
man's; to a woman, Yang Kuei-fei's overt sensual appeal would seem too
hurried and direct. What that means, though, is that all the man really has
to do is take it slowly, making seduction a ritual full of all kinds of little
things he has to do for his target. If he takes his time, he will have her eat-
ing out of his hand.
Everything in seduction is a sign, and nothing more so than clothes. It
is not that you have to dress interestingly, elegantly, or provocatively, but
that you have to dress for your target—have to appeal to your target's tastes.
When Cleopatra was seducing Mark Antony, her dress was not brazenly
sexual; she dressed as a Greek goddess, knowing his weakness for such fan-
tasy figures. Madame de Pompadour, the mistress of King Louis XV, knew
the king's weakness, his chronic boredom; she constantly wore different
clothes, changing not only their color but their style, supplying the king
with a constant feast for his eyes. Pamela Harriman was subdued in the
fashions she wore, befitting her role as a high-society geisha and reflecting
the sober tastes of the men she seduced. Contrast works well here: at work
or at home, you might dress nonchalantly—Marilyn Monroe, for example,
wore jeans and a T-shirt at home—but when you are with the target you
wear something elaborate, as if you were putting on a costume. Your Cin-
derella transformation will stir excitement, and the feeling that you have
done something just for the person you are with. Whenever your attention
is individualized (you would not dress like that for anyone else), it is infi-
nitely more seductive.
In the 1870s, Queen Victoria found herself wooed by Benjamin Dis-
raeli, her own prime minister. Disraeli's words were flattering and his
manner insinuating; he also sent her flowers, valentines, gifts—but not just
any flowers or gifts, the kind that most men would send. The flowers were
primroses, symbols of their simple yet beautiful friendship. From then on,
whenever Victoria saw a primrose she thought of Disraeli. Or he would
Pay Attention to Detail 
• 275
write on a valentine that he, "no longer in the sunset, but the twilight of
his existence, must encounter a life of anxiety and toil; but this, too, has its
romance, when he remembers that he labors for the most gracious of be-
ings!" Or he might send her a little box, with no inscription, but with a
heart transfixed by an arrow on one side and the word "Fideliter," or
"Faithfully," on the other. Victoria fell in love with Disraeli.
A gift has immense seductive power, but the object itself is less impor-
tant than the gesture, and the subtle thought or emotion that it communi-
cates. Perhaps the choice relates to something from the target's past, or
symbolizes something between you, or merely represents the lengths you
will go to to please. It was not the money Disraeli spent that impressed Vic-
toria, but the time he took to find the appropriate thing or make the ap-
propriate gesture. Expensive gifts have no sentiment attached; they may
temporarily excite their recipient but they are quickly forgotten, as a child
forgets a new toy. The object that reflects its giver's attentiveness has a lin-
gering sentimental power, which resurfaces every time its owner sees it.
In 1919, the Italian writer and war hero Gabriele D'Annunzio managed
to put together a band of followers and take over the town of Fiume, on
the Adriatic coast (now part of Slovenia). They established their own gov-
ernment there, which lasted for over a year. D'Annunzio initiated a series
of public spectacles that were to be immensely influential on politicians
elsewhere. He would address the public from a balcony overlooking the
town's main square, which would be full of colorful banners, flags, pagan
religious symbols, and, at night, torches. The speeches would be followed
by processions. Although D'Annunzio was not at all a Fascist, what he did
in Fiume crucially affected Benito Mussolini, who borrowed his Roman
salutes, his use of symbols, his mode of public address. Spectacles like these
have been used since then by governments everywhere, even democratic
ones. Their overall impression may be grand, but it is the orchestrated de-
tails that make them work—the number of senses they appeal to, the vari-
ety of emotions they stir. You are aiming to distract people, and nothing is
more distracting than a wealth of detail—fireworks, flags, music, uniforms,
marching soldiers, the feel of the crowd packed together. It becomes diffi-
cult to think straight, particularly if the symbols and details stir up patriotic
emotions.
Finally, words are important in seduction, and have a great deal of
power to confuse, distract, and boost the vanity of the target. But what is
most seductive in the long run is what you do not say, what you communi-
cate indirectly. Words come easily, and people distrust them. Anyone can
say the right words; and once they are said, nothing is binding, and they
may even be forgotten altogether. The gesture, the thoughtful gift, the little
details seem much more real and substantial. They are also much more
charming than lofty words about love, precisely because they speak for
themselves and let the seduced read into them more than is there. Never
tell someone what you are feeling; let them guess it in your looks and ges-
tures. That is the more convincing language.
276 
• 
The Art of Seduction
Symbol: The Banquet. A
feast has been prepared in your honor. Everything has
been elaborately coordinated—the flowers, the decorations, the selec-
tion of guests, the dancers, the music, the five-course meal, the end-
lessly flowing wine. The Banquet loosens your tongue,
and also your inhibitions.
Reversal
T
here is no reversal. Details are essential to any successful seduction, and
cannot be ignored.
Poeticize Your Presence
Important things happen when your targets
are alone: the slightest feeling of relief that
you are not there, and it is all over. Fa-
miliarity and overexposure will cause
this reaction. Remain elusive, then,
so that when you are away, they
will yearn to see you again, and
will associate you only with
pleasant thoughts. Occupy their
minds by alternating an excit-
ing presence with a cool dis-
tance, 
exuberant 
moments
followed by calculated absences.
Associate yourself with poetic
images and objects, so that when
they think of you, they begin to see
you through an idealized halo. The
more you figure in their minds, the
more they will envelop you in seductive
fantasies. Feed these fantasies by subtle
inconsistencies and changes in your behavior.
Poetic Presence/Absence
I
n 1943, the Argentine military overthrew the government. A popular
forty-eight-year old colonel, Juan Perón, was named secretary of labor
and social affairs. Perón was a widow who had a fondness for young girls; at
the time of his appointment he was involved with a teenager whom he in-
troduced to one and all as his daughter.
One evening in January of 1944, Perón was seated among the other
military leaders in a Buenos Aires stadium, attending an artists' festival. It
was late and there were some empty seats around him; out of nowhere two
beautiful young actresses asked his permission to sit down. Were they jok-
ing? He would be delighted. He recognized one of the actresses—it was
Eva Duarte, a star of radio soap operas whose photograph was often on the
covers of the tabloids. The other actress was younger and prettier, but
Perón could not take his eyes off Eva, who was talking to another colonel.
She was really not his type at all. She was twenty-four, far too old for his
taste; she was dressed rather garishly; and there was something a little icy in
her manner. But she looked at him occasionally, and her glance excited
him. He looked away for a moment, and the next thing he knew she had
changed seats and was sitting next to him. They started to talk. She hung
on his every word. Yes, everything he said was precisely how she felt—the
poor, the workers, they were the future of Argentina. She had known
poverty herself. There were almost tears in her eyes when she said, at the
end of the conversation, "Thank you for existing."
In the next few days, Eva managed to get rid of Perón's "daughter" and
establish herself in his apartment. Everywhere he turned, there she was,
fixing him meals, caring for him when he was ill, advising him on politics.
Why did he let her stay? Usually he would have a fling with a superficial
young girl, then get rid of her when she seemed to be sticking around too
much. But there was nothing superficial about Eva. As time went by he
found himself getting addicted to the feeling she gave him. She was in-
tensely loyal, mirroring his every idea, puffing him up endlessly. He felt
more masculine in her presence, that was it, and more powerful—she be-
lieved he would make the country's ideal leader, and her belief affected
him. She was like the women in the tango ballads he loved so much—the
suffering women of the streets who became saintly mother figures and
looked after their men. Perón saw her every day, but he never felt he fully
knew her; one day her comments were a little obscene, the next she was
He who does not know
how to encircle a girl so
that she loses sight of
everything he does not
want her to see, he who
does not know how to
poetize himself into a girl
so that it is from her that
everything proceeds as he
wants it—he is and
remains a bungler. . . .
To poetize oneself into a
girl is an art.
—SØREN 
KIERKEGAARD,
THE SEDUCER'S 
DIARY,
TRANSLATED BY HOWARD V.
HONG; AND EDNA H. HONG;
What 
else? If she's out,
reclining in her litter, \
Make your approach
discreet, \ And—just to fox
the sharp ears of those
around you— \ Cleverly
riddle each phrase \ With
ambiguous subtleties. If
she's taking a leisurely \
Stroll down the colonnade,
then you stroll there too—
\ Vary your pace to hers,
march ahead, drop behind
her, \ Dawdling and brisk
by turns. Be bold, \ Dodge
in round the columns
between you, brush your
person \ Lingeringly past
hers. You must never fail \
279
280 
• The Art of Seduction
the perfect lady. He had one worry: she was angling to get married, and he
could never marry her—she was an actress with a dubious past. The other
colonels were already scandalized by his involvement with her. Neverthe-
less, the affair went on.
In 1945, Perón was dismissed from his post and jailed. The colonels
feared his growing popularity and distrusted the power of his mistress, who
seemed to have total influence over him. It was the first time in almost two
years that he was truly alone, and truly separated from Eva. Suddenly he felt
new emotions sweeping over him: he pinned her photographs all over the
wall. Outside, massive strikes were being organized to protest his imprison-
ment, but all he could think about was Eva. She was a saint, a woman of
destiny, a heroine. He wrote to her, "It is only being apart from loved ones
that we can measure our affection. From the day I left you . . . I have not
been able to calm my sad heart. . . . My immense solitude is full of your
memory." Now he promised to marry her.
The strikes grew in intensity. After eight days, Perón was released from
prison; he promptly married Eva. A few months later he was elected presi-
dent. As first lady, Eva attended state functions in her somewhat gaudy
dresses and jewelry; she was seen as a former actress with a large wardrobe.
Then, in 1947, she left for a tour of Europe, and Argentines followed her
every move—the ecstatic crowds that greeted her in Spain, her audience
with the pope—and in her absence their opinion of her changed. How
well she represented the Argentine spirit, its noble simplicity, its flair for
drama. When she returned a few weeks later, they overwhelmed her with
attention.
Eva too had changed during her trip to Europe: now her dyed blond
hair was pulled into a severe chignon, and she wore tailored suits. It was a
serious look, befitting a woman who was to become the savior of the poor.
Soon her image could be seen everywhere—her initials on the walls, the
sheets, the towels of the hospitals for the poor; her profile on the jerseys of
a soccer team from the poorest part of Argentina, whose club she spon-
sored; her giant smiling face covering the sides of buildings. Since finding
out anything personal about her had become impossible, all kinds of elabo-
rate fantasies began to spring up about her. And when cancer cut her life
short, in 1952, at the age of thirty-three (the age of Christ when he died),
the country went into mourning. Millions filed past her embalmed body.
She was no longer a radio actress, a wife, a first lady, but Evita, a saint.
Interpretation. Eva Duarte was an illegitimate child who had grown up in
poverty, escaped to Buenos Aires to become an actress, and been forced to
do many tawdry things to survive and get ahead in the theater world. Her
dream was to escape all of the constraints on her future, for she was in-
tensely ambitious. Perón was the perfect victim. He imagined himself a
great leader, but the reality was that he was fast becoming a lecherous old
man who was too weak to raise himself up. Eva injected poetry into his
To attend the theater when
she does, gaze at her
beauty— 
\ From the
shoulders up she's time \
Most delectably spent, a
feast for adoring glances, \
For the eloquence of
eyebrows, the speaking
sign. \ Applaud when some
male dancer struts on as
the heroine, \ Cheer for
each lover's role. \ When
she leaves, leave too—but
sit there as long as she
does: \ Waste time at your
mistress's whim. . . . \ Get
her accustomed to you; \
Habit's the key, spare no
pains till that's achieved. \
Let her always see you
around, always hear you
talking, \ Show her your
face night and day. \ When
you're confident you'll be
missed, when your absence
\ Seems sure to cause her
regret, \ Then give her
some respite: a field
improves when fallow, \
Parched soil soaks up the
rain. 
\ Demophoön's
presence gave Phyllis no
more than mild excitement;
\ It was his sailing caused
arson in her heart. \
Penelope was racked by
crafty Ulysses's absence, \
Protesilaus, abroad, made
Laodameia burn. \ Short
partings do best, though:
time wears out affections, \
The absent love fades, a
new one takes its place. \
With 
Menelaus away,
Helen's 
disinclination for
sleeping \ Alone led her
into her guest's \ Warm bed
at night. Were you crazy,
Menelaus?
— O V I D , THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER 
GREEN
Concerning the Birth of
Love • Here is what
happens in the soul: •
1. Admiration. • 2. You
think, 
"Mow delightful it
Poeticize Your Presence • 281
life. Her language was florid and theatrical; she surrounded him with atten-
tion, indeed to the point of suffocation, but a woman's dutiful service to a
great man was a classic image, and was celebrated in innumerable tango bal-
lads. Yet she managed to remain elusive, mysterious, like a movie star you
see all the time on the screen but never really know. And when Perón was
finally alone, in prison, these poetic images and associations burst forth in
his mind. He idealized her madly; as far as he was concerned, she was no
longer an actress with a tawdry past. She seduced an entire nation the same
way. The secret was her dramatic poetic presence, combined with a touch
of elusive distance; over time, you would see whatever you wanted to in
her. To this day people fantasize about what Eva was really like.
Familiarity destroys seduction. This rarely happens early on; there is so
much to learn about a new person. But a midpoint may arrive when the
target has begun to idealize and fantasize about you, only to discover that
you are not what he or she thought. It is not a question of being seen too
often, of being too available, as some imagine. In fact, if your targets see
you too rarely, you give them nothing to feed on, and their attention may
be caught by someone else; you have to occupy their mind. It is more a
matter of being too consistent, too obvious, too human and real. Your tar-
gets cannot idealize you if they know too much about you, if they start to
see you as all too human. Not only must you maintain a degree of distance,
but there must be something fantastical and bewitching about you, sparking
all kinds of delightful possibilities in their mind. The possibility Eva held
out was the possibility that she was what in Argentine culture was consid-
ered the ideal woman—devoted, motherly, saintly—but there are any num-
ber of poetic ideals you can try to embody. Chivalry, adventure, romance,
and so on, are just as potent, and if you have a whiff of them about you,
you can breathe enough poetry into the air to fill people's minds with fan-
tasies and dreams. At all costs, you must embody something, even if it is
roguery and evil. Anything to avoid the taint of familiarity and commonness.
What I need is a woman who is something, anything; ei-
ther very beautiful or very kind or in the last resort very
wicked; very witty or very stupid, but something.
—ALFRED DE MUSSET
Keys to Seduction
W
e all have a self-image that is more flattering than the truth: we
think of ourselves as more generous, selfless, honest, kindly, intelli-
gent, or good-looking than in fact we are. It is extremely difficult for us to
be honest with ourselves about our own limitations; we have a desperate
need to idealize ourselves. As the writer Angela Carter remarks, we would
rather align ourselves with angels than with the higher primates from
which we are actually descended.
would be to kiss her, to
be kissed by her," and so
on. . . . • 3. Hope. You
observe her perfections, and
it is at this moment that a
woman really ought to
surrender, for the utmost
physical pleasure. Even the
most reserved women blush
to the whites of their eyes
at this moment of hope.
The passion is so strong,
and the pleasure so sharp,
that they betray themselves
unmistakably. • 4. Love is
born. To love is to enjoy
seeing, touching, and
sensing with all the senses,
as closely as possible, a
lovable object which loves
in return. • 5. The first
crystallization begins. If
you are sure that a woman
loves you, it is a pleasure
to endow her with a
thousand perfections and to
count your blessings with
infinite satisfaction. In the
end you overrate wildly,
and regard her as
something fallen from
Heaven, unknown as yet,
but certain to be yours. •
Leave a lover with his
thoughts for twenty four
hours, and this is what will
happen: • At the salt
mines of Salzburg, 
they
throw a leafless wintry
bough into one of the
abandoned workings. 
Two
or three months later they
haul it out covered with a
shining deposit of crystals.
The smallest twig, no
bigger than a torn-tit's claw,
is studded with a galaxy of
scintillating diamonds. 
The
original branch is no longer
recognizable. • What I
have called crystallization
is a mental process which
draws from everything that
happens new proofs of the
perfection of the loved
one. . . . • A man in love
sees every perfection in the
object of his love, but his
attention is liable to
282 
• 
The Art of Seduction
This need to idealize extends to our romantic entanglements, because
when we fall in love, or under the spell of another person, we see a reflec-
tion of ourselves. The choice we make in deciding to become involved
with another person reveals something important and intimate about us: we
resist seeing ourselves as having fallen for someone who is cheap or tacky or
tasteless, because it reflects badly on who we are. Furthermore, we are often
likely to fall for someone who resembles us in some way. Should that per-
son be deficient, or worst of all ordinary, then there is something deficient
and ordinary about us. No, at all costs the loved one must be overvalued
and idealized, at least for the sake of our own self-esteem. Besides, in a
world that is harsh and full of disappointment, it is a great pleasure to be
able to fantasize about a person you are involved with.
This makes the seducer's task easy: people are dying to be given the
chance to fantasize about you. Do not spoil this golden opportunity by
overexposing yourself, or becoming so familiar and banal that the target
sees you exactly as you are. You do not have to be an angel, or a paragon of
virtue—that would be quite boring. You can be dangerous, naughty, even
somewhat vulgar, depending on the tastes of your victim. But never be or-
dinary or limited. In poetry (as opposed to reality), anything is possible.
Soon after we fall under a person's spell, we form an image in our
minds of who they are and what pleasures they might offer. Thinking of
them when we are alone, we tend to make this image more and more ide-
alized. The novelist Stendhal, in his book On Love, calls this phenomenon
"crystallization," telling the story of how, in Salzburg, Austria, they used to
throw a leafless branch into the abandoned depths of a salt mine in the
middle of winter. When the branch was pulled out months later, it would
be covered with spectacular crystals. That is what happens to a loved one in
our minds.
According to Stendhal, though, there are two crystallizations. The first
happens when we first meet the person. The second and more important
one happens later, when a bit of doubt creeps in—you desire the other per-
son, but they elude you, you are not sure they are yours. This bit of doubt
is critical—it makes your imagination work double, deepens the poeticizing
process. In the seventeenth century, the great rake the Duc de Lauzun
pulled off one of the most spectacular seductions in history—that of the
Grande Mademoiselle, the cousin of King Louis XIV, and the wealthiest
and most powerful woman in France. He tickled her imagination with a
few brief encounters at the court, letting her catch glimpses of his wit, his
audacity, his cool manner. She would begin to think of him when she was
alone. Next she started to bump into him more often at court, and they
would have little conversations or walks. When these meetings were over,
she would be left with a doubt: is he or is he not interested in me? This
made her want to see him more, in order to allay her doubts. She began to
idealize him all out of proportion to the reality, for the duke was an incor-
rigible scoundrel.
Remember: if you are easily had, you cannot be worth that much. It is
wander after a time because
one gets tired of anything
uniform, even perfect
happiness. • This is what
happens next to fix the
attention: • 6. Doubt
creeps in. . . . He is met
with indifference, coldness,
or even anger if he appears
too confident. . . . The
lover begins to be less sure
of the good fortune he was
anticipating and subjects
his grounds for hope to a
critical examination. 
• He
tries to recoup by indulging
in other pleasures but finds
them inane. He is seized
by the dread of a frightful
calamity and now
concentrates fully. 
Thus
begins: • 7. The second
crystallization, 
which
deposits diamond layers of
proof that "she loves me."
• Every few minutes
throughout the night which
follows the birth of doubt,
the lover has a moment of
dreadful misgiving, and
then reassures himself "she
loves me"; and
crystallization begins to
reveal new charms. Then
once again the haggard eye
of doubt pierces him and he
stops transfixed. 
He forgets
to draw breath and mutters,
"But does she love me?"
Torn between doubt and
delight, the poor lover
convinces himself that she
could give him such
pleasure as he could find
nowhere else on earth.
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND
SUZANNE SALE
Falling in love
automatically tends toward
madness. Left to itself, it
goes to utter extremes. This
is well known by the
"conquistadors" 
of both
sexes. Once a woman's
Poeticize Your Presence • 283
hard to wax poetic about a person who comes so cheaply. If, after the initial
interest, you make it clear that you cannot be taken for granted, if you stir a
bit of doubt, the target will imagine there is something special, lofty, and
unattainable about you. Your image will crystallize in the other person's
mind.
Cleopatra knew that she was really no different from any other woman,
and in fact her face was not particularly beautiful. But she knew that men
have a tendency to overvalue a woman. All that is required is to hint that
there is something different about you, to make them associate you with
something grand or poetic. She made Caesar aware of her connection to
the great kings and queens of Egypt's past; with Antony, she created the
fantasy that she was descended from Aphrodite herself. These men were ca-
vorting not just with a strong-willed woman but a kind of goddess. Such
associations might be difficult to pull off today, but people still get deep
pleasure from associating others with some kind of childhood fantasy fig-
ure. John F. Kennedy presented himself as a figure of chivalry—noble,
brave, charming. Pablo Picasso was not just a great painter with a thirst for
young girls, he was the Minotaur of Greek legend, or the devilish trickster
figure that is so seductive to women. These associations should not be made
too early; they are only powerful once the target has begun to fall under
your spell, and is vulnerable to suggestion. A man who had just met
Cleopatra would have found the Aphrodite association ludicrous. But a
person who is falling in love will believe almost anything. The trick is to as-
sociate your image with something mythic, through the clothes you wear,
the things you say, the places you go.
In Marcel Proust's novel Remembrance of Things Past, the character
Swann finds himself gradually seduced by a woman who is not really his
type. He is an aesthete, and loves the finer things in life. She is of a lower
class, less refined, even a little tasteless. What poeticizes her in his mind is a
series of exuberant moments they share together, moments that from then
on he associates with her. One of these is a concert in a salon that they at-
tend, in which he is intoxicated by a little melody in a sonata. Whenever he
thinks of her, he remembers this little phrase. Little gifts she has given him,
objects she has touched or handled, begin to assume a life of their own.
Any kind of heightened experience, artistic or spiritual, lingers in the mind
much longer than normal experience. You must find a way to share such
moments with your targets—a concert, a play, a spiritual encounter, what-
ever it takes—so that they associate something elevated with you. Shared
moments of exuberance have immense seductive pull. Also, any kind of
object can be imbued with poetic resonance and sentimental associations, as
discussed in the last chapter. The gifts you give and other objects can be-
come imbued with your presence; if they are associated with pleasant
memories, the sight of them keeps you in mind and accelerates the poeti-
cization process.
Although it is said that absence makes the heart grow fonder, an ab-
sence too early will prove deadly to the crystallization process. Like Eva
attention is fixed upon a
man, it is very easy for
him to dominate her
thoughts completely. A
simple game of blowing
hot and cold, of
solicitousness 
and disdain,
of presence and absence is
all that is required. The
rhythm of that technique
acts upon a woman's
attention like a pneumatic
machine and ends by
emptying her of all the rest
of the world. How well our
people put it: "to suck
one's senses"! In fact: one
is absorbed—absorbed by
an object! Most "love
affairs" 
are reduced to this
mechanical play of the
beloved upon the lover's
attention. • The only thing
that can save a lover is a
violent shock from the
outside, a treatment which
is forced upon him. Many
think that absence and long
trips are a good cure for
lovers. Observe that these
are cures for one's
attention. 
Distance from
the beloved starves our
attention toward him; it
prevents anything further
from rekindling the
attention. Journeys, by
physically obliging us to
come out of ourselves and
resolve hundreds of little
problems, by uprooting us
from our habitual setting
and forcing hundreds of
unexpected objects upon us,
succeed in breaking down
the maniac's haven and
opening channels in his
sealed consciousness,
through which fresh air and
normal perspective enter.
—JOSÉ ORTEGA Y GASSET,
ON LOVE: ASPECTS OF A
SINGLE THEME, TRANSLATED BY
TOBY TALBOT
284 
• 
The Art of Seduction
Perón, you must surround your targets with focused attention, so that in
those critical moments when they are alone, their mind is spinning with a
kind of afterglow. Do everything you can to keep the target thinking about
you. Letters, mementos, gifts, unexpected meetings—all these give you an
omnipresence. Everything must remind them of you.
Finally, if your targets should see you as elevated and poetic, there is
much to be gained by making them feel elevated and poeticized in their
turn. The French writer Chateaubriand would make a woman feel like a
goddess, she had such a powerful effect on him. He would send her poems
that she supposedly had inspired. To make Queen Victoria feel as if she
were both a seductive woman and a great leader, Benjamin Disraeli would
compare her to mythological figures and great predecessors, such as Queen
Elizabeth I. By idealizing your targets this way, you will make them idealize
you in return, since you must be equally great to be able to appreciate and
see all of their fine qualities. They will also grow addicted to the elevated
feeling you give them.
Symbol: 
The Halo.
Slowly, when the target is alone, he or she begins to
imagine a kind of faint glow around your head, formed by all of
the possible pleasures you might offer, the radiance of your charged
presence, your noble qualities. The Halo separates you from other
people. Do not make it disappear by becoming fa-
miliar and ordinary.
Reversal
I
t might seem that the reverse tactic would be to reveal everything about
yourself, to be completely honest about your faults and virtues. This kind
of sincerity was a quality Lord Byron had—he almost got a thrill out of
disclosing all of his nasty, ugly qualities, even going so far, later on in his
life, as to tell people about his incestuous involvements with his half sister.
This kind of dangerous intimacy can be immensely seductive. The target
will poeticize your vices, and your honesty about them; they will start to
see more than is there. In other words, the idealization process is unavoid-
able. The only thing that cannot be idealized is mediocrity, but there is
nothing seductive about mediocrity. There is no possible way to seduce
without creating some kind of fantasy and poeticization.
Excessive familiarity can
destroy crystallization. A
charming girl of sixteen
was becoming too fond of a
handsome young man of
the same age, who used to
make a practice of passing
beneath her window every
evening at nightfall. Her
mother invited him to
spend a week with them
in the country. It was a
bold remedy, I admit,
but the girl was of a
romantic disposition, 
and
the young man a trifle
dull; within three days she
despised him.
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND
SUZANNE SALE
Disarm Through Strategic Weakness
and Vulnerability
Too much ma-
neuvering on your part may raise
suspicion. The best way to cover your tracks
is to make the other person feel superior and
stronger. If you seem to be weak, vulnerable, enthralled
by the other person, and unable to control yourself, you will
make your actions look more natural, less calculated. Physical
weakness—tears, bashfulness, paleness—will help create the ef-
fect. To further win trust, exchange honesty for virtue: establish
your "sincerity" by confessing some sin on your part—it doesn't
have to be real. Sincerity is more important than goodness. Play
the victim, then transform your target's sympathy into love.
The Victim Strategy
T
hat sweltering August in the 1770s when the Présidente de Tourvel
was visiting the château of her old friend Madame de Rosemonde,
leaving her husband at home, she was expecting to be enjoying the peace
and quiet of country life more or less on her own. But she loved the simple
pleasures, and soon her daily life at the château assumed a comfortable
pattern—daily Mass, walks in the country, charitable work in the neighbor-
ing villages, card games in the evening. When Madame de Rosemonde's
nephew arrived for a visit, then, the Présidente felt uncomfortable—but
also curious.
The nephew, the Vicomte de Valmont, was the most notorious liber-
tine in Paris. He was certainly handsome, but he was not what she had ex-
pected: he seemed sad, somewhat downtrodden, and strangest of all, he
paid hardly any attention to her. The Présidente was no coquette; she
dressed simply, ignored fashions, and loved her husband. Still, she was
young and beautiful, and was used to fending off men's attentions. In the
back of her mind, she was slightly perturbed that he took so little notice of
her. Then, at Mass one day, she caught a glimpse of Valmont apparently lost
in prayer. The idea dawned on her that he was in the midst of a period of
soul-searching.
As soon as word had leaked out that Valmont was at the château, the
Présidente had received a letter from a friend warning her against this dan-
gerous man. But she thought of herself as the last woman in the world to
be vulnerable to him. Besides, he seemed on the verge of repenting his evil
past; perhaps she could help move him in that direction. What a wonderful
victory that would be for God. And so the Présidente took note of Val-
mont's comings and goings, trying to understand what was happening in
his head. It was strange, for instance, that he would often leave in the
morning to go hunting, yet would never return with any game. One day,
she decided to have her servant do a little harmless spying, and she was
amazed and delighted to learn that Valmont had not gone hunting at all; he
had visited a local village, where he had doled out money to a poor family
about to be evicted from their home. Yes, she was right, his passionate soul
was moving from sensuality to virtue. How happy that made her feel.
That evening, Valmont and the Présidente found themselves alone for
the first time, and Valmont suddenly burst out with a startling confession.
He was head-over-heels in love with the Présidente, and with a love he had
The weak ones do have a
power over us. The clear,
forceful ones I can do
without. I am weak and
indecisive by nature myself,
and a woman who is quiet
and withdrawn and follows
the wishes of a man even
to the point of letting
herself be used has much
the greater appeal. A man
can shape and mold her as
he wishes, and becomes
fonder of her all the while.
—MURASAKI 
SHIKIBU,
THE TALE OF GENJI,
TRANSLATED BY EDWARD G.
SEIDENSTICKER
Hera, 
daughter of Cronus
and Rhea, having been
born on the island of
Samos or, some say, at
Argos, was brought up in
Arcadia by Temenus, sou
of Pelasgus. The Seasons
were her nurses. After
banishing 
their father
Cronus, Hera's twin
brother Zeus sought her
out at Cnossus in Crete or,
some say, on Mount
Thornax (now called
Cuckoo Mountain) 
in
Argolis, where he courted
her, at first unsuccessfully.
She took pity on him only
when he adopted the
287
288 
• 
The Art of Seduction
never experienced before: her virtue, her goodness, her beauty, her kind
ways had completely overwhelmed him. His generosity to the poor that
afternoon had been for her sake—perhaps inspired by her, perhaps some-
thing more sinister: it had been to impress her. He would never have con-
fessed to this, but finding himself alone with her, he could not control his
emotions. Then he got down on his knees and begged for her to help him,
to guide him in his misery.
The Présidente was caught off guard, and began to cry. Intensely em-
barrassed, she ran from the room, and for the next few days pretended to be
ill. She did not know how to react to the letters Valmont now began to
send her, begging her to forgive him. He praised her beautiful face and her
beautiful soul, and claimed she had made him rethink his whole life. These
emotional letters produced disturbing emotions, and Tourvel prided herself
on her calmness and prudence. She knew she should insist that he leave the
château, and wrote him to that effect; he reluctantly agreed, but on one
condition—that she allow him to write to her from Paris. She consented, as
long as the letters were not offensive. When he told Madame de Rose-
monde that he was leaving, the Présidente felt a pang of guilt: his host-
ess and aunt would miss him, and he looked so pale. He was obviously
suffering.
Now the letters from Valmont began to arrive, and Tourvel soon re-
gretted allowing him this liberty. He ignored her request that he avoid the
subject of love—indeed he vowed to love her forever. He rebuked her for
her coldness and insensitivity. He explained his bad path in life—it was not
his fault, he had had no direction, had been led astray by others. Without
her help he would fall back into that world. Do not be cruel, he said, you
are the one who seduced me. I am your slave, the victim of your charms
and goodness; since you are strong, and do not feel as I do, you have noth-
ing to fear. Indeed the Présidente de Tourvel came to pity Valmont—he
seemed so weak, so out of control. How could she help him? And why was
she even thinking of him, which she now did more and more? She was a
happily married woman. No, she must at least put an end to this tiresome
correspondence. No more talk of love, she wrote, or she would not reply.
His letters stopped coming. She felt relief. Finally some peace and quiet.
One evening, however, as she was seated at the dinner table, she sud-
denly heard Valmont's voice from behind her, addressing Madame de Rose-
monde. On the spur of the moment, he said, he had decided to return for
a short visit. She felt a shiver up and down her spine, her face flushed; he
approached and sat down beside her. He looked at her, she looked away,
and soon made an excuse to leave the table and go up to her room. But she
could not completely avoid him over the next few days, and she saw that he
seemed paler than ever. He was polite, and a whole day might pass without
her seeing him, but these brief absences had a paradoxical effect: now
Tourvel realized what had happened. She missed him, she wanted to see
him. This paragon of virtue and goodness had somehow fallen in love with
an incorrigible rake. Disgusted with herself and what she had allowed to
disguise of a bedraggled
cuckoo and tenderly
warmed him in her bosom.
There he at once resumed
his true shape and ravished
her, so that she was
shamed into marrying him.
—ROBERT GRAVES,
THE GREEK 
MYTHS
In a strategy (?) of
seduction one draws the
other into one's area of
weakness, which is also his
or her area of weakness. A
calculated weakness, an
incalculable weakness: one
challenges the other to be
taken i n . . . . • To seduce
is to appear weak. To
seduce is to render weak.
We seduce with our
weakness, never with
strong signs or powers. In
seduction we enact this
weakness, and this is what
gives seduction its strength.
• We seduce with our
death, 
our vulnerability,
and with the void that
haunts us. The secret is to
know how to play with
death in the absence of a
gaze or gesture, in the
absence of knowledge or
meaning. 
• Psychoanalysis
tells us to assume our
fragility and passivity, 
but
in almost religious terms,
turns them into a form of
resignation and acceptance
in order to promote a well-
tempered psychic
equilibrium. 
Seduction, 
by
contrast, plays 
trumph-
antty 
with weakness,
making a game of it, with
its own rules.
—JEAN BAUDRILLARD,
SEDUCTION, 
TRANSLATED 
BY
BRIAN SINGER
Disarm Through Strategic Weakness and Vulnerability 
• 
289
happen, she left the château in the middle of the night, without telling
anyone, and headed for Paris, where she planned somehow to repent this
awful sin.
Interpretation. 
The character of Valmont in Choderlos de Laclos's
epistolary novel Dangerous Liaisons is based on several of the great real-life
libertines of eighteenth-century France. Everything Valmont does is calcu-
lated for effect—the ambiguous actions that make Tourvel curious about
him, the act of charity in the village (he knows he is being followed), the
return visit to the château, the paleness of his face (he is having an affair
with a girl at the château, and their all-night carousals give him a wasted
look). Most devastating of all is his positioning of himself as the weak one,
the seduced, the victim. How can the Présidente imagine he is manipulat-
ing her when everything suggests he is simply overwhelmed by her beauty,
whether physical or spiritual? He cannot be a deceiver when he repeatedly
makes a point of confessing the "truth" about himself: he admits that his
charity was questionably motivated, he explains why he has gone astray, he
lets her in on his emotions. (All of this "honesty," of course, is calculated.)
In essence he is like a woman, or at least like a woman of those times—
emotional, unable to control himself, moody, insecure. She is the one who
is cold and cruel, like a man. In positioning himself as Tourvel's victim, Val-
mont can not only disguise his manipulations but elicit pity and concern.
Playing the victim, he can stir up the tender emotions produced by a sick
child or a wounded animal. And these emotions are easily channeled into
love—as the Présidente discovers to her dismay.
Seduction is a game of reducing suspicion and resistance. The cleverest
way to do this is to make the other person feel stronger, more in control of
things. Suspicion usually comes out of insecurity; if your targets feel supe-
rior and secure in your presence, they are unlikely to doubt your motives.
You are too weak, too emotional, to be up to something. Take this game as
far as it will go. Flaunt your emotions and how deeply they have affected
you. Making people feel the power they have over you is immensely flatter-
ing to them. Confess to something bad, or even to something bad that you
did, or contemplated doing, to them. Honesty is more important than
virtue, and one honest gesture will blind them to many deceitful acts. Cre-
ate an impression of weakness—physical, mental, emotional. Strength and
confidence can be frightening. Make your weakness a comfort, and play
the victim—of their power over you, of circumstances, of life in general.
This is the best way to cover your tracks.
You know, a man ain't worth a damn if he can't cry at the
right time.
—LYNDON BAINES JOHNSON
The old American proverb
says if you want to con
someone, you must first get
him to trust you, or at least
feel superior to you (these
two ideas are related), and
get him to let down his
guard. 
The proverb
explains a great deal about
television commercials. If
we assume that people are
not stupid, they must react
to TV commercials with a
feeling of superiority that
permits them to believe
they are in control. As long
as this illusion of volition
persists, they would
consciously have nothing to
fear from the commercials.
People are prone to trust
anything over which they
believe they have
control. . . . • TV com-
mercials appear foolish,
clumsy, and ineffectual on
purpose. They are made to
appear this way at the
conscious level in order to
be consciously ridiculed and
rejected. . . . Most ad men
will confirm that over the
years the seemingly worst
commercials have sold the
best. An effective TV
commercial is purposefully
designed to insult the
viewer's conscious
intelligence, thereby
penetrating 
his defenses.
— W I L S O N BRYAN KEY,
SUBLIMINAL 
SEDUCTION
It takes great art to use
bashfulness, but one does
achieve a great deal with it.
How often I have used
bashfulness to trick a little
miss! Ordinarily, young
girls speak very harshly
about bashful men, but
secretly they like them. A
little bashfulness flatters a
teenage girl's vanity, makes
her feel superior; it is her
290 
• 
The Art of Seduction
Keys to Seduction
W
e all have weaknesses, vulnerabilities, frailnesses in our mental
makeup. Perhaps we are shy or oversensitive, or need attention—
whatever the weakness is, it is something we cannot control. We may try to
compensate for it, or to hide it, but this is often a mistake: people sense
something inauthentic or unnatural. Remember: what is natural to your
character is inherently seductive. A person's vulnerability, what they seem
to be unable to control, is often what is most seductive about them. People
who display no weaknesses, on the other hand, often elicit envy, fear, and
anger—we want to sabotage them just to bring them down.
Do not struggle against your vulnerabilities, or try to repress them, but
put them into play. Learn to transform them into power. The game is sub-
tle: if you wallow in your weakness, overplay your hand, you will be seen as
angling for sympathy, or, worse, as pathetic. No, what works best is to allow
people an occasional glimpse into the soft, frail side of your character, and
usually only after they have known you for a while. That glimpse will hu-
manize you, lowering their suspicions, and preparing the ground for a
deeper attachment. Normally strong and in control, at moments you let go,
give in to your weakness, let them see it.
Valmont used his weakness this way. He had lost his innocence long
ago, and yet, somewhere inside, he regretted it. He was vulnerable to
someone truly innocent. His seduction of the Présidente was successful be-
cause it was not totally an act; there was a genuine weakness on his part,
which even allowed him to cry at times. He let the Présidente see this side
to him at key moments, in order to disarm her. Like Valmont, you can be
acting and sincere at the same time. Suppose you are genuinely shy—at cer-
tain moments, give your shyness a little weight, lay it on a little thick. It
should be easy for you to embellish a quality you already have.
After Lord Byron published his first major poem, in 1812, he became
an instant celebrity. Beyond being a talented writer, he was so handsome,
even pretty, and he was as brooding and enigmatic as the characters he
wrote about. Women went wild over Lord Byron. He had an infamous
"underlook," slightly lowering his head and glancing upward at a woman,
making her tremble. But Byron had other qualities: when you first met
him, you could not help noticing his fidgety movements, his ill-fitting
clothes, his strange shyness, and his noticeable limp. This infamous man,
who scorned all conventions and seemed so dangerous, was personally inse-
cure and vulnerable.
In Byron's poem Don Juan, the hero is less a seducer of women than a
man constantly pursued by them. The poem was autobiographical; women
wanted to take care of this somewhat fragile man, who seemed to have lit-
tle control over his emotions. More than a century later, John F. Kennedy,
as a boy, became obsessed with Byron, the man he most wanted to emulate.
He even tried to borrow Byron's "underlook." Kennedy himself was a frail
youth, with constant health problems. He was also a little pretty, and friends
earnest money. When they
are lulled to sleep, then at
the very time they believe
you are about to perish
from bashfulness, you show
them that you are so far
from it that you are quite
self-reliant. 
Bashfulness
makes a man lose his
masculine significance, and
therefore it is a relatively
good means for
neutralizing the sex
relation.
—SØREN KIERKEGAARD,
THE 
SEDUCER'S 
DIARY,
TRANSLATED BY HOWARD 
V.
HONG AND EDNA H. HONG
Yet another form of
Charity is there, which is
oft times practised towards
poor prisoners who are shut
up in dungeons and robbed
of all enjoyments with
women. On such do the
gaolers' wives and women
that have charge over them,
or chatelaines who have
prisoners of war in their
Castle, 
take pity and give
them share of their love out
of very charity and
mercifulness. . . . • Thus
do these gaolers' wives,
noble chatelaines and
others, treat their prisoners,
the which, captive and
unhappy though they be,
yet cease not for that to feel
the prickings of the flesh,
as much as ever they did in
their best days. . . . • To
confirm what I say, I will
instance a tale that
Captain 
Beaulieu,
Captain of the King's
Galleys, of whom I have
before spoke once and
again, did tell me. He was
in the service of the late
Grand Prior of France, a
member of the house of
Lorraine, who was much
attached to him. Going
one time to take his patron
on board at Malta in a
Disarm Through Strategic Weakness and Vulnerability • 
291
saw something slightly feminine in him. Kennedy's weaknesses—physical
and mental, for he too was insecure, shy, and oversensitive—were exactly
what drew women to him. If Byron and Kennedy had tried to cover up
their vulnerabilities with a masculine swagger they would have had no
seductive charm. Instead, they learned how to subtly display their weak-
nesses, letting women sense this soft side to them.
There are fears and insecurities peculiar to each sex; your use of strate-
gic weakness must always take these differences into account. A woman, for
instance, may be attracted by a man's strength and self-confidence, but too
much of it can create fear, seeming unnatural, even ugly Particularly intimi-
dating is the sense that the man is cold and unfeeling. She may feel insecure
that he is only after sex, and nothing else. Male seducers long ago learned
to become more feminine—to show their emotions, and to seem interested
in their targets' lives. The medieval troubadours were the first to master this
strategy; they wrote poetry in honor of women, emoted endlessly about
their feelings, and spent hours in their ladies' boudoirs, listening to the
women's complaints and soaking up their spirit. In return for their willing-
ness to play weak, the troubadours earned the right to love.
Little has changed since then. Some of the greatest seducers in recent
history—Gabriele D' Annunzio, Duke Ellington, Errol Flynn—understood
the value of acting slavishly to a woman, like a troubadour on bended knee.
The key is to indulge your softer side while still remaining as masculine as
possible. This may include an occasional show of bashfulness, which the
philosopher Søren Kierkegaard thought an extremely seductive tactic for a
man—it gives the woman a sense of comfort, and even of superiority. Re-
member, though, to keep everything in moderation. A glimpse of shyness
is sufficient; too much of it and the target will despair, afraid that she will
end up having to do all the work.
A man's fears and insecurities often concern his sense of masculinity; he
usually will feel threatened by a woman who is too overtly manipulative,
who is too much in control. The greatest seductresses in history knew how
to cover up their manipulations by playing the little girl in need of mascu-
line protection. A famous courtesan of ancient China, Su Shou, used to
make up her face to look particularly pale and weak. She would also walk
in a way that made her seem frail. The great nineteenth-century courtesan
Cora Pearl would literally dress and act like a little girl. Marilyn Monroe
knew how to give the impression that she depended on a man's strength to
survive. In all of these instances, the women were the ones in control of
the dynamic, boosting a man's sense of masculinity in order to ultimately
enslave him. To make this most effective, a woman should seem both in
need of protection and sexually excitable, giving the man his ultimate
fantasy.
The Empress Josephine, wife of Napoleon Bonaparte, won dominance
over her husband early on through a calculated coquetry. Later on, though,
she held on to that power through her constant—and not so innocent—use
of tears. Seeing someone cry usually has an immediate effect on our emo-
frigate, he was taken by the
Sicilian galleys, and carried
prisoner to the Castel-à-
mare at Palermo, where he
was shut up in an
exceeding narrow, dark and
wretched dungeon, and
very ill entreated by the
space of three months. By
good hap the Governor of
the Castle, who was a
Spaniard, had two very
fair daughters, who hearing
him complaining and
making moan, did one day
ask leave of their father to
visit him, for the honor of
the good God; and this he
did freely give them
permission to do. And
seeing the Captain was of
a surety a right gallant
gentleman, and as ready-
tongued as most, he was
able so to win them over at
this, the very first visit,
that they did gain their
father's leave for him to
quit his wretched dungeon
and to be put in a seemly
enough chamber and
receive better treatment.
Nor was this all, for they
did crave and get
permission to come and see
him freely every day and
converse with him. • And
this did fall out so well that
presently both the twain of
them were in love with
him, albeit he was not
handsome to look upon,
and they very fair ladies.
And so, without a thought
of the chance of more
rigorous imprisonment or
even death, but rather
tempted by such
opportunities, he did set
himself to the enjoyment of
the two girls with good will
and hearty appetite. And
these pleasures did continue
without any scandal, for so
fortunate was he in this
conquest of his for the space
of eight whole months, that
no scandal did ever hap all
that time, and no ill,
292 
• The Art of Seduction
tions: we cannot remain neutral. We feel sympathy, and most often will do
anything to stop the tears—including things that we normally would not
do. Weeping is an incredibly potent tactic, but the weeper is not always so
innocent. There is usually something real behind the tears, but there may
also be an element of acting, of playing for effect. (And if the target senses
this the tactic is doomed.) Beyond the emotional impact of tears, there is
something seductive about sadness. We want to comfort the other person,
and as Tourvel discovered, that desire quickly turns into love. Affecting sad-
ness, even crying sometimes, has great strategic value, even for a man. It is a
skill you can learn. The central character of the eighteenth-century French
novel Marianne, by Marivaux, would think of something sad in her past to
make herself cry or look sad in the present.
Use tears sparingly, and save them for the right moment. Perhaps this
might be a time when the target seems suspicious of your motives, or when
you are worrying about having no effect on him or her. Tears are a sure
barometer of how deeply the other person is falling for you. If they seem
annoyed, or resist the bait, your case is probably hopeless.
In social and political situations, seeming too ambitious, or too con-
trolled, will make people fear you; it is crucial to show your soft side. The
display of a single weakness will hide a multitude of manipulations. Emo-
tion or even tears will work here too. Most seductive of all is playing the
victim. For his first speech in Parliament, Benjamin Disraeli prepared an
elaborate oration, but when he delivered it the opposition yelled and
laughed so loudly that hardly any of it could be heard. He plowed ahead
and gave the whole speech, but by the time he sat down he felt he had
failed miserably. Much to his amazement, his colleagues told him the
speech was a marvelous success. It would have been a failure if he had com-
plained or given up; but by going ahead as he did, he positioned himself as
the victim of a cruel and unreasonable faction. Almost everyone sympa-
thized with him now, which would serve him well in the future. Attacking
your mean-spirited opponents can make you seem ugly as well; instead,
soak up their blows, and play the victim. The public will rally to your side,
in an emotional response that will lay the groundwork for a grand political
seduction.
Symbol: The Blemish. A beautiful face is a delight to look at, but
if it is too perfect it leaves us cold, and even slightly intimidated.
It is the little mole, the beauty mark, that makes the face
human and lovable. So do not conceal all of your
blemishes. 
You need them to soften your
features and elicit tender
feelings.
inconvenience, nor any
surprise or discovery at all.
For indeed the two sisters
had so good an under-
standing between them and
did so generously lend a
hand to each other and so
obligingly play sentinel to
one another, that no ill hap
did ever occur. And he
swore to me, being my very
intimate friend as he was,
that never in his days of
greatest liberty had he
enjoyed so excellent
entertainment 
or felt 
keener
ardor or better appetite for
it than in the said
prison—which 
truly was a
right good prison for him,
albeit folk say no prison
can be good. And this
happy time did continue for
the space of eight months,
till the truce was made
betwixt the Emperor and
Henri II., 
King of France,
whereby all prisoners did
leave their dungeons and
were released. He sware
that never was he more
grieved than at quitting
this good prison of his, but
was exceeding sorry to
leave these fair maids, with
whom he was in such high
favor, and who did express
all possible regrets at his
departing.
—SEIGNEUR DE BRANTÔME,
LIVES OF 
FAIR 
& GALLANT
LADIES, TRANSLATED BY A. R.
ALLINSON
Disarm Through Strategic Weakness and Vulnerability 
• 
293
Reversal
T
iming is everything in seduction; you should always look for signs that
the target is falling under your spell. A person falling in love tends to
ignore the other person's weaknesses, or to see them as endearing. An
unseduced, rational person, on the other hand, may find bashfulness or
emotional outbursts pathetic. There are also certain weaknesses that have
no seductive value, no matter how in love the target may be.
The great seventeenth-century courtesan Ninon de l'Enclos liked men
with a soft side. But sometimes a man would go too far, complaining that
she did not love him enough, that she was too fickle and independent, that
he was being mistreated and wronged. For Ninon, such behavior would
break the spell, and she would quickly end the relationship. Complaining,
whining, neediness, and actively appealing for sympathy will appear to your
targets not as charming weaknesses but as manipulative attempts at a kind of
negative power. So when you play the victim, do it subtly, without overad-
vertising it. The only weaknesses worth playing up are the ones that will
make you seem lovable. All others should be repressed and eradicated at all
costs.
Confuse Desire and Reality—
The Perfect Illusion
To
compensate for the difficulties in their
lives, people spend a lot of their time daydreaming, imag-
ining a future full of adventure, success, and romance. If you can
create the illusion that through you they can live out their
dreams, you will have them at your mercy. It is im-
portant to start slowly, gaining their trust,
and gradually constructing the fantasy
that matches their desires. Aim at
secret wishes that have been thwarted
or repressed, stirring up uncontrollable
emotions, clouding their powers of reason. The
perfect illusion is one that does not depart too much from
reality, but has a touch of the unreal to it, like a waking dream,
head the seduced to a point of confusion in which they can
no longer tell the difference between illusion
and reality.
Fantasy in the Flesh
I
n 1964, a twenty-year-old Frenchman named Bernard Bouriscout ar-
rived in Beijing, China, to work as an accountant in the French embassy.
His first weeks there were not what he had expected. Bouriscout had
grown up in the French provinces, dreaming of travel and adventure.
When he had been assigned to come to China, images of the Forbidden
City, and of the gambling dens of Macao, had danced in his mind. But this
was Communist China, and contact between Westerners and Chinese was
almost impossible at the time. Bouriscout had to socialize with the other
Europeans stationed in the city, and what a boring and cliquish lot they
were. He grew lonely, regretted taking the assignment, and began making
plans to leave.
Then, at a Christmas party that year, Bouriscout's eyes were drawn to a
young Chinese man in a corner of the room. He had never seen anyone
Chinese at any of these affairs. The man was intriguing: he was slender and
short, a bit reserved, but he had an attractive presence. Bouriscout went up
and introduced himself. The man, Shi Pei Pu, proved to be a writer of
Chinese-opera librettos who also taught Chinese to members of the
French embassy. Aged twenty-six, he spoke perfect French. Everything
about him fascinated Bouriscout; his voice was like music, soft and whis-
pery, and he left you wanting to know more about him. Bouriscout, al-
though usually shy, insisted on exchanging telephone numbers. Perhaps Pei
Pu could be his Chinese tutor.
They met a few days later in a restaurant. Bouriscout was the only
Westerner there—at last a taste of something real and exotic. Pei Pu, it
turned out, had been a well-known actor in Chinese operas and came from
a family with connections to the former ruling dynasty. Now he wrote
operas about the workers, but he said this with a look of irony They began
to meet regularly, Pei Pu showing Bouriscout the sights of Beijing. Bouris-
cout loved his stories—Pei Pu talked slowly, and every historical detail
seemed to come alive as he spoke, his hands moving to embellish his words.
This, he might say, is where the last Ming emperor hung himself, pointing
to the spot and telling the story at the same time. Or, the cook in the
restaurant we just ate in once served in the palace of the last emperor, and
then another magnificent tale would follow. Pei Pu also talked of life in the
Beijing Opera, where men often played women's parts, and sometimes be-
came famous for it.
Lovers and madmen have
such seething brains, \ Such
shaping fantasies, that
apprehend \ More than cool
reason ever comprehends.
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
A 
MIDSUMMER 
NIGHT'S
DREAM
He was not a sex person.
He was like . . . somebody
who had come down from
the clouds. He was not
human. You could not say
he was a man friend or a
woman friend; he was
somebody different
anyway. . . . You feel he
was only a friend who was
coming from 
another planet
and so nice also, so
overwhelming 
and
separated from the life of
the ground.
—BERNARD BOURISCOUT, IN
JOYCE WADLER, LIAISON
Romance had again come
her way personified by a
handsome young German
officer, Lieutenant Konrad
Friedrich, who called upon
her at Neuilly to ask her
help. He wanted Pauline
[Bonaparte] to use her
291
298 
• 
The Art of Seduction
The two men became friends. Chinese contact with foreigners was re-
stricted, but they managed to find ways to meet. One evening Bouriscout
tagged along when Pei Pu visited the home of a French official to tutor the
children. He listened as Pei Pu told them "The Story of the Butterfly," a
tale from the Chinese opera: a young girl yearns to attend an imperial
school, but girls are not accepted there. She disguises herself as a boy, passes
the exams, and enters the school. A fellow student falls in love with her,
and she is attracted to him, so she tells him that she is actually a girl. Like
most of these tales, the story ends tragically. Pei Pu told it with unusual
emotion; in fact he had played the role of the girl in the opera.
A few nights later, as they were walking before the gates of the Forbid-
den City, Pei Pu returned to "The Story of the Butterfly" "Look at my
hands," he said, "Look at my face. That story of the butterfly, it is my story
too." In his slow, dramatic delivery he explained that his mother's first two
children had been girls. Sons were far more important in China; if the third
child was a girl, the father would have to take a second wife. The third child
came: another girl. But the mother was too frightened to reveal the truth,
and made an agreement with the midwife: they would say that the child
was a boy, and it would be raised as such. This third child was Pei Pu.
Over the years, Pei Pu had had to go to extreme lengths to disguise her
sex. She never used public bathrooms, plucked her hairline to look as if she
were balding, on and on. Bouriscout was enthralled by the story, and also
relieved, for like the boy in the butterfly tale, deep down he felt attracted to
Pei Pu. Now everything made sense—the small hands, the high-pitched
voice, the delicate neck. He had fallen in love with her, and, it seemed, the
feelings were reciprocated.
Pei Pu started visiting Bouriscout's apartment, and soon they were
sleeping together. She continued to dress as a man, even in his apartment,
but women in China wore men's clothes anyway, and Pei Pu acted more
like a woman than any of the Chinese women he had seen. In bed, she had
a shyness and a way of directing his hands that was both exciting and femi-
nine. She made everything romantic and heightened. When he was away
from her, her every word and gesture resonated in his mind. What made
the affair all the more exciting was the fact that they had to keep it secret.
In December of 1965, Bouriscout left Beijing and returned to Paris. He
traveled, had other affairs, but his thoughts kept returning to Pei Pu. The
Cultural Revolution broke out in China, and he lost contact with her. Be-
fore he had left, she had told him she was pregnant with their child. He had
no idea whether the baby had been born. His obsession with her grew too
strong, and in 1969 he finagled another government job in Beijing.
Contact with foreigners was now even more discouraged than on his
first visit, but he managed to track Pei Pu down. She told him she had
borne a son, in 1966, but he had looked like Bouriscout, and given the
growing hatred of foreigners in China, and the need to keep the secret of
her sex, she had him sent him away to an isolated region near Russia. It was
so cold there—perhaps he was dead. She showed Bouriscout photographs
influence with Napoleon in
connection with providing
for the needs of the French
troops in the Papal States.
He made an instantaneous
impression on the princess,
who escorted him around
her garden until they
arrived at the rockery.
There she stopped and,
looking into the young
man's eyes mysteriously,
commanded him to return
to this same spot at the
same hour next day when
she might have some good
news for him. 
The young
officer bowed and took his
leave. . . . In his memoirs
he revealed in detail what
took place after the first
meeting with Pauline: •
"At the hour agreed on I
again proceeded to Neuilly,
made my way to the
appointed spot in the
garden and stood waiting
at the rockery. I had not
been there very long when
a lady made her
appearance, greeted me
pleasantly and led me
through a side door into the
interior of the rockery
where there were several
rooms and galleries and in
one splendid salon a
luxurious-looking 
bath.
The adventure was
beginning to strike me as
very romantic, almost like
a fairy tale, and just as I
was wondering what the
outcome might be a woman
in a robe of the sheerest
cambric entered by a side
door, came up to me, and
smilingly asked how I liked
being there. I at once
recognized 
Napoleon's
beautiful sister, whose
perfect figure was clearly
outlined by every
movement of her robe. She
held out her hand for me to
kiss and told me to sit
down on the couch beside
her. On this occasion I
certainly was not the
Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion 
• 
299
of the boy, and he did see some resemblance. Over the next few weeks they
managed to meet here and there, and then Bouriscout had an idea: he sym-
pathized with the Cultural Revolution, and he wanted to get around the
prohibitions that were preventing him from seeing Pei Pu, so he offered to
do some spying. The offer was passed along to the right people, and soon
Bouriscout was stealing documents for the Communists. The son, named
Bertrand, was recalled to Beijing, and Bouriscout finally met him. Now a
threefold adventure filled Bouriscout's life: the alluring Pei Pu, the thrill of
being a spy, and the illicit child, whom he wanted to bring back to France.
In 1972, Bouriscout left Beijing. Over the next few years he tried
repeatedly to get Pei Pu and his son to France, and a decade later he fi-
nally succeeded; the three became a family In 1983, though, the French
authorities grew suspicious of this relationship between a Foreign Office
official and a Chinese man, and with a little investigating they uncovered
Bouriscout's spying. He was arrested, and soon made a startling confession:
the man he was living with was really a woman. Confused, the French or-
dered an examination of Pei Pu; as they had thought, he was very much a
man. Bouriscout went to prison.
Even after Bouriscout had heard his former lover's own confession, he
was still convinced that Pei Pu was a woman. Her soft body, their inti-
mate relationship—how could he be wrong? Only when Pei Pu, impris-
oned in the same jail, showed him the incontrovertible proof of his sex did
Bouriscout finally accept it.
Interpretation. The moment Pei Pu met Bouriscout, he realized he had
found the perfect victim. Bouriscout was lonely, bored, desperate. The way
he responded to Pei Pu suggested that he was probably also homosexual, or
perhaps bisexual—at least confused. (Bouriscout in fact had had homo-
sexual encounters as a boy; guilty about them, he had tried to repress this
side of himself.) Pei Pu had played women's parts before, and was quite
good at it; he was slight and effeminate; physically it was not a stretch. But
who would believe such a story, or at least not be skeptical of it?
The critical component of Pei Pu's seduction, in which he brought the
Frenchman's fantasy of adventure to life, was to start slowly and set up an
idea in his victim s mind. In his perfect French (which, however, was full of
interesting Chinese expressions), he got Bouriscout used to hearing stories
and tales, some true, some not, but all delivered in that dramatic yet believ-
able tone. Then he planted the idea of gender impersonation with his
"Story of the Butterfly." By the time he confessed the "truth" of his gen-
der, Bouriscout was already completely enchanted with him.
Bouriscout warded off all suspicious thoughts because he wanted to be-
lieve Pei Pu's story. From there it was easy Pei Pu faked his periods; it didn't
take much money to get hold of a child he could reasonably pass off as
their son. More important, he played the fantasy role to the hilt, remaining
elusive and mysterious (which was what a Westerner would expect from an
seducer. . . . After an
interval Pauline pulled a
hell rope and ordered the
woman who answered to
prepare a hath which she
asked me to share.
Wearing bathgowns of the
finest linen we remained
for nearly an hour in the
crystal-clear bluish water.
Then we had a grand
dinner served in another
room and lingered on
together until dusk. 
When
I left I had to promise to
return again soon and I
spent many afternoons
with the princess in the
same way."
—HARRISON BRENT,
PAULINE 
BONAPARTE: 
A
WOMAN 
OF 
AFFAIRS
The courtesan is meant to
be a half-defined, floating
figure never fixing herself
surely in the imagination.
She is the memory of an
experience, the point at
which a dream is
transformed into reality or
reality into a dream. The
bright colors fade, her name
becomes a mere echo—echo
of an echo, since she has
probably adopted it from
some ancient predecessor.
The idea of the courtesan
is a garden of delights in
which the lover walks,
smelling first this flower
and then that but never
understanding 
whence
comes the fragrance that
intoxicates him. 
Why
should the courtesan not
elude analysis? She does
not want to be recognized
for what she is, but rather
to be allowed to be potent
and effective. She offers the
truth of herself—or, rather,
of the passions that become
directed toward her. And
what she gives back is one's
self and an hour of grace in
her presence. Love revives
300 
• 
The Art of Seduction
Asian woman) while enveloping his past and indeed their whole experience
in titillating bits of history. As Bouriscout later explained, "Pei Pu screwed
me in the head. . . . I was having relations and in my thoughts, my dreams,
I was light-years away from what was true."
Bouriscout thought he was having an exotic adventure, an enduring
fantasy of his. Less consciously, he had an outlet for his repressed homo-
sexuality. Pei Pu embodied his fantasy, giving it flesh, by working first on
his mind. The mind has two currents: it wants to believe in things that are
pleasant to believe in, yet it has a self-protective need to be suspicious of
people. If you start off too theatrical, trying too hard to create a fantasy,
you will feed that suspicious side of the mind, and once fed, the doubts will
not go away. Instead, you must start slowly, building trust, while perhaps
letting people see a little touch of something strange or exciting about you
to tease their interest. Then you build up your story, like any piece of fic-
tion. You have established a foundation of trust—now the fantasies and
dreams you envelop them in are suddenly believable.
Remember: people want to believe in the extraordinary; with a little
groundwork, a little mental foreplay, they will fall for your illusion. If any-
thing, err on the side of reality: use real props (like the child Pei Pu showed
Bouriscout) and add the fantastical touches in your words, or an occasional
gesture that gives you a slight unreality. Once you sense that they are
hooked, you can deepen the spell, go further and further into the fantasy.
At that point they will have gone so far into their own minds that you will
no longer have to bother with verisimilitude.
Wish Fulfillment
I
n 1762, Catherine, wife of Czar Peter III, staged a coup against her inef-
fectual husband and proclaimed herself empress of Russia. Over the next
few years Catherine ruled alone, but kept a series of lovers. The Russians
called these men the vremienchiki, "the men of the moment," and in 1774
the man of the moment was Gregory Potemkin, a thirty-five-year-old lieu-
tenant, ten years younger than Catherine, and a most unlikely candidate for
the role. Potemkin was coarse and not at all handsome (he had lost an eye
in an accident). But he knew how to make Catherine laugh, and he wor-
shiped her so intensely that she eventually succumbed. He quickly became
the love of her life.
Catherine promoted Potemkin higher and higher in the hierarchy,
eventually making him the governor of White Russia, a large southwestern
area including the Ukraine. As governor, Potemkin had to leave St. Peters-
burg and go to live in the south. He knew that Catherine could not do
without male companionship, so he took it upon himself to name Cather-
ine's subsequent vremienchiki. She not only approved of this arrangement,
she made it clear that Potemkin would always remain her favorite.
Catherine's dream was to start a war with Turkey, recapture Constan-
when you look at her: is
that not enough? She is
the generative force of an
illusion, the birth point of
desire, the threshold of
contemplation 
of bodily
beauty.
—LYNNE LAWNER, LIVES OF
THE 
COURTESANS: 
PORTRAITS
OF 
THE 
RENAISSANCE
It was on March 16, the
same day the Duke of
Gloucester wrote to Sir
William, 
that Goethe
recorded the first known
performance of what were
destined to be called
Emma's Attitudes. Just
what these were, we shall
learn shortly. First, it must
be emphasized that the
Attitudes were a show
for favored eyes only.
• . . . Goethe, disciple of
Winckelmann, was at this
date thrilled by the human
form, as a contemporary
writes. Here was the ideal
spectator for the classical
drama Emma and Sir
William had wrought in
the long winter evenings.
Let us take our seats beside
Goethe and settle to watch
the show as he describes
it. • "Sit William
Hamilton . . . has now,
after many years of
devotion to the arts and the
study of nature, found the
acme of these delights in
the person of an English
girl of twenty with a
beautiful face and a perfect
figure. He has had a
Greek costume made for
her which becomes her
extremely. Dressed in this,
he lets down her hair and,
with a few shawls, gives so
much variety to her poses,
gestures, expressions, etc.
that the spectator can
hardly believe his eyes. He
sees what thousands of
artists would have liked to
Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion 
• 
301
tinople for the Orthodox Church, and drive the Turks out of Europe. She
offered to share this crusade with the young Hapsburg emperor, Joseph II,
but Joseph never quite brought himself to sign the treaty that would unite
them in war. Growing impatient, in 1783 Catherine annexed the Crimea, a
southern peninsula that was mostly populated by Muslim Tartars. She asked
Potemkin to do there what he had already managed to do in the Ukraine—
rid the area of bandits, build roads, modernize the ports, bring prosperity
to the poor. Once he had cleaned it up, the Crimea would make the per-
fect launching post for the war against Turkey
The Crimea was a backward wasteland, but Potemkin loved the chal-
lenge. Getting to work on a hundred different projects, he grew intoxicated
with visions of the miracles he would perform there. He would establish a
capital on the Dnieper River, Ekaterinoslav ("To the glory of Catherine"),
that would rival St. Petersburg and would house a university outshining
anything in Europe. The countryside would hold endless fields of corn, or-
chards with rare fruits from the Orient, silkworm farms, new towns with
bustling marketplaces. On a visit to the empress in 1785, Potemkin talked
of these things as if they already existed, so vivid were his descriptions. The
empress was delighted, but her ministers were skeptical—Potemkin loved
to talk. Ignoring their warnings, in 1787 Catherine arranged for a tour
of the area. She asked Joseph II to join her—he would be so impressed
with the modernization of the Crimea that he would immediately sign on
for the war against Turkey. Potemkin, naturally, was to organize the whole
affair.
And so, in May of that year, after the Dnieper had thawed, Catherine
prepared for a journey from Kiev, in the Ukraine, to Sebastopol, in the
Crimea. Potemkin arranged for seven floating palaces to carry Catherine
and her retinue down the river. The journey began, and as Catherine,
Joseph, and the courtiers looked at the shores to either side, they saw tri-
umphal arches in front of clean-looking towns, their walls freshly painted;
healthy-looking cattle grazing in the pastures; streams of marching troops
on the roads; buildings going up everywhere. At dusk they were enter-
tained by bright-costumed peasants, and smiling girls with flowers in their
hair, dancing on the shore. Catherine had traveled through this area many
years before, and the poverty of the peasantry there had saddened her—she
had determined then that she would somehow change their lot. To see be-
fore her eyes the signs of such a transformation overwhelmed her, and she
berated Potemkin's critics: Look at what my favorite has accomplished,
look at these miracles!
They anchored at three towns along the way, staying in each place in a
magnificent, newly built palace with artificial waterfalls in the English-style
gardens. On land they moved through villages with vibrant marketplaces;
the peasants were happily at work, building and repairing. Everywhere they
spent the night, some spectacle filled their eyes—dances, parades, mytho-
logical tableaux vivants, artificial volcanoes illuminating Moorish gardens.
Finally, at the end of the trip, in the palace at Sebastopol, Catherine and
express realized before him
in movements and
surprising 
transformations—
standing, 
kneeling, sitting,
reclining, serious, sad,
playful, ecstatic, contrite,
alluring, 
threatening,
anxious, 
one pose follows
another without a break.
She knows how to arrange
the folds of her veil to
match each mood, and has
a hundred ways of turning
it into a headdress. The old
knight idolizes her and is
quite enthusiastic about
everything she does. In her
he has found all the
antiquities, all the profiles
of Sicilian coins, even the
Apollo Belvedere. 
This
much is certain: as a
performance it's like
nothing you ever saw before
in your life. We have
already enjoyed it on two
evenings."
—FLORA FRASER,
EMMA, 
LADY HAMILTON
For this uncanny is in
reality nothing new or
alien, but something which
is familiar and old-
established in the mind
and which has become
alienated from it only
through the process of
repression. This reference to
the factor of repression
enables us, furthermore, to
understand 
Schelling's
definition of the uncanny
as something which ought
to have remained hidden
but has come to light. . . .
• . . . There is one more
point of general application
which I should like to add.
. . . This is that an
uncanny effect is often and
easily produced when the
distinction between
imagination and reality is
effaced, as when something
that we have hitherto
regarded as imaginary
302 
• 
The Art of Seduction
Joseph discussed the war with Turkey. Joseph reiterated his concerns. Sud-
denly Potemkin interrupted: "I have 100,000 troops waiting for me to say
'Go!' " At that moment the windows of the palace were flung open, and to
the sounds of booming cannons they saw lines of troops as far as the eye
could see, and a fleet of ships filling the harbor. Awed by the sight, images
of Eastern European cities retaken from the Turks dancing in his mind,
Joseph II finally signed the treaty. Catherine was ecstatic, and her love for
Potemkin reached new heights. He had made her dreams come true.
Catherine never suspected that almost everything she had seen was pure
fakery, perhaps the most elaborate illusion ever conjured up by one man.
Interpretation. In the four years that he had been governor of the Crimea,
Potemkin had accomplished little, for this backwater would take decades to
improve. But in the few months before Catherine's visit he had done the
following: every building that faced the road or the shore was given a fresh
coat of paint; artificial trees were set up to hide unseemly spots in the view;
broken roofs were repaired with flimsy boards painted to look like tile;
everyone the party would see was instructed to wear their best clothes and
look happy; everyone old and infirm was to stay indoors. Floating in their
palaces down the Dnieper, the imperial entourage saw brand-new villages,
but most of the buildings were only facades. The herds of cattle were
shipped from great distances, and were moved at night to fresh fields along
the route. The dancing peasants were trained for the entertainments; after
each one they were loaded into carts and hurriedly transported to a new
downriver location, as were the marching soldiers who seemed to be every-
where. The gardens of the new palaces were filled with transplanted trees
that died a few days later. The palaces themselves were quickly and badly
built, but were so magnificently furnished that no one noticed. One
fortress along the way had been built of sand, and was destroyed a little later
by a thunderstorm.
The cost of this vast illusion had been enormous, and the war with
Turkey would fail, but Potemkin had accomplished his goal. To the obser-
vant, of course, there were signs along the way that all was not as it seemed,
but when the empress herself insisted that everything was real and glori-
ous, the courtiers could only agree. This was the essence of the seduction:
Catherine had wanted so desperately to be seen as a loving and progressive
ruler, one who would defeat the Turks and liberate Europe, that when she
saw signs of change in the Crimea, her mind filled in the picture.
When our emotions are engaged, we often have trouble seeing things as
they are. Feelings of love cloud our vision, making us color events to coin-
cide with our desires. To make people believe in the illusions you create,
you need to feed the emotions over which they have least control. Often
the best way to do this is to ascertain their unsatisfied desires, their wishes
crying out for fulfillment. Perhaps they want to see themselves as noble or
romantic, but life has thwarted them. Perhaps they want an adventure. If
appears before us in reality,
or when a symbol takes
over the full functions of
the thing it symbolizes,
and so on. It is this factor
which contributes not a
little to the uncanny effect
attaching to magical
practices. The infantile
element in this, which also
dominates the minds of
neurotics, is the
overaccentuation of
psychical reality in
comparison with material
reality—a feature closely
allied to the belief in the
omnipotence 
of thoughts.
—SIGMUND FREUD,
"THE UNCANNY," IN
PSYCHOLOGICAL 
WRITINGS
AND LETTERS
Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion 
• 
303
something seems to validate this wish, they become emotional and irra-
tional, almost to the point of hallucination.
Remember to envelop them in your illusion slowly. Potemkin did not
start with grand spectacles, but with simple sights along the way, such as
grazing cattle. Then he brought them on land, heightening the drama, un-
til the calculated climax when the windows were flung open to reveal a
mighty war machine—actually a few thousand men and boats lined up in
such a way as to suggest many more. Like Potemkin, involve the target in
some kind of journey, physical or otherwise. The feeling of a shared adven-
ture is rife with fantasy associations. Make people feel that they are getting
to see and live out something that relates to their deepest yearnings and
they will see happy, prosperous villages where there are only facades.
Here the real journey through Potemkin's fairyland began. It
was like a dream—the waking dream of some magician who
had discovered the secret of materializing his visions. . . .
[Catherine] and her companions had left the world of reality
behind. . . . Their talk was of Iphigenia and the ancient
gods, and Catherine felt that she was both Alexander and
Cleopatra.
—GINA KAUS
Keys to Seduction
T
he real world can be unforgiving: events occur over which we have lit-
tle control, other people ignore our feelings in their quests to get what
they need, time runs out before we accomplish what we had wanted. If we
ever stopped to look at the present and future in a completely objective
way, we would despair. Fortunately we develop the habit of dreaming early
on. In this other, mental world that we inhabit, the future is full of rosy
possibilities. Perhaps tomorrow we will sell that brilliant idea, or meet the
person who will change our lives. Our culture stimulates these fantasies
with constant images and stories of marvelous occurrences and happy
romances.
The problem is, these images and fantasies exist only in our minds, or
on-screen. They really aren't enough—we crave the real thing, not this
endless daydreaming and titillation. Your task as a seducer is to bring some
flesh and blood into someone's fantasy life by embodying a fantasy figure,
or creating a scenario resembling that person's dreams. No one can resist
the pull of a secret desire that has come to life before their eyes. You must
first choose targets who have some repression or dream unrealized—always
the most likely victims of a seduction. Slowly and gradually, you will build
up the illusion that they are getting to see and feel and live those dreams of
theirs. Once they have this sensation they will lose contact with reality, and
begin to see your fantasy as more real than anything else. And once they
304 
• 
The Art of Seduction
lose touch with reality, they are (to quote Stendhal on Lord Byron's female
victims) like roasted larks that fall into your mouth.
Most people have a misconception about illusion. As any magician
knows, it need not be built out of anything grand or theatrical; the grand
and theatrical can in fact be destructive, calling too much attention to you
and your schemes. Instead create the appearance of normality. Once your
targets feel secure—nothing is out of the ordinary—you have room to de-
ceive them. Pei Pu did not spin the lie about his gender immediately; he
took his time, made Bouriscout come to him. Once Bouriscout had fallen
for it, Pei Pu continued to wear men's clothes. In animating a fantasy, the
great mistake is imagining it must be larger than life. That would border on
camp, which is entertaining but rarely seductive. Instead, what you aim for
is what Freud called the "uncanny," something strange and familiar at the
same time, like a deja vu, or a childhood memory—anything slightly irra-
tional and dreamlike. The uncanny, the mix of the real and the unreal, has
immense power over our imaginations. The fantasies you bring to life for
your targets should not be bizarre or exceptional; they should be rooted in
reality, with a hint of the strange, the theatrical, the occult (in talk of des-
tiny, for example). You vaguely remind people of something in their child-
hood, or a character in a film or book. Even before Bouriscout heard Pei
Pu's story, he had the uncanny feeling of something remarkable and fantas-
tical in this normal-looking man. The secret to creating an uncanny effect
is to keep it subtle and suggestive.
Emma Hart came from a prosaic background, her father a country
blacksmith in eighteenth-century England. Emma was beautiful, but had
no other talents to her credit. Yet she rose to become one of the greatest
seductresses in history, seducing first Sir William Hamilton, the English
ambassador to the court of Naples, and then (as Lady Hamilton, Sir Wil-
liam's wife) Vice-Admiral Lord Nelson. What was strangest when you met
her was an uncanny sense that she was a figure from the past, a woman out
of Greek myth or ancient history. Sir William was a collector of Greek and
Roman antiquities; to seduce him, Emma cleverly made herself resemble a
Greek statue, and mythical figures in paintings of the time. It was not just
the way she wore her hair, or dressed, but her poses, the way she carried
herself. It was as if one of the paintings he collected had come to life. Soon
Sir William began to host parties in his home in Naples at which Emma
would wear costumes and pose, re-creating images from mythology and
history. Dozens of men fell in love with her, for she embodied an image
from their childhood, an image of beauty and perfection. The key to this
fantasy creation was some shared cultural association—mythology, historical
seductresses like Cleopatra. Every culture has a pool of such figures from
the distant and not-so-distant past. You hint at a similarity, in spirit and in
appearance—but you are flesh and blood. What could be more thrilling
than the sense of being in the presence of some fantasy figure going back
to your earliest memories?
One night Pauline Bonaparte, the sister of Napoleon, held a gala affair
Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion • 305
in her house. Afterward, a handsome German officer approached her in the
garden and asked for her help in passing along a request to the emperor.
Pauline said she would do her best, and then, with a rather mysterious look
in her eye, asked him to come back to the same spot the next night. The
officer returned, and was greeted by a young woman who led him to some
rooms near the garden and then to a magnificent salon, complete with an
extravagant bath. Moments later, another young woman entered through a
side door, dressed in the sheerest garments. It was Pauline. Bells were rung,
ropes were pulled, and maids appeared, preparing the bath, giving the offi-
cer a dressing gown, then disappearing. The officer later described the eve-
ning as something out of a fairy tale, and he had the feeling that Pauline
was deliberately acting the part of some mythical seductress. Pauline was
beautiful and powerful enough to get almost any man she wanted, and she
wasn't interested simply in luring a man into bed; she wanted to envelop
him in romantic adventure, seduce his mind. Part of the adventure was the
feeling that she was playing a role, and was inviting her target along into
this shared fantasy.
Role playing is immensely pleasurable. Its appeal goes back to child-
hood, where we first learn the thrill of trying on different parts, imitating
adults or figures out of fiction. As we get older and society fixes a role on
us, a part of us yearns for the playful approach we once had, the masks we
were able to wear. We still want to play that game, to act a different role in
life. Indulge your targets in this wish by first making it clear that you are
playing a role, then inviting them to join you in a shared fantasy. The more
you set things up like a play or a piece of fiction, the better. Notice how
Pauline began the seduction with a mysterious request that the officer reap-
pear the next night; then a second woman led him into a magical series of
rooms. Pauline herself delayed her entrance, and when she appeared, she
did not mention his business with Napoleon, or anything remotely banal.
She had an ethereal air about her; he was being invited to enter a fairy
tale. The evening was real, but had an uncanny resemblance to an erotic
dream.
Casanova took role playing still further. He traveled with an enormous
wardrobe and a trunk full of props, many of them gifts for his targets—
fans, jewels, other accouterments. And some of the things he said and did
were borrowed from novels he had read and stories he had heard. He en-
veloped women in a romantic atmosphere that was heightened yet quite
real to their senses. Like Casanova, you must see the world as a kind of the-
ater. Inject a certain lightness into the roles you are playing; try to create a
sense of drama and illusion; confuse people with the slight unreality of
words and gestures inspired by fiction; in daily life, be the consummate ac-
tor. Our culture reveres actors because of their freedom to play roles. It is
something that all of us envy.
For years, the Cardinal de Rohan had been afraid that he had somehow
offended his queen, Marie Antoinette. She would not so much as look at
him. Then, in 1784, the Comtesse de Lamotte-Valois suggested to him that
306 
• 
The Art of Seduction
the queen was prepared not only to change this situation but actually to be-
friend him. The queen, said Lamotte-Valois, would indicate this in her
next formal reception—she would nod to him in a particular way.
During the reception, Rohan indeed noticed a slight change in the
queen's behavior toward him, and a barely perceptible glance at him. He
was overjoyed. Now the countess suggested they exchange letters, and Ro-
han spent days writing and rewriting his first letter to the queen. To his de-
light he received one back. Next the queen requested a private interview
with him in the gardens of Versailles. Rohan was beside himself with hap-
piness and anxiety. At nightfall he met the queen in the gardens, fell to the
ground, and kissed the hem of her dress. "You may hope that the past will
be forgotten," she said. At this moment they heard voices approaching, and
the queen, frightened that someone would see them together, quickly fled
with her servants. But Rohan soon received a request from her, again
through the countess: she desperately wanted to acquire the most beautiful
diamond necklace ever created. She needed a go-between to purchase it for
her, since the king thought it too expensive. She had chosen Rohan for the
task. The cardinal was only too willing; in performing this task he would
prove his loyalty, and the queen would be indebted to him forever. Rohan
acquired the necklace. The countess was to deliver it to the queen. Now
Rohan waited for the queen both to thank him and slowly to pay him
back.
Yet this never happened. The countess was in fact a grand swindler; the
queen had never nodded to him, he had only imagined it. The letters
he had received from her were forgeries, and not even very good ones. The
woman he had met in the park had been a prostitute paid to dress and act
the part. The necklace was of course real, but once Rohan had paid for it,
and handed it over to the countess, it disappeared. It was broken into parts,
which were hawked all over Europe for enormous amounts. And when
Rohan finally complained to the queen, news of the extravagant purchase
spread rapidly. The public believed Rohan's story—that the queen had in-
deed bought the necklace, and was pretending otherwise. This fiction was
the first step in the ruin of her reputation.
Everyone has lost something in life, has felt the pangs of disappoint-
ment. The idea that we can get something back, that a mistake can be
righted, is immensely seductive. Under the impression that the queen was
prepared to forgive some mistake he had made, Rohan hallucinated all
kinds of things—nods that did not exist, letters that were the flimsiest of
forgeries, a prostitute who became Marie Antoinette. The mind is infi-
nitely vulnerable to suggestion, and even more so when strong desires are
involved. And nothing is stronger than the desire to change the past, right a
wrong, satisfy a disappointment. Find these desires in your victims and cre-
ating a believable fantasy will be simple for you: few have the power to see
through an illusion they desperately want to believe in.
Confuse Desire and Reality—The Perfect Illusion 
• 
307
Symbol: Shangri-La. Everyone has a vision in their mind of a
perfect place where people are kind and noble, where their
dreams can be realized and their wishes fulfilled, where life
is full of adventure and romance. Lead the target on a
journey there, give them a glimpse of Shangri-
La through the mists on the mountain,
and they will fall in love.
Reversal
T
here is no reversal to this chapter. No seduction can proceed without
creating illusion, the sense of a world that is real but separate from
reality.
Isolate the Victim
An iso-
lated person is weak.
By slowly isolating your vic-
tims, you make them more vul-
nerable to your influence. 
Their
isolation may be psychological: by filling
their field of vision through the pleasurable
attention you pay them, you crowd out every-
thing else in their mind. They see and think
only of you. The isolation may also be physi-
cal: you take them away from their normal mi-
lieu, friends, family, home. Give them the
sense of being marginalized, in limbo—they
are leaving one world behind and entering
another. Once isolated like this, they have
no outside support, and in their confu-
sion they are easily led astray.
Lure the seduced into your
lair, where nothing is
familiar.
Isolation—the Exotic Effect
I
n the early fifth century B.C., Fu Chai, the Chinese king of Wu, defeated
his great enemy, Kou Chien, the king of Yueh, in a series of battles. Kou
Chien was captured and forced to serve as a groom in Fu Chai's stables. He
was finally allowed to return home, but every year he had to pay a large
tribute of money and gifts to Fu Chai. Over the years, this tribute added
up, so that the kingdom of Wu prospered and Fu Chai grew wealthy
One year Kou Chien sent a delegation to Fu Chai: they wanted to
know if he would accept a gift of two beautiful maidens as part of the trib-
ute. Fu Chai was curious, and accepted the offer. The women arrived a few
days later, amid much anticipation, and the king received them in his
palace. The two approached the throne—their hair was magnificently coif-
fured, in what was called "the cloud-cluster" style, ornamented with pearl
ornaments and kingfisher feathers. As they walked, jade pendants hanging
from their girdles made the most delicate sound. The air was full of some
delightful perfume. The king was extremely pleased. The beauty of one of
the girls far surpassed that of the other; her name was Hsi Shih. She looked
him in the eye without a hint of shyness; in fact she was confident and co-
quettish, something he was not used to seeing in such a young girl.
Fu Chai called for festivities to commemorate the occasion. The halls
of the palace filled with revelers; inflamed with wine, Hsi Shih danced be-
fore the king. She sang, and her voice was beautiful. Reclining on a couch
of white jade, she looked like a goddess. The king could not leave her side.
The next day he followed her everywhere. To his astonishment, she was
witty, sharp, and knowledgeable, and could quote the classics better than he
could. When he had to leave her to deal with royal affairs, his mind was full
of her image. Soon he brought her with him to his councils, asking her ad-
vice on important matters. She told him to listen less to his ministers; he
was wiser than they were, his judgment superior.
Hsi Shih's power grew daily. Yet she was not easy to please; if the king
failed to grant some wish of hers, tears would fill her eyes, his heart would
melt, and he would yield. One day she begged him to build her a palace
outside the capital. Of course, he obliged her. And when he visited the
palace, he was astounded at its magnificence, even though he had paid
the bills: Hsi Shih had filled it with the most extravagant furnishings. The
grounds contained an artificial lake with marble bridges crossing over it. Fu
Chai spent more and more time here, sitting by a pool and watching Hsi
In the state of Wu great
preparations had been
made for the reception of
the two beauties. The king
received them in audience
surrounded by his ministers
and all his court. As they
approached him the jade
pendants attached to their
girdles made a musical
sound and the air was
fragrant with the scent of
their gowns. Pearl
ornaments and kingfisher
feathers adorned their hair.
• Fu Chai, the king of
Wu, looked into the lovely
eyes of Hsi Shih
(495-472 
B.C.) 
and
forgot his people and his
state. Now she did not
turn away and blush as she
had done three years
previously beside the little
brook. She was complete
mistress of the art of
seduction and she knew
how to encourage the king
to look again. Fu Chai
hardly noticed the second
girl, whose quiet charms
did not attract him. He
had eyes only for Hsi
Shih, and before the
audience was over those at
court realized that the girl
would be a force to be
reckoned with and that she
would be able to influence
311
312 
• 
The Art of Seduction
Shih comb her hair, using the pool as a mirror. He would watch her play-
ing with her birds, in their jeweled cages, or simply walking through the
palace, for she moved like a willow in the breeze. The months went by; he
stayed in the palace. He missed councils, ignored his family and friends, ne-
glected his public functions. He lost track of time. When a delegation came
to talk to him of urgent matters, he was too distracted to listen. If anything
but Hsi Shih took up his time, he worried unbearably that she would be
angry.
Finally word reached him of a growing crisis: the fortune he had spent
on the palace had bankrupted the treasury, and the people were discon-
tented. He returned to the capital, but it was too late: an army from the
kingdom of Yueh had invaded Wu, and had reached the capital. All was
lost. Fu Chai had no time to rejoin his beloved Hsi Shih. Instead of letting
himself be captured by the king of Yueh, the man who had once served in
his stables, he committed suicide.
Little did he know that Kou Chien had plotted this invasion for years,
and that Hsi Shih's elaborate seduction was the main part of his plan.
Interpretation. Kou Chien wanted to make sure that his invasion of Wu
would not fail. His enemy was not Fu Chai's armies, or his wealth and his
resources, but his mind. If he could be deeply distracted, his mind filled
with something other than affairs of state, he would fall like ripe fruit.
Kou Chien found the most beautiful maiden in his realm. For three
years he had her trained in all of the arts—not just singing, dancing, and
calligraphy, but how to dress, how to talk, how to play the coquette. And it
worked: Hsi Shih did not allow Fu Chai a moment's rest. Everything about
her was exotic and unfamiliar. The more attention he paid to her hair, her
moods, her glances, the way she moved, the less he thought about diplo-
macy and war. He was driven to distraction.
All of us today are kings protecting the tiny realm of our own lives,
weighed down by all kinds of responsibilities, surrounded by ministers and
advisers. A wall forms around us—we are immune to the influence of other
people, because we are so preoccupied. Like Hsi Shih, then, you must lure
your targets away, gently, slowly, from the affairs that fill their mind. And
what will best lure them from their castles is the whiff of the exotic. Offer
something unfamiliar that will fascinate them and hold their attention. Be
different in your manners and appearance, and slowly envelop them in this
different world of yours. Keep your targets off balance with coquettish
changes of mood. Do not worry that the disruption you represent is mak-
ing them emotional—that is a sign of their growing weakness. Most people
are ambivalent: on the one hand they feel comforted by their habits and
duties, on the other they are bored, and ripe for anything that seems exotic,
that seems to come from somewhere else. They may struggle or have
doubts, but exotic pleasures are irresistible. The more you can get them
the king either for good
or ill. . . . • Amidst the
revelers in the halls of Wu,
Hsi Shih wove her net
of fascination about the
heart of the susceptible
monarch. . . . "Inflamed
by wine, she now begins to
sing / The songs of Wu to
please the fatuous king; /
And in the dance of Tsu
she subtly blends 
/All
rhythmic movements to her
sensuous ends." . . . But
she could do more than
sing and dance to amuse
the king. She had wit, and
her grasp of politics
astonished him. 
When
there was anything she
wanted she could shed tears
which so moved her lover's
heart that he could refuse
her nothing. For she was,
as Fan Li had said, the
one and only, the
incomparable Hsi Shih,
whose 
magnetic personality
attracted everyone, many
even against their own
will. . . . • Embroidered
silk curtains encrusted with
coral and gems, scented
furniture and screens inlaid
with jade and mother-of-
pearl were among the
luxuries which surrounded
the favorite. . . . On one
of the hills near the palace
there was a celebrated pool
of clear water which has
been known ever since as
the pool of the king of
Wu. Here, to amuse her
lover, Hsi Shih would
make her toilet, using the
pool as a mirror while
the infatuated king combed
her hair. . . .
—ELOISE 
TALCOTT 
HIBBERT,
EMBROIDERED 
GAUZE:
PORTRAITS 
OR 
FAMOUS
CHINESE 
LADIES
Isolate the Victim • 
313
into your world, the weaker they become. As with the king of Wu, by the
time they realize what has happened, it is too late.
Isolation—The "Only You" Effect
I
n 1948, the twenty-nine-year-old actress Rita Hayworth, known as
Hollywood's Love Goddess, was at a low point in her life. Her marriage
to Orson Welles was breaking up, her mother had died, and her career
seemed stalled. That summer she headed for Europe. Welles was in Italy at
the time, and in the back of her mind she was dreaming of a reconciliation.
Rita stopped first at the French Riviera. Invitations poured in, particu-
larly from wealthy men, for at the time she was considered the most beauti-
ful woman in the world. Aristotle Onassis and the Shah of Iran telephoned
her almost daily, begging for a date. She turned them all down. A few days
after her arrival, though, she received an invitation from Elsa Maxwell, the
society hostess, who was giving a little party in Cannes. Rita balked but
Maxwell insisted, telling her to buy a new dress, show up a little late, and
make a grand entrance.
Rita played along, and arrived at the party wearing a white Grecian
gown, her red hair falling over her bare shoulders. She was greeted by a re-
action she had grown used to: all conversation stopped as both men and
women turned in their chairs, the men gazing in amazement, the women
jealous. A man hurried to her side and escorted her to her table. It was
thirty-seven-year-old Prince Aly Khan, the son of the Aga Khan III, who
was the worldwide leader of the Islamic Ismaili sect and one of the richest
men in the world. Rita had been warned about Aly Khan, a notorious rake.
To her dismay, they were seated next to each other, and he never left her
side. He asked her a million questions—about Hollywood, her interests, on
and on. She began to relax a little and open up. There were other beautiful
women there, princesses, actresses, but Aly Khan ignored them all, acting as
if Rita were the only woman there. He led her onto the dance floor, and
though he was an expert dancer, she felt uncomfortable—he held her a lit-
tle too close. Still, when he offered to drive her back to her hotel, she
agreed. They sped along the Grande Corniche; it was a beautiful night. For
one evening she had managed to forget her many problems, and she was
grateful, but she was still in love with Welles, and an affair with a rake like
Aly Khan was not what she needed.
Aly Khan had to fly off on business for a few days; he begged her to
stay at the Riviera until he got back. While he was away, he telephoned
constantly. Every morning a giant bouquet of flowers arrived. On the tele-
phone he seemed particularly annoyed that the Shah of Iran was trying
hard to see her, and he made her promise to break the date to which she
had finally agreed. During this time, a gypsy fortune-teller visited the hotel,
and Rita agreed to have her fortune read. "You are about to embark on the
In Cairo Aly bumped into
[the singer] Juliette Greco
again. He asked her to
dance. • "You have too bad
a reputation," she replied.
"We're going to sit very
much apart. " • "What are
you doing tomorrow?" he
insisted. • "Tomorrow I
take a plane to Beirut." •
When she boarded the
plane, Aly was already
on it, grinning at her
surprise. . . . • Dressed in
tight black leather slacks
and a black sweater
[Greco] stretched
languorously in an
armchair of her Paris house
and observed: • "They say
I am a dangerous woman.
Well, Aly was a dangerous
man. He was charming in
a very special way. There is
a kind of man who is very
clever with women. He
takes you out to a
restaurant and if the most
beautiful woman comes in,
he doesn't look at her. He
makes you feel you are a
queen. Of course, I
understood it. I didn 't
believe it. I would laugh
and point out the
beautiful 
woman. But that
is me. . . . Most women
are made very happy by
that kind of attention. It's
pure vanity. She thinks,
'I'll be the one and the
others will leave.'
• " . . . 
With Aly, how
the woman felt was most
important. . . . He was a
great charmer, a great
seducer. He made you feel
fine and that everything
was easy. No problems.
Nothing to worry about.
Or regret. It was always,
'What can I do for you?
What do you need?'
Airplane tickets, cars,
boats; you felt you were on
a pink cloud."
—LEONARD SLATER,
ALY: 
A 
BIOGRAPHY
314 
• The Art of Seduction
greatest romance of your life," the gypsy told her. "He is somebody you al-
ready know. . . . You must relent and give in to him totally. Only if you do
that will you find happiness at long last." Not knowing who this man could
be, Rita, who had a weakness for the occult, decided to extend her stay.
Aly Khan came back; he told her that his château overlooking the Mediter-
ranean was the perfect place to escape from the press and forget her trou-
bles, and that he would behave himself. She relented. Life in the château
was like a fairy tale; wherever she turned, his Indian helpers were there to
attend to her every wish. At night he would take her into his enormous
ballroom, where they would dance all by themselves. Could this be the
man the fortune-teller meant?
Aly Khan invited his friends over to meet her. Among this strange
company she felt alone again, and depressed; she decided to leave the
château. Just then, as if he had read her thoughts, Aly Khan whisked her off
to Spain, the country that fascinated her most. The press caught on to the
affair, and began to hound them in Spain: Rita had had a daughter with
Welles—was this any way for a mother to act? Aly Khan's reputation did
not help, but he stood by her, shielding her from the press as best he could.
Now she was more alone than ever, and more dependent on him.
Near the end of the trip, Aly Khan proposed to Rita. She turned him
down; she did not think he was the kind of man you married. He followed
her to Hollywood, where her former friends were less friendly than be-
fore. Thank God she had Aly Khan to help her. A year later she finally
succumbed, abandoning her career, moving to Aly Khan's château, and
marrying him.
Interpretation. Aly Khan, like a lot of men, fell in love with Rita Hay-
worth the moment he saw the film Gilda, in 1948. He made up his mind
that he would seduce her somehow. The moment he heard she was coming
to the Riviera, he got his friend Elsa Maxwell to lure her to the party and
seat her next to him. He knew about the breakup of her marriage, and
how vulnerable she was. His strategy was to block out everything else in
her world—problems, other men, suspicion of him and his motives, etc.
His campaign began with the display of an intense interest in her life—
constant phone calls, flowers, gifts, all to keep him in her mind. He set up
the fortune-teller to plant the seed. When she began to fall for him, he in-
troduced her to his friends, knowing she would feel alienated among them,
and therefore dependent on him. Her dependence was heightened by the
trip to Spain, where she was on unfamiliar territory, besieged by reporters,
and forced to cling to him for help. He slowly came to dominate her
thoughts. Everywhere she turned, there he was. Finally she succumbed, out
of weakness and the boost to her vanity that his attention represented. Un-
der his spell, she forgot about his horrid reputation, relinquishing the suspi-
cions that were the only thing protecting her from him.
It was not Aly Khan's wealth or looks that made him a great seducer.
ANNE: Didst thou not kill
this king [Henry VI]? \
RICHARD: I grant ye. . . . \
ANNE: And thou 
unfit for
any place, but hell. \
RICHARD: 
Yes, one place
else, if you will hear me
name it. \ ANNE: Some
dungeon. 
\ 
RICHARD:
Your bedchamber, \ ANNE:
Ill rest betide the chamber
where thou liest! \
RICHARD: 
So will it,
madam, till I lie with you.
. . . But gentle Lady
Anne . . . \ Is not the
causer of the timeless
deaths \ Of these
Plantagenets, 
Henry and
Edward, \ As blameful as
the 
executioner? 
\ ANNE:
Thou wast the cause and
most accursed effect. \
RICHARD: 
Your beauty
was the cause of that
effect— \ Your beauty, that
did haunt me in my sleep \
To undertake the death of
all the world, \ So I might
live one hour in your sweet
bosom.
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
THE TRAGEDY OF KING
RICHARD 
III
My child, my sister, dream
\ How sweet all things
would seem \ Were we in
that kind land to live
together, \And there love
slow and long, \ There love
and die among \ Those
scenes that image you, that
sumptuous weather. \
Drowned suns that
glimmer there \ Through
cloud-dishevelled air \
Move me with such a
mystery as appears \
Within those other skies \
Of your treacherous eyes \
When 
I behold them
shining through their tears.
\ There, there is nothing
else but grace and measure,
\ Richness, quietness, and
pleasure. . . . \ See,
Isolate the Victim 
• 
315
He was not in fact very handsome, and his wealth was more than offset by
his bad reputation. His success was strategic: he isolated his victims, work-
ing so slowly and subtly that they did not notice it. The intensity of his at-
tention made a woman feel that in his eyes, at that moment, she was the
only woman in the world. This isolation was experienced as pleasure; the
woman did not notice her growing dependence, how the way he filled up
her mind with his attention slowly isolated her from her friends and her
milieu. Her natural suspicions of the man were drowned out by his intoxi-
cating effect on her ego. Aly Khan almost always capped off his seductions
by taking the woman to some enchanted place on the globe—a place that
he knew well, but where the woman felt lost.
Do not give your targets the time or space to worry about, suspect, or
resist you. Flood them with the kind of attention that crowds out all other
thoughts, concerns, and problems. Remember—people secretly yearn to be
led astray by someone who knows where they are going. It can be a plea-
sure to let go, and even to feel isolated and weak, if the seduction is done
slowly and gracefully.
Put them in a spot where they have no place to go, and
they will die before fleeing.
—SUN-TZU
Keys to Seduction
T
he people around you may seem strong, and more or less in control of
their lives, but that is merely a facade. Underneath, people are more
brittle than they let on. What lets them seem strong is the series of nests
and safety nets they envelop themselves in—their friends, their families,
their daily routines, which give them a feeling of continuity, safety, and
control. Suddenly pull the rug out from under them, drop them alone into
some foreign place where the familiar signposts are gone or scrambled, and
you will see a very different person.
A target who is strong and settled is hard to seduce. But even the stron-
gest people can be made vulnerable if you can isolate them from their nests
and safety nets. Block out their friends and family with your constant pres-
ence, alienate them from the world they are used to, and take them to
places they do not know. Get them to spend time in your environment. De-
liberately disturb their habits, get them to do things they have never done.
They will grow emotional, making it easier to lead them astray. Disguise all
this in the form of a pleasurable experience, and your targets will wake up
one day distanced from everything that normally comforts them. Then
they will turn to you for help, like a child crying out for its mother when
the lights are turned out. In seduction, as in warfare, the isolated target is
weak and vulnerable.
In Samuel Richardson's Clarissa, written in 1748, the rake Lovelace is
sheltered from the swells \
There in the still canals \
Those drowsy ships that
dream of sailing forth; \ It
is to satisfy \ Your least
desire, they ply \ Hither
through all the waters of
the earth. \ The sun at
close of day \ Clothes the
fields of hay, \ Then the
canals, at last the town
entire \ In hyacinth and
gold: \ Slowly the land is
rolled \ Sleepward under a
sea of gentle fire. \ There,
there is nothing else but
grace and measure, \
Richness, quietness, and
pleasure.
—CHARLES BAUDELAIRE,
"INVITATION TO THE VOYAGE,"
THE 
FLOWERS 
OF 
EVIL,
TRANSLATED BY RICHARD
WILBUR
316 
• 
The Art of Seduction
attempting to seduce the novel's beautiful heroine. Clarissa is young, virtu-
ous, and very much protected by her family. But Lovelace is a conniving se-
ducer. First he courts Clarissa's sister, Arabella. A match between them
seems likely. Then he suddenly switches attention to Clarissa, playing on
sibling rivalry to make Arabella furious. Their brother, James, is angered by
Lovelace's change in sentiments; he fights with Lovelace and is wounded.
The whole family is in an uproar, united against Lovelace, who, however,
manages to smuggle letters to Clarissa, and to visit her when she is at the
house of a friend. The family finds out, and accuses her of disloyalty.
Clarissa is innocent; she has not encouraged Lovelace's letters or visits. But
now her parents are determined to marry her off, to a rich older man.
Alone in the world, about to be married to a man she finds repulsive, she
turns to Lovelace as the only one who can save her from this mess. Eventu-
ally he rescues her by getting her to London, where she can escape this
dreaded marriage, but where she is also hopelessly isolated. In these cir-
cumstances her feelings toward him soften. All of this has been masterfully
orchestrated by Lovelace himself—the turmoil within the family, Clarissa's
eventual alienation from them, the whole scenario.
Your worst enemies in a seduction are often your targets' family and
friends. They are outside your circle and immune to your charms; they may
provide a voice of reason to the seduced. You must work silently and subtly
to alienate the target from them. Insinuate that they are jealous of your tar-
get's good fortune in finding you, or that they are parental figures who have
lost a taste for adventure. The latter argument is extremely effective with
young people, whose identities are in flux and who are more than ready to
rebel against any authority figure, particularly their parents. You represent
excitement and life; the friends and parents represent habit and boredom.
In Shakespeare's The Tragedy of King Richard III, Richard, when still the
Duke of Gloucester, has murdered King Henry VI and his son, Prince Ed-
ward. Shortly thereafter he accosts Lady Anne, Prince Edward's widow,
who knows what he has done to the two men closest to her, and who hates
him as much as a woman can hate. Yet Richard attempts to seduce her. His
method is simple: he tells her that what he did, he did because of his love
for her. He wanted there to be no one in her life but him. His feelings were
so strong he was driven to murder. Of course Lady Anne not only resists
this line of reasoning, she abhors him. But he persists. Anne is at a moment
of extreme vulnerability—alone in the world, with no one to support her,
at the height of grief. Incredibly, his words begin to have an effect.
Murder is not a seductive tactic, but the seducer does enact a kind of
killing—a psychological one. Our past attachments are a barrier to the pres-
ent. Even people we have left behind can continue to have a hold on us. As
a seducer you will be held up to the past, compared to previous suitors,
perhaps found inferior. Do not let it get to that point. Crowd out the past with
your attentions in the present. If necessary, find ways to disparage their pre-
vious lovers—subtly or not so subtly, depending on the situation. Even go
so far as to open old wounds, making them feel old pain and seeing by con-
Isolate the Victim • 317
trast how much better the present is. The more you can isolate them from
their past, the deeper they will sink with you into the present.
The principle of isolation can be taken literally by whisking the target
off to an exotic locale. This was Aly Khan's method; a secluded island
worked best, and indeed islands, cut off from the rest of the world, have al-
ways been associated with the pursuit of sensual pleasures. The Roman
Emperor Tiberius descended into debauchery once he made his home on
the island of Capri. The danger of travel is that your targets are intimately
exposed to you—it is hard to maintain an air of mystery. But if you take
them to a place alluring enough to distract them, you will prevent them
from focusing on anything banal in your character. Cleopatra lured Julius
Caesar into taking a voyage down the Nile. Moving deeper into Egypt, he
was further isolated from Rome, and Cleopatra was all the more seductive.
The early-twentieth-century lesbian seductress Natalie Barney had an on-
again-off-again affair with the poet Renée Vivien; to regain her affections,
she took Renée on a trip to the island of Lesbos, a place Natalie had visited
many times. In doing so she not only isolated Renée but disarmed and dis-
tracted her with the associations of the place, the home of the legendary
lesbian poet Sappho. Vivien even began to imagine that Natalie was Sap-
pho herself. Do not take the target just anywhere; pick the place that will
have the most effective associations.
The seductive power of isolation goes beyond the sexual realm. When
new adherents joined Mahatma Gandhi's circle of devoted followers, they
were encouraged to cut off their ties with the past—with their family and
friends. This kind of renunciation has been a requirement of many reli-
gious sects over the centuries. People who isolate themselves in this way are
much more vulnerable to influence and persuasion. A charismatic politi-
cian feeds off and even encourages people's feelings of alienation. John F.
Kennedy did this to great effect when he subtly disparaged the Eisenhower
years; the comfort of the 1950s, he implied, compromised American ideals.
He invited Americans to join him in a new life, on a "New Frontier," full
of danger and excitement. It was an extremely seductive lure, particularly
for the young, who were Kennedy's most enthusiastic supporters.
Finally, at some point in the seduction there must be a hint of danger in
the mix. Your targets should feel that they are gaining a great adventure in
following you, but are also losing something—a part of their past, their
cherished comfort. Actively encourage these ambivalent feelings. An ele-
ment of fear is the proper spice; although too much fear is debilitating, in
small doses it makes us feel alive. Like diving out of an airplane, it is excit-
ing, a thrill, at the same time that it is a little frightening. And the only per-
son there to break the fall, or catch them, is you.
318 
• 
The Art of Seduction
Symbol: The Pied Piper. A jolly fellow in his red and yellow cloak,
he lures the children from their homes with the delightful sounds of his
flute. Enchanted, they do not notice how far they are walking, how
they are leaving their families behind. They do not even notice the cave
he eventually leads them into, and which closes upon them forever.
Reversal
T
he risks of this strategy are simple: isolate someone too quickly and
you will induce a sense of panic that may end up in the target's taking
flight. The isolation you bring must be gradual, and disguised as pleasure—
the pleasure of knowing you, leaving the world behind. In any case, some
people are too fragile to be cut off from their base of support. The great
modern courtesan Pamela Harriman had a solution to this problem: she
isolated her victims from their families, their former or present wives, and
in place of those old connections she quickly set up new comforts for her
lovers. She overwhelmed them with attention, attending to their every
need. In the case of Averill Harriman, the billionaire who eventually mar-
ried her, she literally established a new home for him, one that had no asso-
ciations with the past and was full of the pleasures of the present. It is
unwise to keep the seduced dangling in midair for too long, with nothing
familiar or comforting in sight. Instead, replace the familiar things you have
cut them off from with a new home, a new series of comforts.
Phase Three
The Precipice—
Deepening the Effect Through
Extreme Measures
The goal in this phase is to make everything deeper—the effect you have
on their mind, feelings of love and attachment, tension within your vic-
tims. With your hooks deep into them, you can then push them back
and forth, between hope and despair, until they weaken and snap. Show-
ing how far you are willing to go for your victims, doing some noble or
chivalrous deed (16: Prove yourself) will create a powerful jolt, spark an
intensely positive reaction. Everyone has scars, repressed desires, and un-
finished business from childhood. Bring these desires and wounds to the
surface, make your victims feel they are getting what they never got as a
child and you will penetrate deep into their psyche, stir uncontrollable
emotions (17: Effect a regression). Now you can take your victims past
their limits, getting them to act out their dark sides, adding a sense of
danger to your seduction (18: Stir up the transgressive and taboo).
You need to deepen the spell, and nothing will more confuse and enchant
your victims than giving your seduction a spiritual veneer. It is not lust
that motivates you, but destiny, divine thoughts and everything elevated
(19: Use spiritual lures). The erotic lurks beneath the spiritual. Now
your victims have been properly set up. By deliberately hurting them,
instilling fears and anxieties, you will lead them to the edge of the
precipice from which it will be easy to push and make them fall (20: Mix
pleasure with pain). They feel great tension and are yearning for relief.
Prove Yourself
Most
people want to be seduced. If
they resist your efforts, it is proba-
bly because you have not gone far
enough to allay their doubts—about
your motives, the depth of your feel-
ings, and so on. One well-timed ac-
tion that shows how far you are
willing to go to win them over will
dispel their doubts. Do not worry
about looking foolish or making a
mistake—any 
kind of deed that is
self-sacrificing and for your targets'
sake will so overwhelm their emo-
tions, they won't notice anything else.
Never appear discouraged by people's
resistance, or complain. Instead, meet
the challenge by doing something ex-
treme or chivalrous. Conversely, spur
others to prove themselves by making
yourself hard to reach, unattain-
able, worth fighting over.
Seductive Evidence
A
nyone can talk big, say lofty things about their feelings, insist on how
much they care for us, and also for all oppressed peoples in the far
reaches of the planet. But if they never behave in a way that will back up
their words, we begin to doubt their sincerity—perhaps we are dealing
with a charlatan, or a hypocrite or a coward. Flattery and fine words can
only go so far. A time will eventually arrive when you will have to show
your victim some evidence, to match your words with deeds.
This kind of evidence has two functions. First, it allays any lingering
doubts about you. Second, an action that reveals some positive quality in
you is immensely seductive in and of itself. Brave or selfless deeds create a
powerful and positive emotional reaction. Don't worry, your deeds do not
have to be so brave and selfless that you lose everything in the process. The
appearance alone of nobility will often suffice. In fact, in a world where
people overanalyze and talk too much, any kind of action has a bracing, se-
ductive effect.
It is normal in the course of a seduction to encounter resistance. The
more obstacles you overcome, of course, the greater the pleasure that awaits
you, but many a seduction fails because the seducer does not correctly read
the resistances of the target. More often than not, you give up too easily.
First, understand a primary law of seduction: resistance is a sign that the
other person's emotions are engaged in the process. The only person you
cannot seduce is somebody distant and cold. Resistance is emotional, and
can be transformed into its opposite, much as, in jujitsu, the physical resis-
tance of an opponent can be used to make him fall. If people resist you be-
cause they don't trust you, an apparently selfless deed, showing how far you
are willing to go to prove yourself, is a powerful remedy. If they resist be-
cause they are virtuous, or because they are loyal to someone else, all the
better—virtue and repressed desire are easily overcome by action. As the
great seductress Natalie Barney once wrote, "Most virtue is a demand for
greater seduction."
There are two ways to prove yourself. First, the spontaneous action: a
situation arises in which the target needs help, a problem needs solving, or,
simply, he or she needs a favor. You cannot foresee these situations, but you
must be ready for them, for they can spring up at any time. Impress the tar-
get by going further than really necessary—sacrificing more money, more
time, more effort than they had expected. Your target will often use these
Love is a species of warfare.
Slack troopers, go
elsewhere! \ It takes more
than cowards to guard \
These standards. 
Night-
duty in winter, long-route
marches, every \ Hardship,
all forms of suffering: these
await \ The recruit who
expects a soft option.
You'll often be out in \
Cloudbursts, and bivouac
on the bare \ Ground. . . .
Is lasting \ Love your
ambition? Then put away
all pride. \ The simple,
straightforward way in may
be denied you, \ Doors
bolted, shut in your face —
\ So be ready to slip down
from the roof through a
lightwell, \ Or sneak in by
an upper-floor window.
She'll be glad \ To know
you 're risking your neck,
and for her sake: that will
offer \ Any mistress sure
proof of your love.
— O V I D , T H E A R T O F L O V E ,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
The man says: " . . . A
fruit picked from one's own
orchard ought to taste
sweeter than one obtained
from a stranger's tree, and
what has been attained by
323
324 
• 
The Art of Seduction
moments, or even manufacture them, as a kind of test: will you retreat? Or
will you rise to the occasion? You cannot hesitate or flinch, even for a mo-
ment, or all is lost. If necessary, make the deed seem to have cost you more
than it has, never with words, but indirectly—exhausted looks, reports
spread through a third party, whatever it takes.
The second way to prove yourself is the brave deed that you plan and
execute in advance, on your own and at the right moment—preferably
some way into the seduction, when any doubts the victim still has about
you are more dangerous than earlier on. Choose a dramatic, difficult action
that reveals the painful time and effort involved. Danger can be extremely
seductive. Cleverly lead your victim into a crisis, a moment of danger, or
indirectly put them in an uncomfortable position, and you can play the res-
cuer, the gallant knight. The powerful feelings and emotions this elicits can
easily be redirected into love.
Some Examples
1. In France in the 1640s, Marion de l'Orme was the courtesan men lusted
after the most. Renowned for her beauty, she had been the mistress of Car-
dinal Richelieu, among other notable political and military figures. To win
her bed was a sign of achievement.
For weeks the rake Count Grammont had wooed de l'Orme, and fi-
nally she had given him an appointment for a particular evening. The count
prepared himself for a delightful encounter, but on the day of the appoint-
ment he received a letter from her in which she expressed, in polite and
tender terms, her terrible regrets—she had the most awful headache, and
would have to stay in bed that evening. Their appointment would have to
be postponed. The count felt certain he was being pushed to the side for
someone else, for de l'Orme was as capricious as she was beautiful.
Grammont did not hesitate. At nightfall he rode to the Marais, where
de l'Orme lived, and scouted the area. In a square near her home he spot-
ted a man approaching on foot. Recognizing the Duc de Brissac, he imme-
diately knew that this man was to supplant him in the courtesan's bed.
Brissac seemed unhappy to see the count, and so Grammont approached
him hurriedly and said, "Brissac, my friend, you must do me a service of
the greatest importance: I have an appointment, for the first time, with a
girl who lives near this place; and as this visit is only to concert measures, I
shall make but a very short stay. Be so kind as to lend me your cloak, and
walk my horse a little, until I return; but above all, do not go far from this
place." Without waiting for an answer, Grammont took the duke's cloak
and handed him the bridle of his horse. Looking back, he saw that Brissac
was watching him, so he pretended to enter a house, slipped out through
the back, circled around, and reached de l'Orme's house without being
seen.
greater effort is cherished
more dearly than what is
gained with little trouble.
As the proverb says:
'Prizes great cannot be
won unless some heavy
labor's done.'" • The
woman says: 
"If no great
prizes can be won unless
some heavy labor's done,
you must suffer the
exhaustion of many toils to
be able to attain the favors
you seek, since what you
ask for is a greater prize."
• The man says: "I give
you all the thanks that I
can express for so sagely
promising me your love
when I have performed
great toils. God forbid that
I or any other could win
the love of so worthy a
woman without first
attaining it by many
labors."
— A N D R E A S 
CAPELLANUS
ON LOVE, TRANSLATED BY
P. G.WALSH
One day, [Saint-Preuil]
pleaded more than usual
that [Madame de la
Maisonfort] 
grant him the
ultimate favors a woman
could offer, and he went
beyond just words in his
pleading. 
Madame, saying
he had gone way too far,
ordered him to never ever
appear before her again.
He left her room. Only an
hour later, the lady was
taking her customary walk
along one of those beautiful
canals at Bagnolet, when
Saint-Preuil leapt out from
behind a hedge, totally
naked, and standing before
his mistress in this state, he
cried out, "For the last
time, 
Madame—
Goodbye!" 
Thereupon, 
he
threw himself into the
canal, head first. The lady,
terrified by such a sight,
Prove Yourself • 325
Grammont knocked at the door, and a servant, mistaking him for the
duke, let him in. He headed straight for the lady's chamber, where he found
her lying on a couch, in a sheer gown. He threw off Brissac's cloak and she
gasped in fright. "What is the matter, my fair one?" he asked. "Your
headache, to all appearance, is gone?" She seemed put out, exclaimed she
still had the headache, and insisted that he leave. It was up to her, she said,
to make or break appointments. "Madam," Grammont said calmly, "I know
what perplexes you: you are afraid lest Brissac should meet me here; but
you may make yourself easy on that account." He then opened the window
and revealed Brissac out in the square, dutifully walking back and forth
with a horse, like a common stable boy. He looked ridiculous; de l'Orme
burst out laughing, threw her arms around the count, and exclaimed, "My
dear Chevalier, I can hold out no longer; you are too amiable and too ec-
centric not to be pardoned." He told her the whole story, and she promised
that the duke could exercise horses all night, but she would not let him in.
They made an appointment for the following evening. Outside, the count
returned the cloak, apologized for taking so long, and thanked the duke.
Brissac was most gracious, even holding Grammont's horse for him to
mount, and waving goodbye as he rode off.
Interpretation. Count Grammont knew that most would-be seducers give
up too easily, mistaking capriciousness or apparent coolness as a sign of a
genuine lack of interest. In fact it can mean many things: perhaps the per-
son is testing you, wondering if you are really serious. Prickly behavior is
exactly this kind of test—if you give up at the first sign of difficulty, you
obviously do not want them that much. Or it could be that they themselves
are uncertain about you, or are trying to choose between you and someone
else. In any event, it is absurd to give up. One incontrovertible demonstra-
tion of how far you are willing to go will overwhelm all doubts. It will also
defeat your rivals, since most people are timid, worried about making fools
of themselves, and so rarely risk anything.
When dealing with difficult or resistant targets, it is usually best to im-
provise, the way Grammont did. If your action seems sudden and a sur-
prise, it will make them more emotional, loosen them up. A little
roundabout accumulation of information—a little spying—is always a
good idea. Most important is the spirit in which you enact your proof. If
you are lighthearted and playful, if you make the target laugh, proving
yourself and amusing them at the same time, it won't matter if you mess
up, or if they see you have employed a little trickery. They will give in to
the pleasant mood you have created. Notice that the count never whined
or grew angry or defensive. All he had to do was pull back the curtain and
reveal the duke walking his horse, melting de l'Orme's resistance with
laughter. In one well-executed act, he showed what he would do for a
night of her favors.
began to cry and to run in
the direction of her house,
where upon arriving, she
fainted. As soon as she
could speak, she ordered
that someone go and see
what had happened to
Saint-Preuil, who in truth
had not stayed very long in
the canal, and having
quickly put his clothes back
on, hurried to Paris where
he hid himself for several
days. Meanwhile, the
rumor spread that he had
died. Madame de la
Maisnnfort 
was deeply
moved by the extreme
measures he had adopted
to prove his sentiments.
This act of his appeared to
her to be a sign of an
extraordinary love; and
having perhaps noticed
some charms in his naked
presence that she had not
seen fully clothed, she
deeply regretted her cruelty,
and publicly stated her
feeling of loss. Word of this
reached Saint-Preuil, and
he immediately resurrected
himself and did not lose
time in taking advantage of
such a favorable feeling in
his mistress.
— C O U N T 
BUSSY-RABUTIN,
HISTOIRES 
AMOUREUSES 
DES
GAULES
To become a lady's
vassal . . . the troubadour
was expected to pass
through four stages, i.e.:
aspirant, 
supplicant,
postulant, and lover.
When 
he had attained the
last stage of amorous
initiation he made a vow of
fidelity and this homage
was sealed by a kiss. • In
this idealistic form of
courtly love reserved for the
aristocratic elite of chivalry,
the phenomenon of love
was considered to be a state
326 
• 
The Art of Seduction
2. Pauline Bonaparte, the sister of Napoleon, had so many affairs with dif-
ferent men over the years that doctors were afraid for her health. She could
not stay with one man for more than a few weeks; novelty was her only
pleasure. After Napoleon married her off to Prince Camillo Borghese, in
1803, her affairs only multiplied. And so, when she met the dashing Major
Jules de Canouville, in 1810, everyone assumed the affair would last no
longer than the others. Of course the major was a decorated soldier, well
educated, an accomplished dancer, and one of the most handsome men in
the army. But Pauline, thirty years old at the time, had had affairs with
dozens of men who could have matched that resume.
A few days after the affair began, the imperial dentist arrived chez
Pauline. A toothache had been causing her sleepless nights, and the dentist
saw he would have to pull out the bad tooth right then and there. No
painkillers were used at the time, and as the man began to take out his vari-
ous instruments, Pauline grew terrified. Despite the pain of the tooth, she
changed her mind and refused to have it pulled.
Major Canouville was lounging on a couch in a silken robe. Taking all
this in, he tried to encourage her to have it done: "A moment or two of
pain and it's over forever. . . . A child could go through with it and not ut-
ter a sound." "I'd like to see you do it," she said. Canouville got up, went
over to the dentist, chose a tooth in the back of his own mouth, and or-
dered that it be pulled. A perfectly good tooth was extracted, and Canou-
ville barely batted an eyelash. After this, not only did Pauline let the dentist
do his job, her opinion of Canouville changed: no man had ever done any-
thing like this for her before.
The affair had been going to last but a few weeks; now it stretched on.
Napoleon was not pleased. Pauline was a married woman; short affairs
were allowed, but a deep attachment was embarrassing. He sent Canouville
to Spain, to deliver a message to a general there. The mission would take
weeks, and in the meantime Pauline would find someone else.
Canouville, though, was not your average lover. Riding day and night,
without stopping to eat or sleep, he arrived in Salamanca within a few days.
There he found that he could proceed no farther, since communications
had been cut off, and so, without waiting for further orders, he rode back
to Paris, without an escort, through enemy territory. He could meet with
Pauline only briefly; Napoleon sent him right back to Spain. It was months
before he was finally allowed to return, but when he did, Pauline immedi-
ately resumed her affair with him—an unheard-of act of loyalty on her
part. This time Napoleon sent Canouville to Germany and finally to Rus-
sia, where he died bravely in battle in 1812. He was the only lover Pauline
ever waited for, and the only one she ever mourned.
Interpretation. In seduction, the time often comes when the target has be-
gun to fall for you, but suddenly pulls back. Your motives have begun to
of grace, while the
initiation 
that followed,
and the final sealing of the
pact—or 
equivalent of
the knightly accolade—
were linked with the rest of
a nobleman's training and
valorous exploits. 
The
hallmarks of a true lover
and of a perfect knight
were almost identical. 
The
lover was bound to serve
and obey his lady as a
knight served his lord. In
both cases the pledge was of
a sacred nature.
— N I N A EPTON,
LOVE AND THE FRENCH
In one of the goodly towns
of the kingdom of France
there dwelt a nobleman of
good birth, who attended
the schools that he might
learn how virtue and honor
are to be acquired among
virtuous men. 
But
although he was so
accomplished that at the
age of seventeen or eighteen
years he was, as it were,
both precept and example
to others, Love failed not to
add his lesson to the rest;
and, that he might be the
better harkened to and
received, concealed himself
in the face and the eyes of
the fairest lady in the
whole country round, who
had come to the city in
order to advance a suit-at-
law. But before Love
sought to vanquish the
gentleman by means of this
lady's beauty, he had first
won her heart by letting
her see the perfections of
this young lord; for in good
looks, grace, sense and
excellence of speech he was
surpassed by none. • You,
who know what speedy
way is made by the fire of
love when once it fastens
on the heart and fancy, will
Prove Yourself • 327
seem dubious—perhaps all you are after is sexual favors, or power, or
money. Most people are insecure and doubts like these can ruin the seduc-
tive illusion. In the case of Pauline Bonaparte, she was quite accustomed to
using men for pleasure, and she knew perfectly well that she was being used
in turn. She was totally cynical. But people often use cynicism to cover up
insecurity. Pauline's secret anxiety was that none of her lovers had ever
really loved her—that all of them to a man had really just wanted sex or
political favors from her. When Canouville showed, through concrete ac-
tions, the sacrifices he would make for her—his tooth, his career, his life—
he transformed a deeply selfish woman into a devoted lover. Not that her
response was completely unselfish: his deeds were a boost to her vanity. If
she could inspire these actions from him, she must be worth it. But if he
was going to appeal to the noble sede of her nature, she had to rise to that
level as well, and prove herself by remaining loyal to him.
Making your deed as dashing and chivalrous as possible will elevate the
seduction to a new level, stir up deep emotions, and conceal any ulterior
motives you may have. The sacrifices you are making must be visible; talk-
ing about them, or explaining what they have cost you, will seem like brag-
ging. Lose sleep, fall ill, lose valuable time, put your career on the line,
spend more money than you can afford. You can exaggerate all this for ef-
fect, but don't get caught boasting about it or feeling sorry for yourself:
cause yourself pain and let them see it. Since almost everyone else in
the world seems to have an angle, your noble and selfless deed will be
irresistible.
3. Throughout the 1890s and into the early twentieth century, Gabriele
D'Annunzio was considered one of Italy's premier novelists and play-
wrights. Yet many Italians could not stand the man. His writing was florid,
and in person he seemed full of himself, overdramatic—riding horses naked
on the beach, pretending to be a Renaissance man, and more of the kind.
His novels were often about war, and about the glory of facing and defeat-
ing death—an entertaining subject for someone who had never actually
done so. And so, at the start of World War I, no one was surprised that
D'Annunzio led the call for Italy to side with the Allies and enter the fray.
Everywhere you turned, there he was, giving a speech in favor of war—
a campaign that succeeded in 1915, when Italy finally declared war on
Germany and Austria. D'Annunzio's role so far had been completely pre-
dictable. But what did surprise the Italian public was what this fifty-two-
year-old man did next: he joined the army. He had never served in the
military, boats made him seasick, but he could not be dissuaded. Eventually
the authorities gave him a post in a cavalry division, hoping to keep him
out of combat.
Italy had little experience in war, and its military was somewhat
chaotic. The generals somehow lost track of D'Annunzio—who, in any
readily imagine that
between two subjects so
perfect as these it knew
little pause until it had
them at its will, and had
so filled them with its clear
light, that thought, wish,
and speech were all aflame
with it. Youth, begetting
fear in the young lord, led
him to urge his suit with
all the gentleness
imaginable; but she, being
conquered by love, had no
need of force to win her.
Nevertheless, shame, which
tarries with ladies as long
as it can, for some time
restrained her from
declaring her mind. But at
last the heart's fortress,
which is honor's abode, was
shattered in such sort that
the poor lady consented to
that which she had never
been minded to refuse. • In
order, however, to make
trial of her lover's patience,
constancy, and love, she
granted him what he
sought on a very hard
condition, assuring him
that if he fulfilled it she
would love him perfectly
forever; whereas, if he
failed in it, he would
certainly never win her as
long as he lived. And the
condition was this: she
would be willing to talk
with him, both being in
bed together, clad in their
linen only, but he was to
ask nothinginore from 
her
than words and kisses. •
He, thinking there was no
joy to be compared to that
which she promised him,
agreed to the proposal, and
that evening the promise
was kept; in such wise
that, despite all the caresses
she bestowed on him and
the temptations that beset
him, he would not break
his oath. And albeit his
torment seemed to him no
less than that of Purgatory,
328 
• 
The Art of Seduction
case, had decided to leave his cavalry division and form units of his own.
(He was an artist, after all, and could not be subjected to army discipline.)
Calling himself Commandante, he overcame his habitual seasickness and di-
rected a series of daring raids, leading groups of motorboats in the middle
of the night into Austrian harbors and firing torpedoes at anchored ships.
He also learned how to fly, and began to lead dangerous sorties. In August
of 1915, he flew over the city of Trieste, then in enemy hands, and dropped
Italian flags and thousands of pamphlets containing a message of hope, writ-
ten in his inimitable style: "The end of your martyrdom is at hand! The
dawn of your joy is imminent. From the heights of heaven, on the wings of
Italy, I throw you this pledge, this message from my heart." He flew at alti-
tudes unheard of at the time, and through thick enemy fire. The Austrians
put a price on his head.
On a mission in 1916, D'Annunzio fell against his machine gun, per-
manently injuring one eye and seriously damaging the other. Told his fly-
ing days were over, he convalesced in his home in Venice. At the time, the
most beautiful and fashionable woman in Italy was generally considered to
be the Countess Morosini, former mistress of the German Kaiser. Her
palace was on the Grand Canal, opposite the home of D'Annunzio. Now
she found herself besieged by letters and poems from the writer-soldier,
mixing details of his flying exploits with declarations of his love. In the
middle of air raids on Venice, he would cross the canal, barely able to see
out of one eye, to deliver his latest poem. D'Annunzio was much beneath
Morosini's station, a mere writer, but his willingness to brave anything on
her behalf won her over. The fact that his reckless behavior could get him
killed any day only hastened the seduction.
D'Annunzio ignored the doctors' advice and returned to flying, leading
even more daring raids than before. By the end of the war, he was Italy's
most decorated hero. Now, wherever in the nation he appeared, the public
filled the piazzas to hear his speeches. After the war, he led a march on
Fiume, on the Adriatic coast. In the negotiations to settle the war, Italians
believed they should have been awarded this city, but the Allies had not
agreed. D'Annunzio's forces took over the city and the poet became a
leader, ruling Fiume for more than a year as an autonomous republic. By
then, everyone had forgotten about his less-than-glorious past as a decadent
writer. Now he could do no wrong.
Interpretation. The appeal of seduction is that of being separated from our
normal routines, experiencing the thrill of the unknown. Death is the ulti-
mate unknown. In periods of chaos, confusion, and death—the plagues
that swept Europe in the Middle Ages, the Terror of the French Revolu-
tion, the air raids on London during World War II—people often let go of
their usual caution and do things they never would otherwise. They expe-
rience a kind of delirium. There is something immensely seductive about
yet was his love so great
and his hope so strong,
sure as he felt of the
ceaseless continuance of the
love he had thus painfully
won, that he preserved his
patience and rose from
beside her without having
done anything contrary to
her expressed wish. • The
lady was, I think, more
astonished than pleased by
such virtue; and giving no
heed to the honor, patience,
and faithfulness her lover
had shown in the keeping
of his oath, 
she forthwith
suspected that his love was
not so great as she had
thought, or else that he had
found her less pleasing
than he had expected. •
She therefore resolved,
before 
keeping her promise,
to make a further trial of
the love he bore her; and to
this end she begged him to
talk to a girl in her service,
who was younger than
herself and very beautiful,
bidding him make love
speeches to her, so that
those who saw him come so
often 
to the house might
think that it was for the
sake of this damsel and not
of herself • The young
lord, feeling sure that his
own love was returned in
equal measure, was wholly
obedient to her commands,
and for love of her
compelled himself to make
love to the girl; and she,
finding him so handsome
and well-spoken, 
believed
his lies more than other
truth, and loved him as
much as though she herself
were greatly loved by him.
• The mistress finding that
matters were thus well
advanced, albeit the young
lord did not cease to claim
her promise, granted him
permission to come and see
her at one hour after
midnight, saying that after
Prove Yourself • 329
danger, about heading into the unknown. Show that you have a reckless
streak and a daring nature, that you lack the usual fear of death, and you are
instantly fascinating to the bulk of humanity.
What you are proving in this instance is not how you feel toward an-
other person but something about yourself: you are willing to go out on a
limb. You are not just another talker and braggart. It is a recipe for instant
charisma. Any political figure—Churchill, de Gaulle, Kennedy—who has
proven himself on the battlefield has an unmatchable appeal. Many had
thought of D'Annunzio as a foppish womanizer; his experience in the war
gave him a heroic sheen, a Napoleonic aura. In fact he had always been an
effective seducer, but now he was even more devilishly appealing. You do
not necessarily have to risk death, but putting yourself in its vicinity will
give you a seductive charge. (It is often best to do this some way into the
seduction, making it come as a pleasant surprise.) You are willing to enter
the unknown. No one is more seductive than the person who has had a
brush with death. People will be drawn to you; perhaps they are hoping
that some of your adventurous spirit will rub off on them.
4. According to one version of the Arthurian legend, the great knight Sir
Lancelot once caught a glimpse of Queen Guinevere, King Arthur's wife,
and that glimpse was enough—he fell madly in love. And so when word
reached him that Queen Guinevere had been kidnapped by an evil knight,
Lancelot did not hesitate—he forgot his other chivalrous tasks and hurried
in pursuit. His horse collapsed from the chase, so he continued on foot. Fi-
nally it seemed that he was close, but he was exhausted and could go no
farther. A horse-driven cart passed by; the cart was filled with loathsome-
looking men shackled together. In those days it was the tradition to place
criminals—murderers, traitors, cowards, thieves—in such a cart, which
then passed through every street in town so that people could see it. Once
you had ridden in the cart, you lost all feudal rights for the rest of your life.
The cart was such a dreadful symbol that seeing an empty one made you
shiver and give the sign of the cross. Even so, Sir Lancelot accosted the
cart's driver, a dwarf: "In the name of God, tell me if you've seen my lady
the queen pass by this way?" "If you want to get into this cart I'm driving,"
said the dwarf, "by tomorrow you'll know what has become of the queen."
Then he drove the cart onward. Lancelot hesitated for but two of the
horse's steps, then ran after it and climbed in.
Wherever the cart went, townspeople heckled it. They were most curi-
ous about the knight among the passengers. What was his crime? How will
he be put to death—flayed? Drowned? Burned upon a fire of thorns? Fi-
nally the dwarf let him get out, without a word as to the whereabouts of
the queen. To make matters worse, no one now would go near or talk to
Lancelot, for he had been in the cart. He kept on chasing the queen, and all
along the way he was cursed at, spat upon, challenged by other knights. He
having so fully tested the
love and obedience he had
shown towards her, it was
but just that he should be
rewarded for his long
patience. Of the lover's joy
on hearing this you need
have no doubt, and he
failed not to arrive at the
appointed time. • But the
lady, still wishing to try the
strength of his love, had
said to her beautiful
damsel—"I 
am well aware
of the love a certain
nobleman bears to you,
and I think you are no less
in love with him; and I feel
so much pity for you both,
that I have resolved to
afford you time and place
that you may converse
together at your ease." •
The damsel was so
enchanted that she could
not conceal her longings,
but answered that she
would not fail to be
present. • In obedience,
therefore, to her mistress's
counsel and command, she
undressed herself and lay
down on a handsome bed,
in a room the door of
which the lady left half
open, whilst within she set
a light so that the maiden's
beauty might be clearly
seen. Then she herself
pretended to go away, but
hid herself near to the bed
so carefully that she could
not be seen. • Her poor
lover, thinking to find her
according to her promise,
failed not to enter the room
as softly as he could, at the
appointed hour; and after
he had shut the door and
put off his garments and
fur shoes, he got into the
bed, where he looked to
find what he desired. But
no sooner did he put out
his arms to embrace her
whom he believed to be his
mistress, than the poor girl,
believing him entirely her
330 
• The Art of Seduction
had disgraced knighthood by riding in the cart. But no one could stop him
or slow him down, and finally he discovered that the queen's kidnapper was
the wicked Meleagant. He caught up with Meleagant and the two fought a
duel. Still weak from the chase, Lancelot seemed to be near defeat, but
when word reached him that the queen was watching the battle, he recov-
ered his strength and was on the verge of killing Meleagant when a truce
was called. Guinevere was handed over to him.
Lancelot could hardly contain his joy at the thought of finally being in
his lady's presence. But to his shock, she seemed angry, and would not look
at her rescuer. She told Meleagant's father, "Sire, in truth he has wasted his
efforts. I shall always deny that I feel any gratitude toward him." Lancelot
was mortified but he did not complain. Much later, after undergoing innu-
merable further trials, she finally relented and they became lovers. One day
he asked her: when she had been abducted by Meleagant, had she heard the
story of the cart, and how he had disgraced knighthood? Was that why she
had treated him so coldly that day? The queen replied, "By delaying for
two steps you showed your unwillingness to climb into it. That, to tell the
truth, is why I didn't wish to see you or speak with you."
Interpretation. The opportunity to do your selfless deed often comes upon
you suddenly. You have to show your worth in an instant, right there on
the spot. It could be a rescue situation, a gift you could make or a favor you
could do, a sudden request to drop everything and come to their aid. What
matters most is not whether you act rashly, make a mistake, and do some-
thing foolish, but that you seem to act on their behalf without thought for
yourself or the consequences.
At moments like these, hesitation, even for a few seconds, can ruin all
the hard work of your seduction, revealing you as self-absorbed, unchival-
rous, and cowardly. This, at any rate, is the moral of Chrétien de Troyes's
twelfth-century version of the story of Lancelot. Remember: not only
what you do matters, but how you do it. If you are naturally self-absorbed,
learn to disguise it. React as spontaneously as possible, exaggerating the ef-
fect by seeming flustered, overexcited, even foolish—love has driven you to
that point. If you have to jump into the cart for Guinevere's sake, make sure
she sees that you do it without the slightest hesitation.
5. In Rome sometime around 1531, word spread of a sensational young
woman named Tullia d'Aragona. By the standards of the period, Tullia was
not a classic beauty; she was tall and thin, at a time when the plump and
voluptuous woman was considered the ideal. And she lacked the cloying,
giggling manner of most young girls who wanted masculine attention. No,
her quality was nobler. Her Latin was perfect, she could discuss the latest
literature, she played the lute and sang. In other words, she was a novelty,
and since that was all most men were looking for, they began to visit her in
own, had her arms round
his neck, speaking to him
the while in such loving
words and with so
beautiful a countenance,
that there is not a hermit
so holy but he would have
forgotten his beads for love
of her. • But when the
gentleman recognized her
with both eye and ear, and
found he was not with her
for whose sake he had so
greatly suffered, the love
that had made him get so
quickly into the bed, made
him rise from it still more
quickly. And in anger
equally with mistress and
damsel, he said— "Neither
your folly nor the malice of
her who put you there can
make me other than I am.
But do you try to be an
honest woman, for you
shall never lose that good
name through me. " • So
saying he rushed out of the
room in the greatest wrath
imaginable, and it was long
before he returned to see his
mistress. However love,
which is never without
hope, assured him that the
greater and more manifest
his constancy was proved to
be by all these trials, the
longer and more delightful
would be his bliss. • The
lady, who had seen and
heard all that passed, was
so delighted and amazed at
beholding the depth and
constancy of his love, that
she was impatient to sec
him again in order to ask
h is fo rgiven ess for the
sorrow that she had caused
him to endure. And as
soon as she could meet
with him, she failed not to
address him in such
excellent and pleasant
words, that he not only
forgot all his troubles but
even deemed them very
fortunate, seeing that their
issue was to the glory of his
constancy and the perfect
Prove Yourself • 
331
great numbers. She had a lover, a diplomat, and the thought that one man
had won her physical favors drove them all mad. Her male visitors began to
compete for her attention, writing poems in her honor, vying to become
her favorite. None of them succeeded, but they kept on trying.
Of course there were some who were offended by her, stating publicly
that she was no more than a high-class whore. They repeated the rumor
(perhaps true) that she had made older men dance while she played the
lute, and if their dancing pleased her, they could hold her in their arms. To
Tullia's faithful followers, all of noble birth, this was slander. They wrote a
document that was distributed far and wide: "Our honored mistress, the
well-born and honorable lady Tullia d'Aragona, doth surpass all ladies of
the past, present, or future by her dazzling qualities. . . . Anyone who re-
fuses to conform to this statement is hereby charged to enter the lists with
one of the undersigned knights, who will convince him in the customary
manner."
Tullia left Rome in 1535, going first to Venice, where the poet Tasso
became her lover, and eventually to Ferrara, which was then perhaps the
most civilized court in Italy. And what a sensation she caused there. Her
voice, her singing, even her poems were praised far and wide. She opened a
literary academy devoted to ideas of freethinking. She called herself a muse
and, as in Rome, a group of young men collected around her. They would
follow her around the city, carving her name in trees, writing sonnets in her
honor, and singing them to anyone who would listen.
One young nobleman was driven to distraction by this cult of adora-
tion: it seemed that everyone loved Tullia but no one received her love in
return. Determined to steal her away and marry her, this young man
tricked her into allowing him to visit her at night. He proclaimed his undy-
ing devotion, showered her with jewels and presents, and asked for her
hand. She refused. He pulled out a knife, she still refused, and so he stabbed
himself. He lived, but now Tullia's reputation was even greater than before:
not even money could buy her favors, or so it seemed. As the years went
by and her beauty faded, some poet or intellectual would always come to
her defense and protect her. Few of them ever pondered the reality: that
Tullia was indeed a courtesan, one of the most popular and well paid in the
profession.
Interpretation. All of us have defects of some sort. Some of these we are
born with, and cannot help. Tullia had many such defects. Physically she
was not the Renaissance ideal. Also, her mother had been a courtesan, and
she was illegitimate. Yet the men who fell under her spell did not care.
They were too distracted by her image—the image of an elevated woman,
a woman you would have to fight over to win. Her pose came straight out
of the Middle Ages, the days of knights and troubadours. Then, a woman,
most often married, was able to control the power dynamic between the
sexes by withholding her favors until the knight somehow proved his worth
assurance of his love, the
fruit of which he enjoyed
from that time as fully as
he could desire.
— Q U E E N MARGARET OF
NAVARRE, 
THE 
HEPTAMERON,
QUOTED IN THE VICE
ANTHOLOGY, 
EDITED 
BY
RICHARD 
DAVENPORT-HINES
A soldier lays siege to
cities, a lover to girls'
houses, \ The one assaults
city gates, the other front
doors. \ Love, like war, is a
toss-up. The defeated can
recover, \ While some you
might think invincible
collapse; \ So if you've got
love written off as an easy
option \ You'd better think
twice. Love calls \ For guts
and initiative. 
Great
Achilles sulks for Briseis—
\ Quick, Trojans, smash
through the Argive wall! \
Hector went into battle
from 
Andromache's
embraces \ Helmeted by his
wife. 
\ Agamemnon
himself, the Supremo, was
struck into raptures \ At
the sight of Cassandra's
tumbled hair; \ Even Mars
was caught on the job, felt
the blacksmith's meshes—
\ Heaven's best scandal in
years. Then take \ My own
case. I was idle, born to
leisure en deshabille, \
Mind softened by lazy
scribbling in the shade. \
But love for a pretty girl
soon drove the sluggard \
To action, made him join
up. \And just look at me
now—fighting fit, dead
keen on night exercises: \ If
you want a cure for
slackness, fall in love!
— O V I D , 
THE AMORES,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
332 
• 
The Art of Seduction
and the sincerity of his sentiments. He could be sent on a quest, or made
to live among lepers, or compete in a possibly fatal joust for her honor.
And this he had to do without complaint. Although the days of the trouba-
dour are long gone, the pattern remains: a man actually loves to be able to
prove himself, to be challenged, to compete, to undergo tests and trials and
emerge victorious. He has a masochistic streak; a part of him loves pain.
And strangely enough, the more a woman asks for, the worthier she seems.
A woman who is easy to get cannot be worth much.
Make people compete for your attention, make them prove themselves
in some way, and you will find them rising to the challenge. The heat of
seduction is raised by such challenges—show me that you really love me.
When one person (of either sex) rises to the occasion, often the other per-
son is now expected to do the same, and the seduction heightens. By mak-
ing people prove themselves, too, you raise your value and cover up your
defects. Your targets are too busy trying to prove themselves to notice your
blemishes and faults.
Symbol: 
The 
Tour-
nament. On the field, with its bright pennants
and caparisoned horses, the lady looks on as knights fight for
her hand. She has heard them declare love on bended knee, their
endless songs and pretty promises. They are all good at such things.
But then the trumpet sounds and the combat begins. In the tourna-
ment there can be no faking or hesitation. The knight she
chooses must have blood on his face, and a few
broken limbs.
Reversal
W
hen trying to prove that you are worthy of your target, remember
that every target sees things differently. A show of physical prowess
will not impress someone who does not value physical prowess; it will just
show that you are after attention, flaunting yourself. Seducers must adapt
their way of proving themselves to the doubts and weaknesses of the se-
duced. For some, fine words are better proofs than daredevil deeds, particu-
larly if they are written down. With these people show your sentiments in
a letter—a different kind of physical proof, and one with more poetic ap-
peal than some showy bit of action. Know your target well, and aim your
seductive evidence at the source of their doubts or resistance.
Effect a Regression
People who
have experienced a certain kind of
pleasure in the past will try to repeat or relive
it. The deepest-rooted and most pleasurable memories
are usually those from earliest childhood, and are often un-
consciously associated with a parental figure. Bring your tar-
gets back to that point by placing yourself in the oedipal triangle
and positioning them as the needy child. Unaware of the cause of
their emotional response, they will fall in love with you. Alterna-
tively, you too can regress, letting them play the role of the pro-
tecting, nursing parent. In either case you are offering the
ultimate fantasy: the chance to have an intimate rela-
tionship with mommy or daddy, son or daughter.
The Erotic Regression
A
s adults we tend to overvalue our childhood. In their dependency and
powerlessness, children genuinely suffer, yet when we get older we
conveniently forget about that and sentimentalize the supposed paradise we
have left behind. We forget the pain and remember only the pleasure.
Why? Because the responsibilities of adult life are a burden so oppressive at
times that we secretly yearn for the dependency of childhood, for that per-
son who looked after our every need, assumed our cares and worries. This
daydream of ours has a strong erotic component, for the child's feeling of
being dependent on the parent is charged with sexual undertones. Give
people a sensation similar to that protected, dependent feeling of childhood
and they will project all kinds of fantasies onto you, including feelings of
love or sexual attraction that they will attribute to something else. We
won't admit it, but we long to regress, to shed our adult exterior and vent
the childish emotions that linger beneath the surface.
Early in his career, Sigmund Freud confronted a strange problem: many
of his female patients were falling in love with him. He thought he knew
what was happening: encouraged by Freud, the patient would delve into
her childhood, which of course was the source of her illness or neurosis.
She would talk about her relationship with her father, her earliest experi-
ences of tenderness and love, and also of neglect and abandonment. The
process would stir up powerful emotions and memories. In a way, she
would be transported back into her childhood. Intensifying this effect was
the fact that Freud himself said little and made himself a little cold and dis-
tant, although he seemed to be caring—in other words, quite like the tradi-
tional father figure. Meanwhile the patient was lying on a couch, in a
helpless or passive position, so that the situation duplicated the roles of par-
ent and child. Eventually she would begin to direct some of the confused
emotions she was dealing with toward Freud himself. Unaware of what was
happening, she would relate to him as to her father. She would regress and
fall in love. Freud called this phenomenon "transference," and it would be-
come an active part of his therapy. By getting patients to transfer some of
their repressed feelings onto the therapist, he would bring their problems
into the open, where they could be dealt with on a conscious level.
The transference effect was so potent, though, that Freud was often un-
able to move his patients past their infatuation. In fact transference is a
powerful way of creating an emotional attachment—the goal of any seduc-
[In Japan,] much in the
traditional way of child-
rearing seems to foster
passive dependence. 
The
child is rarely left alone,
day or night, for it usually
sleeps with the mother.
When it goes out the child
is not pushed ahead in a
pram, to face the world
alone, but is tightly bound
to the mother's back in a
snug cocoon. When the
mother bows, the child does
too, so the social graces are
acquired automatically
while feeling the mother's
heartbeat. 
Thus emotional
security tends to depend
almost entirely on the
physical presence of the
mother. • . . . Children
learn that a show of
passive dependence is the
best way to get favors as
well as affection. There is a
verb for this in Japanese:
amaeru, translated in the
dictionary as "to presume
upon another's love; to
play the baby." According
to the psychiatrist Doi
Takeo this is the main key
to understanding the
Japanese personality. 
It
goes on in adult life too:
juniors do it to seniors in
companies, or any other
group, women do it to
men, men do it to their
335
336 
• 
The Art of Seduction
tion. The method has infinite applications outside psychoanalysis. To prac-
tice it in real life, you need to play the therapist, encouraging people to talk
about their childhood. Most of us are only too happy to oblige; and our
memories are so vivid and emotional that a part of us regresses just in talk-
ing about our early years. Also, in the course of talking, little secrets slip
out: we reveal all kinds of valuable information about our weaknesses and
our mental makeup, information you must attend to and remember. Do
not take your targets' words at face value; they will often sugarcoat or over-
dramatize events in childhood. But pay attention to their tone of voice, to
any nervous tics as they talk, and particularly to anything they do not want
to talk about, anything they deny or that makes them emotional. Many state-
ments actually mean their opposite: should they say they hated their father,
for instance, you can be sure that they are hiding a lot of disappointment—
that they actually loved their father only too much, and perhaps never quite
got what they wanted from him. Listen closely for recurring themes and
stories. Most important, learn to analyze emotional responses and see what
lies behind them.
While they talk, maintain the therapist's pose—attentive but quiet,
making occasional, nonjudgmental comments. Be caring yet distant—
somewhat blank, in fact—and they will begin to transfer emotions and pro-
ject fantasies onto you. With the information you have gathered about their
childhood, and the trusting bond you have forged, you can now begin to
effect the regression. Perhaps you have uncovered a powerful attachment to
a parent, a sibling, a teacher, or any early infatuation, a person who casts a
shadow over their present lives. Knowing what it was about this person that
affected them so powerfully, you can now take over that role. Or perhaps
you have learned of an immense gap in their childhood—a neglectful fa-
ther, for instance. You act like that parent now, but you replace the original
neglect with the attention and affection that the real parent never supplied.
Everyone has unfinished business from childhood—disappointments, lacks,
painful memories. Finish what is unfinished. Discover what your target
never got and you have the ingredients for a deep-rooted seduction.
The key is not just to talk about memories—that is weak. What you
want is to get people to act out in their present old issues from their past,
without their being aware of what is happening. The regressions you can
effect fall into four main types.
The Infantile Regression. The first bond—the bond between a mother
and her infant—is the most powerful one. Unlike other animals, human ba-
bies have a long period of helplessness during which they are dependent on
their mother, creating an attachment that influences the rest of their lives.
The key to effecting this regression is to reproduce the sense of uncondi-
tional love a mother has for her child. Never judge your targets—let them
do whatever they want, including behaving badly; at the same time sur-
round them with loving attention, smother them with comfort. A part of
mothers, and sometimes
wives. 
...•... 
A
magazine called Young
Lady featured an article
(January 1982) on "how
to make ourselves
beautiful." How, in other
words, to attract men. An
American or European
magazine would then go
on to tell the reader how to
be sexually desirable, no
doubt suggesting various
puffs, creams, and sprays.
Not so with Young Lady.
"The most attractive
women," it informs us,
"are women full of
maternal love. 
Women
without maternal love are
the types men never want
to marry. . . . One has to
look at men through the
eyes of a mother. "
— I A N BURUMA, BEHIND THE
MASK: 
ON 
SEXUAL 
DEMONS,
SACRED 
MOTHERS,
TRANSVESTITES, 
GANGSTERS,
DRIFTERS 
AND 
OTHER
JAPANESE 
CULTURAL 
HEROES
I have stressed the fact that
the beloved person is a
substitute for the ideal ego.
Two people who love each
other are interchanging
. their ego-ideals. That they
love each other means they
love the ideal of themselves
in the other one. There
would be no love on earth
if 
this phantom 
were 
not
there. We fall in love
because we cannot attain
the image that is our better
self and the best of our self
From this concept it is
obvious that love itself is
only possible on a certain
cultural level or after a
certain phase in the
development of the
personality has been
reached. The creation of an
ego-ideal itself marks
human progress. 
When
people are entirely satisfied
Effect a Regression 
• 331
them will regress to those earliest years when their mother took care of
everything and rarely left them alone. This works on almost everyone, for
unconditional love is the rarest and most treasured form. You do not even
have to tailor your behavior to anything specific in their childhood; most of
us have experienced this kind of attention. Meanwhile, create atmospheres
that reinforce the feeling you are generating—warm environments, playful
activities, bright, happy colors.
The Oedipal Regression. After the bond between mother and child
comes the oedipal triangle of mother, father, and child. This triangle forms
during the period of the child's earliest erotic fantasies. A boy wants his
mother to himself, a girl does the same with her father, but they never
quite have it that way, for a parent will always have competing connections
to a spouse or to other adults. Unconditional love has gone; now, inevita-
bly, the parent must sometimes deny what the child desires. Transport your
victims back to this period. Play a parental role, be loving, but also some-
times scold and instill some discipline. Children actually love a little
discipline—it makes them feel that the adult cares about them. And adult
children too will be thrilled if you mix your tenderness with a little tough-
ness and punishment.
Unlike infantile regression, oedipal regression must be tailored to your
target. It depends on the information you have gathered. Without knowing
enough, you might treat a person like a child, scolding them now and then,
only to discover that you are stirring up ugly memories—they had too
much discipline as child. Or you might stir up memories of a parent they
loathed, and they will transfer those feelings to you. Do not go ahead
with the regression until you have learned everything you can about their
childhood—what they had too much of, what they lacked, and so on. If
the target was strongly attached to a parent, but that attachment was par-
tially negative, the oedipal regression strategy can still be quite effective. We
always feel ambivalent toward a parent; even as we love them, we resent
having had to depend on them. Don't worry about stirring up these am-
bivalences, which don't keep us from being tied to our parents. Remember
to include an erotic component in your parental behavior. Now your tar-
gets are not only getting their mother or father all to themselves, they are
getting something more, something previously forbidden but now allowed.
The Ego Ideal Regression. As children, we often form an ideal figure out
of our dreams and ambitions. First, that ideal figure is the person we want
to be. We imagine ourselves as brave adventurers, romantic figures. Then,
in our adolescence, we turn our attention to others, often projecting our
ideals onto them. The first boy or girl we fall in love with may seem to
have the ideal qualities we wanted for ourselves, or else may make us feel
that we can play that ideal role in relation to them. Most of us carry these
with their actual selves,
love is impossible. • The
transfer of the ego-ideal to
a person is the most
characteristic trait of love.
— T H E O D O R REIK, OF LOVE
AND LUST
I gave [Sylphide] the eyes
of one girl in the village,
the fresh complexion of
another. The portraits of
great ladies of the time of
Francis I, Henry IV, and
Louis XIV, hanging in our
drawing room, lent me
other features, and I even
borrowed beauties from the
pictures of the Madonna in
the churches. This magic
creature followed me
invisibly everywhere, I
conversed with her as if
with a real person; she
changed her appearance
according to the degree of
my madness; Aphrodite
without a veil, Diana
shrouded in azure and
rose, Thalia in a laughing
mask, Hebe with the goblet
of youth—or she became a
fairy, giving me dominion
over nature. . . . The
delusion lasted two whole
years, in the course of
which my soul attained the
highest peak of exaltation.
—CHATEAUBRIAND, 
MEMOIRS
FROM 
BEYOND 
THE 
GRAVE,
QUOTED IN FRIEDRICH 
SIEBURG,
CHATEAUBRIAND, 
TRANSLATED
BY VIOLET M. MACDONALD
338 
• 
The Art of Seduction
ideals around with us, buried just below the surface. We are secretly disap-
pointed in how much we have had to compromise, how far below the ideal
we have fallen as we have gotten older. Make your targets feel they are liv-
ing out this youthful ideal, and coming closer to being the person they
wanted to be, and you will effect a different kind of regression, creating
a feeling reminiscent of adolescence. The relationship between you and
the seduced is in this instance more equal than in the previous kinds of
regressions—more like the affection between siblings. In fact the ideal is
often modeled on a brother or sister. To create this effect, strive to repro-
duce the intense, innocent mood of a youthful infatuation.
The Reverse Parental Regression. Here you are the one to regress: you
deliberately play the role of the cute, adorable, yet also sexually charged
child. Older people always find younger people incredibly seductive. In the
presence of youth, they feel a little of their own youth return; but they are
in fact older, and mixed into the invigoration they feel in young people's
company is the pleasure of playing the mother or father to them. If a child
has erotic feelings toward a parent, feelings that are quickly repressed, the
parent must deal with the same problem in reverse. Assume the role of the
child in relation to your targets, however, and they get to act out some of
those repressed erotic sentiments. The strategy may seem to call for a differ-
ence in age, but this is actually not critical. Marilyn Monroe's exaggerated
little-girl qualities worked just fine on men her age. Emphasizing a weak-
ness or vulnerability on your part will give the target a chance to play the
protector.
Some Examples
1. The parents of Victor Hugo separated shortly after the novelist was
born, in 1802. Hugo's mother, Sophie, had been carrying on an affair with
her husband's superior officer, a general. She took the three Hugo boys
away from their father and went off to Paris to raise them on her own.
Now the boys led a tumultuous life, featuring bouts of poverty, frequent
moves, and their mother's continued affair with the general. Of all the
boys, Victor was the most attached to his mother, adopting all her ideas and
pet peeves, particularly her hatred of his father. But with all the turmoil in
his childhood he never felt he got enough love and attention from the
mother he adored. When she died, in 1821, poor and debt-ridden, he was
devastated.
The following year Hugo married his childhood sweetheart, Adèle,
who physically resembled his mother. It was a happy marriage for a while,
but soon Adèle came to resemble his mother in more ways than one: in
1832, he discovered that she was having an affair with the French literary
critic Sainte-Beuve, who also happened to be Hugo's best friend at the
Effect a Regression • 
339
time. Hugo was a celebrated writer by now, but he was not the calculating
type. He generally wore his heart on his sleeve. Yet he could not confide in
anyone about Adèle's affair; it was too humiliating. His only solution was to
have affairs of his own, with actresses, courtesans, married women. Hugo
had a prodigious appetite, sometimes visiting three different women in the
same day.
Near the end of 1832, production began on one of Hugo's plays, and
he was to supervise the casting. A twenty-six-year-old actress named Juli-
ette Drouet auditioned for one of the smaller roles. Normally quite adroit
with the ladies, Hugo found himself stuttering in Juliette's presence. She
was quite simply the most beautiful woman he had ever seen, and this and
her composed manner intimidated him. Naturally, Juliette won the part.
He found himself thinking about her all the time. She always seemed to be
surrounded by a group of adoring men. Clearly she was not interested in
him, or so he thought. One evening, though, after a performance of the play,
he followed her home, to find that she was neither angry nor surprised—
indeed she invited him up to her apartment. He spent the night, and soon
he was spending almost every night there.
Hugo was happy again. To his delight, Juliette quit her career in the
theater, dropped her former friends, and learned to cook. She had loved
fancy clothes and social affairs; now she became Hugo's secretary, rarely
leaving the apartment in which he had established her and seeming to live
only for his visits. After a while, however, Hugo returned to his old ways
and started to have little affairs on the side. She did not complain—as long
as she remained the one woman he kept returning to. And Hugo had in
fact grown quite dependent on her.
In 1843, Hugo's beloved daughter died in an accident and he sank into
a depression. The only way he knew to get over his grief was to have an af-
fair with someone new. And so, shortly thereafter, he fell in love with a
young married aristocrat named Léonie d'Aunet. He began to see Juliette
less and less. A few years later, Léonie, feeling certain she was the preferred
one, gave him an ultimatum: stop seeing Juliette altogether, or it was over.
Hugo refused. Instead he decided to stage a contest: he would continue to
see both women, and in a few months his heart would tell him which one
he preferred. Léonie was furious, but she had no choice. Her affair with
Hugo had already ruined her marriage and her standing in society; she was
dependent on him. Anyway, how could she lose—she was in the prime of
life, whereas Juliette had gray hair by now. So she pretended to go along
with this contest, but as time went on, she grew increasingly resentful about
it, and complained. Juliette, on the other hand, behaved as if nothing had
changed. Whenever he visited, she treated him as she always had, dropping
everything to comfort and mother him.
The contest lasted several years. In 1851, Hugo was in trouble with
Louis-Napoleon, the cousin of Napoleon Bonaparte and now the president
of France. Hugo had attacked his dictatorial tendencies in the press, bitterly
and perhaps recklessly, for Louis-Napoleon was a vengeful man. Fearing for
340 
• 
The Art of Seduction
the writer's life, Juliette managed to hide him in a friend's house and
arranged for a false passport, a disguise, and safe passage to Brussels. Every-
thing went according to plan; Juliette joined him a few days later, carrying
his most valuable possessions. Clearly her heroic actions had won the con-
test for her.
And yet, after the novelty of Hugo's new life wore off, his affairs re-
sumed. Finally, fearing for his health, and worried that she could no longer
compete with yet another twenty-year-old coquette, Juliette made a calm
but stern demand: no more women or she was leaving him. Taken com-
pletely by surprise, yet certain that she meant every word, Hugo broke
down and sobbed. An old man by now, he got down on his knees and
swore, on the Bible and then on a copy of his famous novel Les Misérables,
that he would stray no more. Until Juliette's death, in 1883, her spell over
him was complete.
Interpretation. Hugo's love life was determined by his relationship with his
mother. He never felt she had loved him enough. Almost all the women he
had affairs with bore a physical resemblance to her; somehow he would
make up for her lack of love for him by sheer volume. When Juliette met
him, she could not have known all this, but she must have sensed two
things: he was extremely disappointed in his wife, and he had never really
grown up. His emotional outbursts and his need for attention made him
more a little boy than a man. She would gain ascendancy over him for the
rest of his life by supplying the one thing he had never had: complete, un-
conditional mother-love.
Juliette never judged Hugo, or criticized him for his naughty ways. She
lavished him with attention; visiting her was like returning to the womb. In
her presence, in fact, he was more a little boy than ever. How could he
refuse her a favor or ever leave her? And when she finally threatened to
leave him, he was reduced to the state of a wailing infant crying for his
mother. In the end she had total power over him.
Unconditional love is rare and hard to find, yet it is what we all crave,
since we either experienced it once or wish we had. You do not have to go
as far as Juliette Drouet; the mere hint of devoted attention, of accepting
your lovers for who they are, of meeting their needs, will place them in an
infantile position. A sense of dependency may frighten them a little, and
they may feel an undercurrent of ambivalence, a need to assert themselves
periodically, as Hugo did through his affairs. But their ties to you will be
strong and they will keep coming back for more, bound by the illusion that
they are recapturing the mother-love they had seemingly lost forever, or
never had.
2. Around the turn of the twentieth century, Professor Mut, a school-
master at a college for young men in a small German town, began to de-
Effect a Regression 
• 
341
velop a keen hatred of his students. Mut was in his late fifties, and had
worked at the same school for many years. He taught Greek and Latin and
was a distinguished classical scholar. He had always felt a need to impose
discipline, but now it was getting ugly: the students were simply not inter-
ested in Homer anymore. They listened to bad music and only liked mod-
ern literature. Although they were rebellious, Mut considered them soft
and undisciplined. He wanted to teach them a lesson and make their lives
miserable; his usual way of dealing with their bouts of rowdiness was sheer
bullying, and most often it worked.
One day a student Mut loathed—a haughty, well-dressed young man
named Lohmann—stood up in class and said, "I can't go on working in this
room, Professor. There is such a smell of mud." Mud was the boys' nick-
name for Professor Mut. The professor seized Lohmann by the arm,
twisted it hard, then banished him from the room. He later noticed that
Lohmann had left his exercise book behind, and thumbing through it he
saw a paragraph about an actress named Rosa Fröhlich. A plot hatched in
Mut's mind: he would catch Lohmann cavorting with this actress, no doubt
a woman of ill repute, and would get the boy kicked out of school.
First he had to find out where she performed. He searched high and
low, finally finding her name up outside a club called the Blue Angel.
He went in. It was a smoke-filled place, full of the working-class types
he looked down on. Rosa was onstage. She was singing a song; the way she
looked everyone in the audience in the eye was rather brazen, but for some
reason Mut found this disarming. He relaxed a little, had some wine. After
her performance he made his way to her dressing room, determined to grill
her about Lohmann. Once there he felt strangely uncomfortable, but he
gathered up his courage, accused her of leading schoolboys astray, and
threatened to get the police to close the place down. Rosa, however, was
not intimidated. She turned all of Mut's sentences around: perhaps he was
the one leading boys astray. Her tone was cajoling and teasing. Yes,
Lohmann had bought her flowers and champagne—so what? No one had
ever talked to Mut this way before; his authoritative tone usually made peo-
ple give way. He should have felt offended: she was low class and a woman,
and he was a schoolmaster, but she was talking to him as if they were
equals. Instead, however, he neither got angry nor left—something com-
pelled him to stay.
Now she was silent. She picked up a stocking and started to darn it, ig-
noring him; his eyes followed her every move, particularly the way she
rubbed her bare knee. Finally he brought up Lohmann again, and the po-
lice. "You've no idea what this life's like," she said. "Everyone who comes
here thinks he's the only pebble on the beach. If you don't give them what
they want they threaten you with the police!" "I certainly regret having
hurt a lady's feelings," he replied sheepishly. As she got up from her chair,
their knees rubbed, and he felt a shiver up his spine. Now she was nice to
him again, and poured him some more wine. She invited him to come
back, then left abruptly to perform another number.
342 
• 
The Art of Seduction
The next day he kept thinking about her words, her looks. Thinking
about her while he was teaching gave him a kind of naughty thrill. That
night he went back to the club, still determined to catch Lohmann in the
act, and once again found himself in Rosa's dressing room, drinking wine
and becoming strangely passive. She asked him to help her get dressed; that
seemed quite an honor and he obliged her. Helping her with her corset and
her makeup, he forgot about Lohmann. He felt he was being initiated into
some new world. She pinched his cheeks and stroked his chin, and occa-
sionally let him glimpse her bare leg as she rolled up a stocking.
Now Professor Mut showed up night after night, helping her dress,
watching her perform, all with a strange kind of pride. He was there so
often that Lohmann and his friends no longer showed up. He had taken
their place—he was the one to bring her flowers, pay for her champagne,
the one to serve her. Yes, an old man like himself had bested the youthful
Lohmann, who thought himself so suave! He liked it when she stroked his
chin, complimented him for doing things right, but he felt even more ex-
cited when she rebuked him, throwing a powder puff in his face or pushing
him off a chair. It meant she liked him. And so, gradually, he began to pay
for all her caprices. It cost him a pretty penny but kept her away from other
men. Eventually he proposed to her. They married, and scandal ensued: he
lost his job, and soon all his money; finally he landed in prison. To the very
end, however, he could never get angry with Rosa. Instead he felt guilty:
he had never done enough for her.
Interpretation. Professor Mut and Rosa Fröhlich are characters in the
novel The Blue Angel, written by Heinrich Mann in 1905, and later made
into a film starring Marlene Dietrich. Rosa's seduction of Mut follows the
classic oedipal regression pattern. First, the woman treats the man the way a
mother would treat a little boy. She scolds him, but the scolding is not
threatening; it is tender, and has a teasing edge. Like a mother, she knows
she is dealing with someone weak, who cannot help his naughty behavior.
She mixes plenty of praise and approval in with her taunts. Once the man
begins to regress, she adds physical excitement—some bodily contact to ex-
cite him, subtle sexual overtones. As a reward for his regression, the man may
get the thrill of finally sleeping with his mother. But there is always an ele-
ment of competition, which the mother figure must heighten. The man
gets to possess her all on his own, something he could not do with father in
the way, but he first has to win her away from others.
The key to this kind of regression is to see and treat your targets as chil-
dren. Nothing about them intimidates you, no matter how much authority
or social standing they have. Your manner makes it clear that you feel you
are the stronger party. To accomplish this it may be helpful to imagine or
visualize them as the children they once were; suddenly, powerful people
do not seem so powerful and threatening when you regress them in your
imagination. Keep in mind that certain types are more vulnerable to an
Effect a Regression • 
343
oedipal regression. Look for those who, like Professor Mut, seem outwardly
the most adult—straitlaced, serious, a little full of themselves. They are
struggling to repress their regressive tendencies, overcompensating for their
weaknesses. Often those who seem the most in command of themselves are
the ripest for regression. In fact they are secretly longing for it, because their
power, position, and responsibilities are more a burden than a pleasure.
3. Born in 1768, the French writer François René de Chateaubriand grew
up in a medieval castle in Brittany. The castle was cold and gloomy, as if in-
habited by the ghosts of its past. The family lived there in semiseclusion.
Chateaubriand spent much of his time with his sister Lucile, and his attach-
ment to her was strong enough that rumors of incest made the rounds. But
when he was around fifteen, a new woman named Sylphide entered his
life—a woman he created in his imagination, a composite of all the hero-
ines, goddesses, and courtesans he had read about in books. He was con-
stantly seeing her features in his mind, and hearing her voice. Soon she was
taking walks with him, carrying on conversations. He imagined her inno-
cent and exalted, yet they would sometimes do things that were not so in-
nocent. He carried on this relationship for two whole years, until finally he
left for Paris, and replaced Sylphide with women of flesh and blood.
The French public, weary after the terrors of the 1790s, greeted
Chateaubriand's first books enthusiastically, sensing a new spirit in them.
His novels were full of windswept castles, brooding heroes, and passionate
heroines. Romanticism was in the air. Chateaubriand himself resembled
the characters in his novels, and despite his rather unattractive appearance,
women went wild over him—with him, they could escape their boring
marriages and live out the kind of turbulent romance he wrote about.
Chateaubriand's nickname was the Enchanter, and although he was mar-
ried, and an ardent Catholic, the number of his affairs increased with the
years. But he had a restless nature—he traveled to the Middle East, to the
United States, all over Europe. He could not find what he was looking for
anywhere, and not the right woman either: after the novelty of an affair
wore off, he would leave. By 1807 he had had so many affairs, and still felt
so unsatisfied, that he decided to retire to his country estate, called Vallée
aux Loups. He filled the place with trees from all over the world, trans-
forming the grounds into something out of one of his novels. There he
began to write the memoirs that he envisioned would be his masterpiece.
By 1817, however, Chateaubriand's life had fallen apart. Money prob-
lems had forced him to sell Vallée aux Loups. Almost fifty, he suddenly felt
old, his inspiration dried up. That year he visited the writer Madame de
Staël, who had been ill and was now close to death. He spent several days at
her bedside, along with her closest friend, Juliette Récamier. Madame Ré-
camier's affairs were infamous. She was married to a much older man, but
they had not lived together for some time; she had broken the hearts of the
most illustrious men in Europe, including Prince Metternich, the Duke of
344 
• 
The Art of Seduction
Wellington, and the writer Benjamin Constant. It had also been rumored
that despite all her flirtations she was still a virgin. She was now almost
forty, but she was the type of woman who seems youthful at any age.
Drawn together by their grief over de Staël's death, she and Chateaubriand
became friends. She listened so attentively to him, adopting his moods and
echoing his sentiments, that he felt that he had at last met a woman who
understood him. There was also something rather ethereal about Madame
Récamier. Her walk, her voice, her eyes—more than one man had com-
pared her to some unearthly angel. Chateaubriand soon burned with the
desire to possess her physically.
The year after their friendship began, she had a surprise for him: she
had convinced a friend to purchase Vallée aux Loups. The friend was away
for a few weeks, and she invited Chateaubriand to spend some time with
her at his former estate. He happily accepted. He showed her around, ex-
plaining what each little patch of ground had meant to him, the memories
the place conjured up. He felt youthful feelings welling up inside him, feel-
ings he had forgotten about. He delved further into the past, describing
events in his childhood. At moments, walking with Madame Récamier and
looking into those kind eyes, he felt a shiver of recognition, but he could
not quite identify it. All he knew was that he had to go back to the mem-
oirs that he had laid aside. "I intend to employ the little time that is left to
me in describing my youth," he said, "so long as its essence remains palpa-
ble to me."
It seemed that Madame Récamier returned Chateaubriand's love, but as
usual she struggled to keep it a spiritual affair. The Enchanter, however,
deserved his nickname. His poetry, his air of melancholy, and his persis-
tence finally won the day and she succumbed, perhaps for the first time in
her life. Now, as lovers, they were inseparable. But as always with Cha-
teaubriand, over time one woman was not enough. The restless spirit
returned. He began to have affairs again. Soon he and Récamier stopped
seeing each other.
In 1832, Chateaubriand was traveling through Switzerland. Once again
his life had taken a downward turn; only this time he truly was old, in body
and spirit. In the Alps, strange thoughts of his youth began to assail him,
memories of the castle in Brittany. Word reached him that Madame Ré-
camier was in the area. He had not seen her in years, and he hurried to the
inn where she was staying. She was as kind to him as ever; during the day
they took walks together, and at night they stayed up late, talking.
One day, Chateaubriand told Récamier he had finally decided to finish
his memoirs. And he had a confession to make: he told her the story of
Sylphide, his imaginary lover when he was growing up. He had once
hoped to meet a Sylphide in real life, but the women he had known had
paled in comparison. Over the years he had forgotten about his imaginary
lover, but now he was an old man, and he not only thought of her again,
he could see her face and hear her voice. And with those memories he real-
ized that he had in fact met Sylphide in real life—it was Madame Ré-
Effect a Regression • 
345
camier. The face and voice were close. More important, there was the calm
spirit, the innocent, virginal quality. Reading to her the prayer to Sylphide
he had just written, he told her he wanted to be young again, and seeing
her had brought his youth back to him. Reconciled with Madame Ré-
camier, he began to work again on the memoirs, which were eventually
published under the title Memoirs from Beyond the Grave. Most critics agreed
that the book was his masterpiece. The memoirs were dedicated to
Madame Récamier, to whom he remained devoted until his death, in
1848.
Interpretation. All of us carry within us an image of an ideal type of per-
son whom we yearn to meet and love. Most often the type is a composite
made up of bits and pieces of different people from our youth, and even of
characters in books and movies. People who influenced us inordinately—a
teacher for instance—may also figure. The traits have nothing to do with
superficial interests. Rather, they are unconscious, hard to verbalize.
We searched hardest for this ideal type in our adolescence, when we
were more idealistic. Often our first loves have more of these traits than our
subsequent affairs. For Chateaubriand, living with his family in their se-
cluded castle, his first love was his sister Lucile, whom he adored and ideal-
ized. But since love with her was impossible, he created a figure out of his
imagination who had all her positive attributes—nobility of spirit, inno-
cence, courage.
Madame Récamier could not have known about Chateaubriand's ideal
type, but she did know something about him, well before she ever met
him. She had read all of his books, and his characters were highly autobio-
graphical. She knew of his obsession with his lost youth; and everyone
knew of his endless and unsatisfying affairs with women, his hyperrestless
spirit. Madame Récamier knew how to mirror people, entering their spirit,
and one of her first acts was to take Chateaubriand to Vallée aux Loups,
where he felt he had left part of his youth. Alive with memories, he re-
gressed further into his childhood, to the days in the castle. She actively en-
couraged this. Most important, she embodied a spirit that came naturally to
her, but that matched his youthful ideal: innocent, noble, kind. (The fact
that so many men fell in love with her suggests that many men had the
same ideals.) Madame Récamier was Lucile/Sylphide. It took him years to
realize it, but when he did, her spell over him was complete.
It is nearly impossible to embody someone's ideal completely. But if
you come close enough, if you evoke some of that ideal spirit, you can lead
that person into a deep seduction. To effect this regression you must play
the role of the therapist. Get your targets to open up about their past, par-
ticularly their former loves and most particularly their first love. Pay atten-
tion to any expressions of disappointment, how this or that person did not
give them what they wanted. Take them to places that evoke their youth.
In this regression you are creating not so much a relationship of depen-
346 
• 
The Art of Seduction
dency and immaturity but rather the adolescent spirit of a first love. There
is a touch of innocence to the relationship. So much of adult life involves
compromise, conniving, and a certain toughness. Create the ideal atmo-
sphere by keeping such things out, drawing the other person into a kind of
mutual weakness, conjuring a second virginity. There should be a dream-
like quality to the affair, as if the target were reliving that first love but
could not quite believe it. Let all of this unfold slowly, each encounter re-
vealing more ideal qualities. The sense of reliving a past pleasure is simply
impossible to resist.
4. Some time in the summer of 1614, several members of England's upper
nobility, including the Archbishop of Canterbury, met to decide what to
do about the Earl of Somerset, the favorite of King James I, who was
forty-eight at the time. After eight years as the favorite, the young earl had
accumulated such power and wealth, and so many titles, that nothing was
left for anyone else. But how to get rid of this powerful man? For the time
being the conspirators had no answer.
A few weeks later the king was inspecting the royal stables when he
caught sight of a young man who was new to the court: the twenty-two-
year-old George Villiers, a member of the lower nobility. The courtiers
who accompanied the king that day watched the king's eyes following Vil-
liers, and saw with what interest he asked about this young man. Indeed
everyone had to agree that he was a most handsome youth, with the face of
an angel and a charmingly childish manner. When news of the king's inter-
est in Villiers reached the conspirators, they instantly knew they had found
what they had been looking for: a young man who could seduce the king
and supplant the dreaded favorite. Left to nature, though, the seduction
would never happen. They had to help it along. So, without telling Villiers
of their plan, they befriended him.
King James was the son of Mary Queen of Scots. His childhood had
been a nightmare: his father, his mother's favorite, and his own regents had
all been murdered; his mother had first been exiled, later executed. When
James was young, to escape suspicion he played the part of a fool. He hated
the sight of a sword and could not stand the slightest sign of argument.
When his cousin Queen Elizabeth I died in 1603, leaving no heir, he be-
came king of England.
James surrounded himself with bright, happy young men, and seemed
to prefer the company of boys. In 1612, his son, Prince Henry, died. The
king was inconsolable. He needed distraction and good cheer, and his fa-
vorite, the Earl of Somerset, was no longer so young and attractive. The
timing for a seduction was perfect. And so the conspirators went to work
on Villiers, under the guise of trying to help him advance within the court.
They supplied him with a magnificent wardrobe, jewels, a glittering car-
riage, the kind of things the king noticed. They worked on his riding,
Effect a Regression • 347
fencing, tennis, dancing, his skills with birds and dogs. He was instructed in
the art of conversation—how to flatter, tell a joke, sigh at the right mo-
ment. Fortunately Villiers was easy to work with; he had a naturally buoy-
ant manner and nothing seemed to bother him. That same year the
conspirators managed to get him appointed the royal cup-bearer: every
night he poured out the king's wine, so that the king could see him up
close. After a few weeks, the king was in love. The boy seemed to crave at-
tention and tenderness, exactly what he yearned to offer. How wonderful it
would be to mold and educate him. And what a perfect figure he had!
The conspirators convinced Villiers to break off his engagement to a
young lady; the king was single-minded in his affections, and could not
stand competition. Soon James wanted to be around Villiers all the time,
for he had the qualities the king admired: innocence and a lighthearted
spirit. The king appointed Villiers gentleman of the bedchamber, making it
possible for them to be alone together. What particularly charmed James
was that Villiers never asked for anything, which made it all the more de-
lightful to spoil him.
By 1616, Villiers had completely supplanted the former favorite. He
was now the Earl of Buckingham, and a member of the king's privy coun-
cil. To the conspirators' dismay, however, he quickly accumulated even
more privileges than the Earl of Somerset had done. The king would call
him sweetheart in public, fix his doublets, comb his hair. James zealously
protected his favorite, anxious to preserve the young man's innocence. He
tended to the youth's every whim, in effect became his slave. In fact the
king seemed to regress; whenever Steenie, his nickname for Villiers, en-
tered the room, he started to act like a child. The two were inseparable un-
til the king's death, in 1625.
Interpretation. We are most definitely stamped forever by our parents, in
ways we can never fully understand. But the parents are equally influenced
and seduced by the child. They may play the role of the protector, but in
the process they absorb the child's spirit and energy, relive a part of their
own childhood. And just as the child struggles against sexual feelings
toward the parent, the parent must repress comparable erotic feelings that
lie just beneath the tenderness they feel. The best and most insidious way to
seduce people is often to position yourself as the child. Imagining them-
selves stronger, more in control, they will be lured into your web. They will
feel they have nothing to fear. Emphasize your immaturity, your weakness,
and you let them indulge in fantasies of protecting and parenting you—a
strong desire as people get older. What they do not realize is that you are
getting under their skin, insinuating yourself—it is the child who is con-
trolling the adult. Your innocence makes them want to protect you, but it is
also sexually charged. Innocence is highly seductive; some people even long
to play the corrupter of innocence. Stir up their latent sexual feelings and
348 
• 
The Art of Seduction
you can lead them astray with the hope of fulfilling a strong yet repressed
fantasy: sleeping with the child figure. In your presence, too, they will be-
gin to regress as well, infected by your childish, playful spirit.
Most of this came naturally to Villiers, but you will probably have to
use some calculation. Fortunately, all of us have strong childish tendencies
within us that are easy to access and exaggerate. Make your gestures seem
spontaneous and unplanned. Any sexual element of your behavior should
seem innocent, unconscious. Like Villiers, don't push for favors. Parents
prefer to spoil children who don't ask for things but invite them in their
manner. Seeming nonjudgmental and uncritical of those around you will
make everything you do seem more natural and naive. Have a happy, cheer-
ful demeanor, but with a playful edge. Emphasize any weaknesses you
might have, things you cannot control. Remember: most of us remember
our early years fondly, but often, paradoxically, the people with the stron-
gest attachment to those times are the ones who had the most difficult
childhoods. Actually, circumstances kept them from getting to be children,
so they never really grew up, and they long for the paradise they never got
to experience. James I falls into this category. These types are ripe targets
for a reverse regression.
Symbol: The Bed. Lying alone in bed, the child
feels unprotected, afraid, and needy. In a nearby room, there is the parent's bed. It is large and
forbidding, site of things you are not supposed to know about. Give the seduced both feel-
ings—helplessness and transgression—as you lay them into bed and put them to sleep.
Reversal
T
o reverse the strategies of regression, the parties to a seduction would
have to remain adults during the process. This is not only rare, it is not
very pleasurable. Seduction means realizing certain fantasies. Being a ma-
ture and responsible adult is not a fantasy, it is a duty. Furthermore, a person
who remains an adult in relation to you is harder to seduce. In all kinds of
seduction—political, media, personal—the target must regress. The only
danger is that the child, wearying of dependence, turns against the parent
and rebels. You must be prepared for this, and unlike a parent, never take it
personally.
Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo
There are always social limits on what one can do.
Some of these, the most elemental taboos, go back centuries;
others are more superficial, simply defining polite and accept-
able behavior. Making your targets feel that you are leading them
past either kind of limit is immensely seductive. People yearn to ex-
plore their dark side. Not everything in romantic love is supposed to
be tender and soft; hint that you have a cruel, even sadistic streak.
You do not respect age differences, marriage vows, family ties. Once
the desire to transgress draws your targets to you, it will be hard for
them to stop. Take them further than they imagined—the shared
feeling of guilt and complicity will create a powerful bond.
The Lost Self
I
n March of 1812, the twenty-four-year-old George Gordon Byron pub-
lished the first cantos of his poem Childe Harold. The poem was filled
with familiar gothic imagery—a dilapidated abbey, debauchery, travels to
the mysterious East—but what made it different was that the hero of the
poem was also its villain: Harold was a man who led a life of vice, disdain-
ing society's conventions yet somehow going unpunished. Also, the poem
was not set in some faraway land but in present-day England. Childe Harold
created an instant stir, becoming the talk of London. The first printing
quickly sold out. Within days a rumor made the rounds: the poem, about a
debauched young nobleman, was in fact autobiographical.
Now the cream of society clamored to meet Lord Byron, and many of
them left their calling cards at his London residence. Soon he was showing
up at their homes. Strangely enough, he exceeded their expectations. He
was devilishly handsome, with curling hair and the face of an angel. His
black attire set off his pale complexion. He did not talk much, which made
an impression of itself, and when he did, his voice was low and hypnotic
and his tone a little disdainful. He had a limp (he was born with a clubfoot),
so when an orchestra struck up a waltz (the dance craze of 1812), he would
stand to the side, a faraway look in his eye. The ladies went wild over By-
ron. Upon meeting him, Lady Roseberry felt her heart beating so violently
(a mix of fear and excitement) that she had to walk away. Women fought to
be seated next to him, to win his attention, to be seduced by him. Was it
true that he was guilty of a secret sin, like the hero of his poem?
Lady Caroline Lamb—wife of William Lamb, son of Lord and Lady
Melbourne—was a glittering young woman on the social scene, but deep
inside she was unhappy. As a young girl she had dreamt of adventure, ro-
mance, travel. Now she was expected to play the role of the polite young
wife, and it did not suit her. Lady Caroline was one of the first to read
Childe Harold, and something more than its novelty stirred her. When she
saw Lord Byron at a dinner party, surrounded by women, she looked at his
face, then walked away; that night she wrote of him in her journal, "Mad,
bad, and dangerous to know." She added, "That beautiful pale face is my
fate."
The next day, to Lady Caroline's surprise, Lord Byron called on her.
Evidently he had seen her walking away from him, and her shyness had in-
trigued him—he disliked the aggressive women who were constantly at his
It is a matter of a certain
hind of feeling: that of
being overwhelmed. 
There
are many who have a great
fear of bring overwhelmed
by someone; for example,
someone who makes them
laugh against their will, or
tickles them to death, or,
worse, tells them things
that they sense to be
accurate but which they do
not quite understand,
things that go beyond their
prejudices and received
wisdom, In other words,
they do not want to be
seduced, since seduction
means confronting people
with their limits, limits
that are supposed to be set
and stable but that the
seducer suddenly causes to
waver. Seduction is the
desire of being
overwhelmed, 
taken
beyond.
—DANIEL SIBONY,
L ' A M O U R 
INCONSCIENT
Just lately I saw a tight-
reined stallion \ Get the bit
in his teeth and bolt \ Like
lightning—yet 
the minute
he felt the reins slacken, \
Drop loose on his flying
mane, \ He stopped dead.
351
352 
• 
The Art of Seduction
heels, as it seemed he disdained everything, including his success. Soon he
was visiting Lady Caroline daily. He lingered in her boudoir, played with
her children, helped her choose her dress for the day. She pressed him to
talk of his life: he described his brutal father, the untimely deaths that
seemed to be a family curse, the crumbling abbey he had inherited, his ad-
ventures in Turkey and Greece. His life was indeed as gothic as that of
Childe Harold.
Within days the two became lovers. Now, though, the tables turned:
Lady Caroline pursued Byron with unladylike aggression. She dressed as a
page and sneaked into his carriage, wrote him extravagantly emotional let-
ters, flaunted the affair. At last, a chance to play the grand romantic role of
her girlhood fantasies. Byron began to turn against her. He already loved to
shock; now he confessed to her the nature of the secret sin he had alluded
to in Childe Harold—his homosexual affairs during his travels. He made
cruel remarks, grew indifferent. But this only seemed to push her further.
She sent him the customary lock of hair, but from her pubis; she followed
him in the street, made public scenes—finally her family sent her abroad to
avoid further scandal. After Byron made it clear the affair was over, she de-
scended into a madness that would last several years.
In 1813, an old friend of Byron's, James Webster, invited the poet to
stay at his country estate. Webster had a young and beautiful wife, Lady
Frances, and he knew Byron's reputation as a seducer, but his wife was
quiet and chaste—surely she would resist the temptation of a man such as
Byron. To Webster's relief, Byron barely spoke to Frances, who seemed
equally uninterested in him. Yet several days into Byron's stay, she contrived
to be alone with him in the billiards room, where she asked him a question:
how could a woman who liked a man inform him of it when he did not
perceive it? Byron scribbled a racy reply on a piece of paper, which made
her blush as she read it. Soon thereafter he invited the couple to stay with
him at his infamous abbey. There, the prim and proper Lady Frances saw
him drink wine from a human skull. They stayed up late in one of the
abbey's secret chambers, reading poetry and kissing. With Byron, it seemed,
Lady Frances was only too eager to explore adultery.
That same year, Lord Byron's half sister Augusta arrived in London to
get away from her husband, who was having money troubles. Byron had
not seen Augusta for some time. The two were physically similar—the
same face, the same mannerisms; she was Lord Byron as a woman. And his
behavior toward her was more than brotherly. He took her to the theater,
to dances, received her at home, treating her with an intimate spirit that
Augusta soon returned. Indeed the kind and tender attention that Byron
showered on her soon became physical.
Augusta was a devoted wife with three children, yet she yielded to her
half brother's advances. How could she help herself? He stirred up a strange
passion in her, a stronger passion than she felt for any other man, including
her husband. For Byron, his relationship with Augusta was the ultimate and
crowning sin of his career. And soon he was writing to his friends, openly
We eternally chafe at
restrictions, covet \
Whatever's 
forbidden.
(Look how a sick man
who's told \ No immersion
hangs round the bath-
house.) \ . . . Desire \
Mounts for what's kept out
of reach. A thief's attracted
\ By burglar-proof
premises. How often will
love \ Thrive on a rival's
approval? It's not your
wife's beauty, but your own
\ Passion for her that gets
us—she must \ Have
something, just to have
hooked you. A girl locked
up by her \ Husband's not
chaste but pursued, her
fear's \ A bigger draw than
her figure. Illicit passion—
like it \ Or not—is
sweeter. It only turns me
on \ When the girl says,
"I'm 
frightened."
— O V I D , THE AMORES,
TRANSLATED BY PETER 
GREEN
It is often not possible for
[women] later on to undo
the connection thus formed
in their minds between
sensual activities and
something forbidden, and
they turn out to be
psychically impotent, 
i.e.
frigid, when at last such
activities do become
permissible. This is the
source of the desire in so
many women to keep even
legitimate relations secret
for a time; and of the
appearance of the capacity
for normal sensation in
others as soon as the
condition of prohibition is
restored by a secret
intrigue—untrue 
to the
husband, they can keep a
second order of faith with
the lover. • In my opinion
the necessary condition of
forbiddenness in the erotic
life of women holds the
same place as the man's
Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo 
• 353
confessing it. Indeed he delighted in their shocked responses, and his long
narrative poem, The Bride of Abydos, takes brother-sister incest as its theme.
Rumors began to spread of Byron's relations with Augusta, who was now
pregnant with his child. Polite society shunned him—but women were
more drawn to him than before, and his books were more popular than
ever.
Annabella Milbanke, Lady Caroline Lamb's cousin, had met Byron in
those first months of 1812 when he was the toast of London. Annabella
was sober and down to earth, and her interests were science and religion.
But there was something about Byron that attracted her. And the feeling
seemed to be returned: not only did the two become friends, to her bewil-
derment he showed another kind of interest in her, even at one point
proposing marriage. This was in the midst of the scandal over Byron and
Caroline Lamb, and Annabella did not take the proposal seriously. Over the
next few months she followed his career from a distance, and heard the
troubling rumors of incest. Yet in 1813, she wrote her aunt, "I consider his
acquaintance as so desirable that I would incur the risk of being called a
Flirt for the sake of enjoying it." Reading his new poems, she wrote that his
"description of Love almost makes me in love." She was developing an ob-
session with Byron, of which word soon reached him. They renewed their
friendship, and in 1814 he proposed again; this time she accepted. Byron
was a fallen angel and she would be the one to reform him.
It did not turn out that way. Byron had hoped that married life would
calm him down, but after the ceremony he realized it was a mistake. He
told Annabella, "Now you will find that you have married a devil." Within
a few years the marriage fell apart.
In 1816, Byron left England, never to return. He traveled through Italy
for a while; everyone knew his story—the affairs, the incest, the cruelty to
his lovers. But wherever he went, Italian women, particularly married no-
blewomen, pursued him, making it clear in their own way how prepared
they were to be the next Byronic victim. In truth, the women had become
the aggressors. As Byron told the poet Shelley, "No one has been more car-
ried off than poor dear me—I've been ravished more often than anyone
since the Trojan war."
Interpretation. Women of Byron's time were longing to play a different
role than society allowed them. They were supposed to be the decent,
moralizing force in culture; only men had outlets for their darker impulses.
Underlying the social restrictions on women, perhaps, was a fear of the
more amoral and unbridled part of the female psyche.
Feeling repressed and restless, women of the time devoured gothic nov-
els and romances, stories in which women were adventurous, and had the
same capacity for good and evil as men. Books like these helped to trigger a
revolt, with women like Lady Caroline playing out a little of the fantasy life
they had had in their girlhood, where it had to some extent been permit-
need to lower his sexual
object. . . . Women
belonging to the higher
levels of civilization do not
usually transgress the
prohibition against sexual
activities during the period
of waiting, and thus they
acquire this close association
between the forbidden and
the sexual. . . . • The
injurious results of the
deprivation of sexual
enjoyment at the beginning
manifest themselves in lack
of full satisfaction when
sexual desire is later given
free rein in marriage. But,
on the other hand,
unrestrained sexual liberty
from the beginning leads to
no better result. It is easy
to show that the value the
mind sets on erotic needs
instantly sinks as soon as
satisfaction becomes readily
obtainable. Some obstacle
is necessary to swell the
tide of the libido to its
height; and at all periods of
history, wherever natural
barriers in the way of
satisfaction have not
sufficed, 
mankind has
erected conventional ones in
order to be able to enjoy
love. This is true both of
individuals and of nations.
In times during which no
obstacles to sexual
satisfaction existed, such
as, maybe, during the
decline of the civilizations
of antiquity, love became
worthless, life became
empty, and strong reaction-
formations were necessary
before the indispensable
emotional value of love
could be recovered.
—SIGMUND 
FREUD,
"CONTRIBUTIONS TO THE
PSYCHOLOGY OF LOVE,"
SEXUALITY AND THE
PSYCHOLOGY 
OF 
LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY JOAN RIVIÈRE
354 
• 
The Art of Seduction
ted. Byron arrived on the scene at the right time. He became the lightning
rod for women's unexpressed desires; with him they could go beyond the
limits society had imposed. For some the lure was adultery, for others it was
romantic rebellion, or a chance to become irrational and uncivilized. (The
desire to reform him merely covered up the truth—the desire to be over-
whelmed by him.) In all cases it was the lure of the forbidden, which in this
case was more than merely a superficial temptation: once you became in-
volved with Lord Byron, he took you further than you had imagined or
wanted, since he recognized no limits. Women did not just fall in love with
him, they let him turn their lives upside down, even ruin them. They pre-
ferred that fate to the safe confines of marriage.
In some ways, the situation of women in the early nineteenth century
has become generalized in the early twenty-first. The outlets for male bad
behavior—war, dirty politics, the institution of mistresses and courtesans—
have faded away; today, not just women but men are supposed to be emi-
nently civilized and reasonable. And many have a hard time living up to
this. As children we are able to vent the darker side of our characters, a side
that all of us have. But under pressure from society (at first in the form
of our parents), we slowly repress the naughty, rebellious, perverse streaks
in our characters. To get along, we learn to repress our dark sides, which
become a kind of lost self, a part of our psyche buried beneath our polite
appearance.
As adults, we secretly want to recapture that lost self—the more adven-
turous, less respectful, childhood part of us. We are drawn to those who
live out their lost selves as adults, even if it involves some evil or destruc-
tion. Like Byron, you can become the lightning rod for such desires. You
must learn, however, to keep this potential under control, and to use it
strategically. As the aura of the forbidden around you is drawing targets into
your web, do not overplay your dangerousness, or they will be frightened
away. Once you feel them falling under your spell, you have freer rein. If
they begin to imitate you, as Lady Caroline imitated Byron, then take it
further—mix in some cruelty, involve them in sin, crime, taboo activity,
whatever it takes. Unleash the lost self within them; the more they act it
out, the deeper your hold over them. Going halfway will break the spell
and create self-consciousness. Take it as far as you can.
Baseness attracts everybody.
—JOHANN WOLFGANG GOETHE
Keys to Seduction
S
ociety and culture are based on limits—this kind of behavior is accept-
able, that is not. The limits are fluid and change with time, but there are
always limits. The alternative is anarchy, the lawlessness of nature, which we
dread. But we are strange animals: the moment any kind of limit is im-
This is how Monsieur
Maudair analyzed 
men's
attitude 
toward prostitutes:
"Neither the love of a
passionate but well-
brought-up mistress, nor
his marriage to a woman
whom he respects, can
replace the prostitute for the
human animal in those
perverse moments when he
covets the pleasure of
debasing 
himself without
affecting his social prestige.
Nothing can replace this
bizarre and powerful
pleasure of being able to
say everything, do
everything, profane and
parody without any fear of
retribution, remorse, or
responsibility. It is a
complete revolt against
organized society, his
organized, educated self
and especially his
religion." 
Monsieur
Mauclair hears the call of
the Devil in this dark
passion poetized by
Baudelaire. 
"The
prostitute represents the
unconscious which enables
us to put aside our
responsibilities."
— N I N A EPTON,
LOVE AND THE FRENCH
Hearts and eye go traveling
along the paths that have
always brought them joy;
and if anyone attempts to
spoil their game, he only
makes them the more
passionate about it, God
knows. . . . so it was with
Tristan and Isolde. As
soon as they were forbidden
their desires, and prevented
from enjoying one another
by spies and guards, they
began to suffer intensely.
Desire now seriously
tormented them by its
magic, many times worse
than before; their need for
one another was more
Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo • 355
posed, physically or psychologically, we are instantly curious. A part of us
wants to go beyond that limit, to explore what is forbidden.
If, as children, we are told not to go past a certain point in the woods,
that is precisely where we want to go. But we grow older, and become po-
lite and deferential; more and more boundaries encumber our lives. Do not
confuse politeness with happiness, however. It covers up frustration, un-
wanted compromise. How can we explore the shadow side of our person-
ality without incurring punishment or ostracism? It seeps out in our
dreams. We sometimes wake up with a sense of guilt at the murder, incest,
adultery, and mayhem that goes on in our dreams, until we realize no one
needs to know about it but ourselves. But give a person the sense that with
you they will have a chance to explore the outer reaches of acceptable, po-
lite behavior, that with you they can vent some of their closeted person-
ality, and you create the ingredients for a deep and powerful seduction.
You will have to go beyond the point of merely teasing them with an
elusive fantasy. The shock and seductive power will come from the reality
of what you are offering them. Like Byron, at a certain point you can even
press it further than they may want to go. If they have followed you merely
out of curiosity, they may feel some fear and hesitation, but once they are
hooked, they will fond you hard to resist, for it is hard to return to a limit
once you have transgressed and gone past it. The human cries out for more,
and does not know when to stop. You will determine for them when it is
time to stop.
The moment people feel that something is prohibited, a part of them
will want it. That is what makes a married man or woman such a delicious
target—the more someone is prohibited, the greater the desire. George Vil-
liers, the Earl of Buckingham, was the favorite first of King James I, then of
James's son, King Charles I. Nothing was ever denied him. In 1625, on a
visit to France, he met the beautiful Queen Anne and fell hopelessly in
love. What could be more impossible, more out of reach, than the queen of
a rival power? He could have had almost any other woman, but the prohib-
ited nature of the queen completely enflamed him, until he embarrassed
himself and his country by trying to kiss her in public.
Since what is forbidden is desired, somehow you must make yourself
seem forbidden. The most blatant way to do this is to engage in behavior
that gives you a dark and forbidden aura. Theoretically you are someone to
avoid; in fact you are too seductive to resist. That was the allure of the actor
Errol Flynn, who, like Byron, often found himself the pursued rather than
the pursuer. Flynn was devilishly handsome, but he also had something
else: a definite criminal streak. In his wild youth he engaged in all kinds of
shady activities. In the 1950s he was charged with rape, a permanent stain
on his reputation even though he was acquitted; but his popularity among
women only increased. Play up your dark side and you will have a similar
effect. For your targets to be involved with you means going beyond their
limits, doing something naughty and unacceptable—to society, to their
peers. For many that is reason to bite the bait.
painful and urgent than it
had ever been. • . . .
Women do lots of things
just because they are
forbidden, 
which they
would certainly not
do if they were not
forbidden. . . . Our Lord
God gave Eve the freedom
to do what she would with
all the fruits, flowers, and
plants there were in
Paradise, except for only
one, which he forbade
her to touch on pain of
death. . . . She look the
fruit and broke God's
commandment . . . but it
is my firm belief now that
Eve would never have done
this, if she had not been
forbidden to.
—GOTTFRIED VON STRASSBURG,
TRISTAN 
UND 
ISOLDE, QUOTED
IN ANDREA HOPKINS, THE
BOOK OF COURTLY LOVE
One of Monsieur Leopold
Stern's friends rented a
bachelor's pied-à-terre
where he received his wife
as a mistress, served her
with port and petits-fours
and "experienced all the
tingling excitement of
adultery." He told Stern
that it was a delightful
sensation to cuckold
himself.
— N I N A E P T O N ,
LOVE AND THE FRENCH
356 
• 
The Art of Seduction
In Junichiro Tanazaki's 1928 novel Quicksand, Sonoko Kakiuchi, the
wife of a respectable lawyer, is bored and decides to take art classes to wile
away the time. There, she finds herself fascinated with a fellow female stu-
dent, the beautiful Mitsuko, who befriends her, then seduces her. Kakiuchi
is forced to tell endless lies to her husband about her involvement with
Mitsuko and their frequent trysts. Mitsuko slowly involves her in all kinds
of nefarious activities, including a love triangle with a bizarre young man.
Each time Kakiuchi is made to explore some forbidden pleasure, Mitsuko
challenges her to go further and further. Kakiuchi hesitates, feels remorse—
she knows she is in the clutches of a devilish young seductress who has
played on her boredom to lead her astray. But in the end, she cannot help
following Mitsuko's lead—each transgressive act makes her want more.
Once your targets are drawn by the lure of the forbidden, dare them to
match you in transgressive behavior. Any kind of challenge is seductive.
Take it slowly heightening the challenge only after they show signs of
yielding to you. Once they are under your spell, they may not even notice
how far out on a limb you have taken them.
The great eighteenth-century rake Duc de Richelieu had a prediliction
for young girls and he would often heighten the seduction by enveloping
them in transgressive behavior, to which the young are particularly suscep-
tible. For instance, he would find a way into the young girl's house and lure
her into her bed; the parents would be just down the hall, adding the
proper spice. Sometimes he would act as if they were about to be discov-
ered, the momentary fright sharpening the overall thrill. In all cases, he
would try to turn the young girl against her parents, ridiculing their reli-
gious zeal or prudery or pious behavior. The duke's stategy was to attack
the values that his targets held dearest—precisely the values that represent a
limit. In a young person, family ties, religious ties, and the like are useful to
the seducer; young people barely need a reason to rebel against them. The
strategy, though, can be applied to a person of any age: for every deeply
held value there is a shadow side, a doubt, a desire to explore what those
values forbid.
In Renaissance Italy, a prostitute would dress as a lady and go to
church. Nothing was more exciting to a man than to exchange glances
with a woman whom he knew to be a whore as he was surrounded by his
wife, family, peers, and church officials. Every religion or value system
creates a dark side, the shadow realm of everything it prohibits. Tease your
targets, get them to flirt with whatever transgresses their family values,
which are often emotional yet superficial, since they are imposed from the
outside.
One of the most seductive men of the twentieth century, Rudolph
Valentino, was known as the Sex Menace. His appeal for women was
twofold: he could be tender and attentive, but he also hinted of cruelty. At
any moment he could become dangerously bold, perhaps even a little vio-
lent. The studios played up this double image as much as possible—when it
was reported that he had been abusive to his wife, for example, they ex-
Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo 
• 
357
ploited the story. A mix of the masculine and the feminine, the violent and
the tender, will always seem transgressive and appealing. Love is supposed
to be tender and delicate, but in fact it can release violent and destructive
emotions; and the possible violence of love, the way it breaks down our
normal reasonableness, is just what attracts us. Approach romance's violent
side by mixing a cruel streak into your tender attentions, particularly in the
latter stages of the seduction, when the target is in your clutches. The
courtesan Lola Montez was known to turn to violence, using a whip now
and then, and Lou Andreas-Salomé could be exceptionally cruel to her
men, playing coquettish games, turning alternately icy and demanding. Her
cruelty only kept her targets coming back for more. A masochistic involve-
ment can represent a great transgressive release.
The more illicit your seduction feels, the more powerful its effect. Give
your targets the feeling that they are committing a kind of crime, a deed
whose guilt they share with you. Create public moments in which the two
of you know something that those around you do not. It could be phrases
and looks that only you recognize, a secret. Byron's seductive appeal to
Lady Frances was connected to the nearness of her husband—in his com-
pany, for example, she had a love letter of Byron's hidden in her bosom. Jo-
hannes, the protagonist of Søren Kierkegaard's The Seducer's Diary, sent a
message to his target, the young Cordelia, in the middle of a dinner party
they were both attending; she could not reveal to the other guests that it
was from him, for then she would have to do some explaining. He might
also say something in public that would have a special meaning for her,
since it referred to something in one of his letters. All of this added spice to
the affair by giving it a feeling of a shared secret, even a guilty crime. It is
critical to play on tensions like these in public, creating a sense of complic-
ity and collusion against the world.
In the Tristan and Isolde legend, the famous lovers reach the heights of
bliss and exhilaration exactly because of the taboos they break. Isolde is en-
gaged to King Mark; she will soon be a married woman. Tristan is a loyal
subject and warrior in the service of King Mark, who is his father's age.
The whole affair has a feeling of stealing away the bride from the father.
Epitomizing the concept of love in the Western world, the legend has
had immense influence over the ages, and a crucial part of it is the idea
that without obstacles, without a feeling of transgression, love is weak and
flavorless.
People may be straining to remove restrictions on private behavior, to
make everything freer, in the world today, but that only makes seduction
more difficult and less exciting. Do what you can to reintroduce a feeling
of transgression and crime, even if it is only psychological or illusory.
There must be obstacles to overcome, social norms to flout, laws to break,
before the seduction can be consummated. It might seem that a permissive
society imposes few limits; find some. There will always be limits, sacred
cows, behavioral standards—endless ammunition for stirring up the trans-
gressive and taboo.
358 
• 
The Art of Seduction
Symbol: The Forest. The children are told not to go into the
forest that lies just beyond the safe confines of their home.
There is no law there, only wilderness, wild animals, and
criminals. But the chance to explore, the alluring dark-
ness, and the fact that it is prohibited are impossi-
ble to resist. And once inside, they want
to go farther and farther.
Reversal
T
he reversal of stirring up taboos would be to stay within the limits
of acceptable behavior. That would make for a very tepid seduc-
tion. Which is not to say that only evil or wild behavior is seductive; good-
ness, kindness, and an aura of spirituality can be tremendously attractive,
since they are rare qualities. But notice that the game is the same. A person
who is kind or good or spiritual within the limits that society prescribes has
a weak appeal. It is those who go to the extreme—the Gandhis, the Krish-
namurtis—who seduce us. They do not merely expound a spiritual life-
style, they do away with all personal material comfort to live out their
ascetic ideals. They too go beyond the limits, transgressing acceptable be-
havior, because societies would find it hard to function if everyone went
to such lengths. In seduction, there is absolutely no power in respecting
boundaries and limits.
Use Spiritual Lures
Every-
one has doubts and in-
securities—about their body,
their self-worth, their sexuality. If
your seduction appeals exclusively to the
physical, you will stir up these doubts and
make your targets self-conscious. Instead, lure
them out of their insecurities by making them fo-
cus on something sublime and spiritual: a religious
experience, a lofty work of art, the occult. Play up
your divine qualities; affect an air of discontent with
worldly things; speak of the stars, destiny, the hidden
threads that unite you and the object of the seduc-
tion. Lost in a spiritual mist, the target will feel
light and uninhibited. Deepen the effect of
your seduction by making its sexual cul-
mination seem like the spiritual
union of two souls.
Object of Worship
L
iane de Pougy was the reigning courtesan of 1890s Paris. Slender and
androgynous, she was a novelty, and the wealthiest men in Europe vied
to possess her. By late in the decade, however, she had grown tired of it all.
"What a sterile life," she wrote a friend. "Always the same routine: the Bois,
the races, fittings; and to end an insipid day: dinner!" What wearied the
courtesan most was the constant attention of her male admirers, who
sought to monopolize her physical charms.
One spring day in 1899, Liane was riding in an open carriage through
the Bois de Boulogne. As usual, men tipped their hats at her as she passed
by. But one of these admirers caught her by surprise: a young woman with
long blond hair, who gave her an intense, worshipful stare. Liane smiled at
the woman, who smiled and bowed in return.
A few days later Liane began to receive cards and flowers from a
twenty-three-year-old American named Natalie Barney, who identified
herself as the blond admirer in the Bois de Boulogne, and asked for a ren-
dezvous. Liane invited Natalie to visit, but to amuse herself she decided to
play a little joke: a friend would take her place, lounging on her bed in the
dark boudoir, while Liane would hide behind a screen. Natalie arrived at
the appointed hour. She wore the costume of a Florentine page and carried
a bouquet of flowers. Kneeling before the bed, she began to praise the
courtesan, comparing her to a Fra Angelico painting. All too soon, she
heard someone laugh—and standing up she realized the joke that had been
played on her. She blushed and made for the door. When Liane hurried
out from behind the screen, Natalie chastised her: the courtesan had the
face of an angel, but apparently not the spirit. Contrite, Liane whispered,
"Come back tomorrow morning. I'll be alone."
The young American showed up the next day, wearing the same outfit.
She was witty and spirited; Liane relaxed in her presence, and invited her to
stay for the courtesan's morning ritual—the elaborate makeup, clothes, and
jewelry she put on before heading out into the world. Watching reverently,
Natalie remarked that she worshiped beauty, and that Liane was the most
beautiful woman she had ever seen. Playing the part of the page, she fol-
lowed Liane to the carriage, opened the door for her with a bow, and ac-
companied her on her habitual ride through the Bois de Boulogne. Once
inside the park, Natalie knelt on the floor, out of sight of the passing
gentlemen who tipped their hats to Liane. She recited poems she had writ-
Ah! always to be able to
freely love the one whom
one loves! To spend my life
at your feet like our last
days together. To protect
you against imaginary
satyrs so that I can be the
only one to throw you on
this bed of moss. . . .
We'll find each other again
in Lesbos, and when dusk
falls, we'll go deep in the
woods to lose the paths
leading to this century. I
want to imagine us in this
enchanted island of
immortals. I picture it as
being so beautiful. Come,
I'll describe for you those
delicate female couples, and
far from the cities and the
din, 
we'll forget everything
but the Ethics of Beauty.
—NATALIE BARNEY, LETTER TO
LIANE DE POUGY,QUOTED IN
JEAN 
CHALON, 
PORTRAIT OF A
SEDUCTRESS:THE 
WORLD OF
NATALIE 
BARNEY, 
TRANSLATED
BY CAROL BARKO
Terrible Natalie, who used
to ravage the land of love.
Formidable 
Natalie, feared
by husbands since no one
could resist her
seductiveness. And one
could see how women
361
362 
• 
The Art of Seduction
ten in Liane's honor, and she told the courtesan she considered it a mission
to rescue her from the seamy career into which she had fallen.
That evening Natalie took her to the theater to see Sarah Bernhardt
play Hamlet. During the intermission, she told Liane that she identified
with Hamlet—his hunger for the sublime, his hatred of tyranny—which,
for her, was the tyranny of men over women. Over the next few days Liane
received a steady flow of flowers from Natalie, and telegrams with little po-
ems in her honor. Slowly the worshipful words and looks became more
physical, with the occasional touch, then a caress, even a kiss—and a kiss
that felt different from any in Liane's experience. One morning, with
Natalie in attendance, Liane prepared to take a bath. As she slipped out
of her nightgown, Natalie suddenly flung herself at her friend's feet, kissing
her ankles. The courtesan freed herself and hurried into the bath, only for
Natalie to throw off her clothes and join her. Within a few days, all Paris
knew that Liane de Pougy had a new lover: Natalie Barney.
Liane made no effort to disguise her new affair, publishing a novel,
Idylle Saphique, detailing every aspect of Natalie's seduction. She had never
had an affair with a woman before, and she described her involvement with
Natalie as something like a mystical experience. Even at the end of her
long life, she remembered the affair as by far her most intense.
Renée Vivien was a young Englishwoman who had come to Paris to
write poetry and flee the marriage that her father was trying to arrange for
her. Renée was obsessed with death; she also felt there was something
wrong with her, experiencing moments of intense self-loathing. In 1900,
Renée met Natalie at the theater. Something about the American's kind
eyes melted Renée's normal reserve, and she began sending poems to Na-
talie, who responded with poems of her own. They soon became friends.
Renée confessed that she had had an intense friendship with another
woman, but that it remained platonic—the thought of physical involve-
ment repulsed her. Natalie told her about the ancient Greek poet Sappho,
who celebrated love between women as the only love that is innocent and
pure. One night Renée, inspired by their discussions, invited Natalie to her
apartment, which she had transformed into a kind of chapel. The room
was filled with candles and with white lilies, the flowers she associated with
Natalie. That night the two women became lovers. They soon moved in
together, but when Renée realized that Natalie could not be faithful to her,
her love turned into hatred. She broke off the relationship, moved out, and
vowed to never see her again.
Over the next few months Natalie sent her letters and poems, and
showed up at her new home—all to no avail. Renée would have nothing to
do with her. One evening at the opera, though, Natalie sat down beside
her and gave her a poem she had written in her honor. She expressed her
regrets for the past, and also a simple request: the two women should go on
a pilgrimage to the Greek island of Lesbos, Sappho's home. Only there
could they purify themselves and their relationship. Renée could not resist.
would abandon their
husbands, homes, children,
to follow this Circe of
Lesbos. • Circe's method
was to concoct magic
potions. 
Natalie preferred
writing poems; she always
knew how to blend the
physical and the spiritual.
—-JEAN CHALON, PORTRAIT OF
A SEDUCTRESS: 
THE 
WORLD OF
NATALIE 
BARNEY, 
TRANSLATED
BY CAROL BARKO
There once lived in the
town of Gafsa, in Barbary,
a very rich man who had
numerous children, 
among
them a lovely and graceful
young daughter called
Alibech. She was not
herself a Christian, but
there were many
Christians in the town,
and one day, having on
occasion heard them extol
the Christian faith and the
service of God, she asked
one of them for his opinion
on the best and easiest way
for a person to "serve
God," as they put it. He
answered her by saying
that the ones who served
God best were those who
put the greatest distance
between themselves and
earthly goods, as happened
in the case of people who
had gone to live in the
remoter parts of the
Sahara. • She said no
more about it to anyone,
but next morning, being a
very 
simple-natured
creature of fourteen or
thereabouts, Alibech set out
all alone, in secret, and
made her way toward the
desert, prompted by
nothing more logical than a
strong adolescent impulse.
A few days later,
exhausted from fatigue 
and
hunger, she arrived in the
heart of the wilderness,
Use Spiritual Lures 
• 
363
On the island they retraced the poetess's steps, imagining they were trans-
ported back into the pagan, innocent days of ancient Greece. For Renée,
Natalie had become Sappho herself. When they finally returned to Paris,
Renée wrote her, "My blond Siren, I don't want you to become like those
who dwell on earth. . . . I want you to stay yourself, for this is the way you
cast your spell over me." Their affair lasted until Renée's death, in 1909.
Interpretation. Liane de Pougy and Renée Vivien both suffered a similar
oppression: they were self-absorbed, hyperaware of themselves. The source
of this habit in Liane was men's constant attention to her body. She could
never escape their looks, which plagued her with a feeling of heavi-
ness. Renée, meanwhile, thought too much about her own problems—
her repression of her lesbianism, her mortality. She felt consumed with
self-hatred.
Natalie Barney, on the other hand, was buoyant, lighthearted, absorbed
in the world around her. Her seductions—and by the end of her life they
numbered well into the hundreds—all had a similar quality: she took the
victim outside herself, directing her attention toward beauty, poetry, the in-
nocence of Sapphic love. She invited her women to participate in a kind of
cult in which they would worship these sublimities. To heighten the cult-
like feeling, she involved them in little rituals: they would call each other by
new names, send each other poems in daily telegrams, wear costumes,
make pilgrimages to holy sites. Two things would inevitably happen: the
women would start to direct some of the worshipful feelings they were ex-
periencing toward Natalie, who seemed as lofty and beautiful as the things
she held up to be adored; and, pleasantly diverted into this spiritualized
realm, they would also lose any heaviness they had felt about their bodies,
their selves, their identities. Their repression of their sexuality would melt
away. By the time Natalie kissed or caressed them, it would feel like some-
thing innocent, pure, as if they had returned to the Garden of Eden before
the fall.
Religion is the great balm of existence because it takes us outside our-
selves, connects us to something larger. As we contemplate the object of
worship (God, nature), our burdens are lifted away. It is wonderful to feel
raised up from the earth, to experience that kind of lightness. No matter
how progressive the times, many of us feel uncomfortable with our bodies,
our animal drives. A seducer who focuses too much attention on the
physical will stir up self-consciousness, and a residue of disgust. So focus
attention on something else. Invite the other person to worship some-
thing beautiful in the world. It could be nature, a work of art, even God
(or gods—paganism never goes out of fashion); people are dying to be-
lieve in something. Add some rituals. If you can make yourself seem to
resemble the thing you are worshiping—you are natural, aesthetic, noble,
and sublime—your targets will transfer their worship to you. Religion and
where, catching sight of a
small hut in the distance,
she stumbled toward it,
and in the doorway she
found a holy man, who
was astonished to see her in
those parts and asked her
what she was doing there.
She told him that she had
been inspired by God, and
that she was trying, not
only to serve Him, but also
to find someone who could
teach her how she should
go about it. • On
observing how young and
exceedingly pretty she was,
the good man was afraid to
take her under his wing
lest the devil should catch
him unawares. So he
praised her for her good
intentions, and having
given her a quantity of
herb roots, wild apples, and
dates to eat, and some
water to drink, he said to
her: • "My daughter, not-
very far from here there is a
holy man who is much
more capable than I of
teaching you what you
want to know. Go along to
him." And he sent her
upon her way. • When she
came to this second man,
she was told precisely the
same thing, and so she
went on until she arrived
at the cell of a young
hermit, a very devout and
kindly fellow called
Rustico, 
to whom she put
the same inquiry as she
had addressed to the others.
Being anxious to prove to
himself that he possessed a
will of iron, he did not,
like the others, send her
away or direct her
elsewhere, but kept her
with him in his cell, in a
corner of which, when
night descended, he
prepared a makeshift bed
out of palm leaves, upon
which he invited her to lie
down and rest. • Once he
364 
• The Art of Seduction
spirituality are full of sexual undertones that can be brought to the surface
once you have made your targets lose their self-awareness. From spiritual
ecstasy to sexual ecstasy is but one small step.
Come back to take me, quickly, and lead me far away. Pu-
rify me with a great fire of divine love, none of the animal
kind. You are all soul when you want to be, when you feel
it, take me far away from my body.
—LIANE DE POUGY
Keys to Seduction
R
eligion is the most seductive system that mankind has created. Death
is our greatest fear, and religion offers us the illusion that we are im-
mortal, that something about us will live on. The idea that we are an infini-
tesimal part of a vast and indifferent universe is terrifying; religion
humanizes this universe, makes us feel important and loved. We are not ani-
mals governed by uncontrollable drives, animals that die for no apparent
reason, but creatures made in the image of a supreme being. We too can be
sublime, rational, and good. Anything that feeds a desire or a wished-for il-
lusion is seductive, and nothing can match religion in this arena.
Pleasure is the bait that you use to lure a person into your web. But no
matter how clever a seducer you are, in the back of your targets' mind they
are aware of the endgame, the physical conclusion toward which you are
heading. You may think your target is unrepressed and hungry for pleasure,
but almost all of us are plagued by an underlying unease with our animal
nature. Unless you deal with this unease, your seduction, even when suc-
cessful in the short term, will be superficial and temporary. Instead, like
Natalie Barney, try to capture your target's soul, to build the foundation of
a deep and lasting seduction. Lure the victim deep into your web with
spirituality, making physical pleasure seem sublime and transcendent. Spiri-
tuality will disguise your manipulations, suggesting that your relationship is
timeless, and creating a space for ecstasy in the victim's mind. Remember
that seduction is a mental process, and nothing is more mentally intoxicat-
ing than religion, spirituality, and the occult.
In Gustave Flaubert's novel Madame Bovary, Rodolphe Boulanger visits
the country doctor Bovary and finds himself interested in the doctor's
beautiful wife, Emma. Boulanger was brutal and shrewd. He was some-
thing of a connoisseur: there had been many women in his life." He senses
that Emma is bored. A few weeks later he manages to run into her at a
county fair, where he gets her alone. He affects an air of sadness and
gloom: "Many's the time I've passed a cemetery in the moonlight and asked
myself if I wouldn't be better off lying there with the rest. . . . " He men-
tions his bad reputation; he deserves it, he says, but is it his fault? "Do you
really not know that there exist souls that are ceaselessly in torment?" Sev-
had taken this step, very
little time elapsed before
temptation went to war
against his willpower, and
after the first few assaults,
finding 
himself
outmaneuvered 
on all
fronts, he laid down his
arms and surrendered.
Casting aside pious
thoughts, prayers, and
penitential exercises, he
began to concentrate his
mental faculties upon the
youth and beauty of the
girl, and to devise suitable
ways and means for
approaching her in such a
fashion that she should not
think it lewd of him to
make the sort of proposal
he had in mind. By
putting certain questions to
her, he soon discovered that
she had never been
intimate with the opposite
sex and was every hit as
innocent as she seemed;
and he therefore thought of
a possible way to persuade
her, with the pretext of
serving God, to grant his
desires. He began by
delivering a long speech in
which he showed her how
powerful an enemy the
devil was to the Lord God,
and followed this up by
impressing upon her that of
all the ways of serving
God, the one that He most
appreciated consisted in
putting the devil back in
Hell, to which the
Almighty had consigned
him in the first place. •
The girl asked him how
this was done, and Rustico
replied: • "You will soon
find out, but just do
whatever you see me doing
for the present. "And so
saying, he began to divest
himself of the few clothes
he was wearing, leaving
himself completely 
naked.
The girl followed his
example, and he sank to
his knees as though he
Use Spiritual Lures 
• 
365
eral times he takes Emma's hand, but she politely withdraws it. He talks of
love, the magnetic force that draws two people together. Perhaps it has
roots in some earlier existence, some previous incarnation of their souls.
"Take us, for example. Why should we have met? How did it happen? It
can only be that something in our particular inclinations made us come
closer and closer across the distance that separated us, the way two rivers
flow together." He takes her hand again and this time she lets him hold it.
After the fair, he avoids her for a few weeks, then suddenly shows up,
claiming that he tried to stay away but that fate, destiny, has pulled him
back. He takes Emma riding. When he finally makes his move, in the
woods, she seems frightened and rejects his advances. "You must have some
mistaken idea," he protests. "I have you in my heart like a Madonna on a
pedestal. . . . I beseech you: be my friend, my sister, my angel!" Under the
spell of his words, she lets him hold her and lead her deeper into the
woods, where she succumbs.
Rodolphe's strategy is threefold. First he talks of sadness, melancholy,
discontent, talk that makes him seem nobler than other people, as if life's
common material pursuits could not satisfy him. Next he talks of destiny,
the magnetic attraction of two souls. This makes his interest in Emma seem
not so much a momentary impulse as something timeless, linked to the
movement of the stars. Finally he talks of angels, the elevated and the sub-
lime. By placing everything on the spiritual plane, he distracts Emma from
the physical, makes her feel giddy, and packs a seduction that could have
taken months into a matter of a few encounters.
The references Rodolphe uses might seem cliched by today's standards,
but the strategy itself will never grow old. Simply adapt it to the occult fads
of the day. Affect a spiritual air by displaying a discontent with the banali-
ties of life. It is not money or sex or success that moves you; your drives are
never so base. No, something much deeper motivates you. Whatever this is,
keep it vague, letting the target imagine your hidden depths. The stars, as-
trology, fate, are always appealing; create the sense that destiny has brought
you and your target together. That will make your seduction feel more
natural. In a world where too much is controlled and manufactured, the
sense that fate, necessity, or some higher power is guiding your relationship
is doubly seductive. If you want to weave religious motifs into your seduc-
tion, it is always best to choose some distant, exotic religion with a slightly
pagan air. It is easy to move from pagan spirituality to pagan earthiness.
Timing counts: once you have stirred your targets' souls, move quickly to
the physical, making sexuality seem merely an extension of the spiritual vi-
brations you are experiencing. In other words, employ the spiritual strategy
as close to the time for your bold move as possible.
The spiritual is not exclusively the religious or the occult. It is anything
that will add a sublime, timeless quality to your seduction. In the modern
world, culture and art have in some ways taken the place of religion. There
are two ways to use art in your seduction: first, create it yourself, in the tar-
get's honor. Natalie Barney wrote poems, and barraged her targets with
were about to pray, getting
her to kneel directly
opposite. • In this posture,
the girl's beauty was
displayed to Rustico in all
its glory, and his longings
blazed more fiercely than
ever, bringing about the
res u rrectio n of the flesh.
Alibech stared at this in
amazement and said: •
"Rustico, what is that I see
sticking out in front of
you, which I do not
possess?" • "Oh, my
daughter," said Rustico,
"this is the devil I was
telling you about. Do you
see what he's doing? He's
hurting me so much that I
can hardly endure it. " •
"Oh, praise be to God,"
said the girl, "I can see
that I am better off than
you are, for I have no such
devil to contend with." •
"You're right there;" said
Rustico. 
"But you have
something else instead, that
I haven't." • 
"Oh?" said
Alibech. 
"And what's
that?" • "You have Hell,"
said Rustico. 
"And I
honestly believe that God
has sent you here for the
salvation of my soul,
because if this devil
continues to plague the life
out of me, and if you are
prepared to take sufficient
pity upon me to let me put
him back into Hell, you
will be giving me
marvelous relief, as well as
rendering incalculable
service and pleasure to
God, which is what you
say you came here for in
the first place." • "Oh,
Father," replied the girl in
all innocence, "if I really
do have Hell, let's do as
you suggest just as soon as
you are ready." • "God
bless you, my daughter,"
said Rustico. "Let's go and
put him back, and then
perhaps he'll leave me
alone. " • At which point
366 
• The Art of Seduction
them. Half of Picasso's appeal to many women was the hope that he would
immortalize them in his paintings—for Ars longa, vita brevis (Art is long, life
is short), as they used to say in Rome. Even if your love is a passing fancy,
by capturing it in a work of art you give it a seductive illusion of eternity.
The second way to use art is to make it ennoble the affair, giving your se-
duction an elevated edge. Natalie Barney took her targets to the theater, to
the opera, to museums, to places full of history and atmosphere. In such
places your souls can vibrate to the same spiritual wavelength. Of course
you should avoid works of art that are earthy or vulgar, calling attention to
your intentions. The play, movie, or book can be contemporary, even a lit-
tle raw, as long as it contains a noble message and is tied to some just cause.
Even a political movement can be spiritually uplifting. Remember to tailor
your spiritual lures to the target. If the target is earthy and cynical, pagan-
ism or art will be more productive than the occult or religious piety.
The Russian mystic Rasputin was revered for his saintliness and his
healing powers. Women in particular were fascinated with Rasputin and
would visit him in his St. Petersburg apartment for spiritual guidance. He
would talk to them of the simple goodness of the Russian peasantry, God's
forgiveness, and other lofty matters. But after a few minutes of this, he
would inject a comment or two that were of a much different nature—
something about the woman's beauty, her lips that were so inviting, the de-
sires she could inspire in a man. He would talk of different kinds of
love—love of God, love between friends, love between a man and a
woman—but mix them all up as if they were one. Then as he returned to
discussing spiritual matters, he would suddenly take the woman's hand, or
whisper into her ear. All this would have an intoxicating effect—women
would find themselves dragged into a kind of maelstrom, both spiritually
uplifted and sexually excited. Hundreds of women succumbed during
these spiritual visits, for he would also tell them that they could not repent
until they had sinned, and who better to sin with than Rasputin.
Rasputin understood the intimate connection between the sexual and
the spiritual. Spirituality, the love of God, is a sublimated version of sexual
love. The language of the religious mystics of the Middle Ages is full of
erotic images; the contemplation of God and of the sublime can offer a
kind of mental orgasm. There is no more seductive brew than the combi-
nation of the spiritual and the sexual, the high and the low. When you talk
of spiritual matters, then, let your looks and physical presence hint of sexu-
ality at the same time. Make the harmony of the universe and union with
God seem to confuse with physical harmony and the union between two
people. If you can make the endgame of your seduction appear as a spiri-
tual experience, you will heighten the physical pleasure and create a seduc-
tion with a deep and lasting effect.
he conveyed the girl to one
of their beds, where he
instructed her in the art of
incarcerating that accursed
fiend. 
• Never having put
a single devil into Hell
before, the girl found the
first experience a little
painful, and she said to
Rustico: • "This devil
must certainly be a bad lot,
Father, and a true enemy
of God, for as well as
plaguing mankind, he even
hurts Hell when he's
driven back inside it. " •
"Daughter," 
said Rustico,
"it will not always be like
that." And in order to
ensure that it wouldn't,
before moving from the bed
they put him back half a
dozen times, curbing his
arrogance to such good
effect that he was positively
glad to keep still for the rest
of the day. • During the
next few days, however, the
devil's pride frequently
reared its head again, and
the girl, ever ready to obey
the call to duty and bring
him under control,
happened to develop a taste
for the sport, and began
saying to Rustico: • "I can
certainly see what those
worthy men in Gafsa
meant when they said that
serving God was so
agreeable. I don't honestly
recall ever having done
anything that gave me so
much pleasure and
satisfaction as I get from
putting the devil back in
Hell. To my way of
thinking, 
anyone who
devotes his energies to
anything but the service of
God is a complete
blockhead." 
• . . . And so,
young ladies, if you stand
in need of God's grace, see
Use Spiritual Lures • 
367
Symbol: The Stars in the sky. Objects of worship for cen-
turies, and symbols of the sublime and divine. In contemplat-
ing them, we are momentarily distracted from everything
mundane and mortal. We feel lightness. Lift your tar-
gets' minds up to the stars and they will not
notice what is happening here
on earth.
Reversal
L
etting your targets feel that your affection is neither temporary nor
superficial will often make them fall deeper under your spell. In some,
though, it can arouse an anxiety: the fear of commitment, of a claustro-
phobic relationship with no exits. Never let your spiritual lures seem to be
leading in that direction, then. To focus attention on the distant future may
implicitly constrict their freedom; you should be seducing them, not offer-
ing to marry them. What you want is to make them lose themselves in the
moment, experiencing the timeless depth of your feelings in the present
tense. Religious ecstasy is about intensity, not temporal extensity.
Giovanni Casanova used many spiritual lures in his seductions—the oc-
cult, anything that would inspire lofty sentiments. For the time that he was
involved with a woman, she would feel that he would do anything for her,
that he was not just using her only to abandon her. But she also knew that
when it became convenient to end the affair, he would cry, give her a mag-
nificent gift, then quietly leave. This was just what many young women
wanted—a temporary diversion from marriage or an oppressive family.
Sometimes pleasure is best when we know it is fleeting.
that you learn to put the
devil back in Hell, for it is
greatly to His liking and
pleasurable to the parties
concerned, and a great deal
of good can arise and flow
in the process.
—GIOVANNI BOCCACCIO,
THE 
DECAMERON, 
TRANSLATED
BY G. H. 
MCWILLIAM
Mix Pleasure with Pain
The
greatest mistake in seduction is being too nice.
At first, perhaps, your kindness is charming, but it soon grows
monotonous; you are trying too hard to please, and seem insecure. Instead
of overwhelming your targets with niceness, try inflicting some pain. Lure them
in with focused attention, then change direction, appearing suddenly uninterested.
Make them feel guilty and insecure. Even instigate a breakup, subjecting them to an
emptiness and pain that will give you room to maneuver—now a rapprochement,
an apology, a return to your earlier kindness, will turn them weak at the
knees. The lower the lows you create, the greater the highs. To
heighten the erotic charge, create the excitement
of fear.
The Emotional Roller Coaster
O
ne hot summer afternoon in 1894, Don Mateo Díaz, a thirty-eight-
year-old resident of Seville, decided to visit a local tobacco factory
Because of his connections Don Mateo was allowed to tour the place, but
his interest was not in the business side. Don Mateo liked young girls, and
hundreds of them worked in the factory. Just as he had expected, that day
many of them were in a state of near undress because of the heat—it was
quite a spectacle. He enjoyed the sights for a while, but the noise and the
temperature soon got to him. As he was heading for the door, though, a
worker of no more than sixteen called out to him: "Caballero, if you will
give me a penny I will sing you a little song."
The girl's name was Conchita Pérez, and she looked young and inno-
cent, in fact beautiful, with a sparkle in her eye that suggested a taste for ad-
venture. The perfect prey. He listened to her song (which seemed vaguely
suggestive), tossed her a coin that was equal to a month's salary, tipped his
hat, then left. It was never good to come on too strong too early. As he
walked along the street, he plotted how he would lure her into an affair.
Suddenly he felt a hand on his arm and he turned to see her walking along-
side him. It was too hot to work—would he be a gentleman and escort her
home? Of course. Do you have a lover? he asked her. No, she said, "I am
mozita"—pure, a virgin.
Conchita lived with her mother in a rundown part of town. Don Ma-
teo exchanged pleasantries, slipped the mother some money (he knew from
experience how important it was to keep the mother happy), then left. He
considered waiting a few days, but he was impatient, and returned the fol-
lowing morning. The mother was out. He and Conchita resumed their
playful banter from the day before, and to his surprise she suddenly sat in
his lap, put her arms around him, and kissed him. His strategy flying out
the window, he took hold of her and returned the kiss. She immediately
jumped up, her eyes flashing with anger: you are trifling with me, she said,
using me for a quick thrill. Don Mateo denied having any such intentions,
and apologized for going too far. When he left, he felt confused: she had
started it all; why should he feel guilty? And yet he did. Young girls can be
so unpredictable; it is best to break them in slowly
Over the next few days Don Mateo was the perfect gentleman. He
visited every day, showered mother and daughter with gifts, made no
advances—at least not at first. The damned girl had become so familiar
The more one pleases
generally, the less one
pleases profoundly.
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND
SUZANNE SALE
You should mix in the odd
rebuff \ With your cheerful
fun. Shut him out of the
house, let him wait there \
Cursing that locked front
door, let him plead \ And
threaten all he's a mind to.
Sweetness cloys the palate,
\ Bitter juice is a freshener.
Often a small skiff \ Is
sunk by favoring winds: it's
their husbands' access to
them, \ At will, that
deprives so many wives of
love. \ Let her put in a
door, with a hard-faced
porter to tell him \ "Keep
out," and he'll soon be
touched with desire \
Through frustration. 
Put
down your blunt foils, fight
with sharpened weapons \
(I don't doubt that my own
shafts \ Will be turned
against me). When a
new-captured lover \ Is
stumbling into the toils,
then let him believe \ He
alone has rights to your
bed—but 
later, make him
371
372 
• 
The Art of Seduction
with him that she would dress in front of him, or greet him in her night-
gown. These glimpses of her body drove him crazy, and he would some-
times try to steal a kiss or caress, only to have her push him away and scold
him. Weeks went by; clearly he had shown that his was not a passing fancy.
Tired of the endless courtship, he took Conchita's mother aside one day
and proposed that he set the girl up in a house of her own. He would treat
her like a queen; she would have everything she wanted. (So, of course,
would her mother.) Surely his proposal would satisfy the two women—but
the next day, a note came from Conchita, expressing not gratitude but re-
crimination: he was trying to buy her love. "You shall never see me again,"
she concluded. He hurried to the house only to discover that the women
had moved out that very morning, without leaving word where they were
going.
Don Mateo felt terrible. Yes, he had acted like a boor. Next time he
would wait months, or years if need be, before being so bold. Soon, how-
ever, another thought assailed him: he would never see Conchita again.
Only then did he realize how much he loved her.
The winter passed, the worst of Mateo's life. One spring day he was
walking down the street when he heard someone calling his name. He
looked up: Conchita was standing in an open window, beaming with ex-
citement. She bent down toward him and he kissed her hand, beside him-
self with joy. Why had she disappeared so suddenly? It was all going too
quickly, she said. She had been afraid—of his intentions, and of her own
feelings. But seeing him again, she was certain that she loved him. Yes, she
was ready to be his mistress. She would prove it, she would come to him.
Being apart had changed them both, he thought.
A few nights later, as promised, she appeared at his house. They kissed
and began to undress. He wanted to savor every minute, to take it slowly,
but he felt like a caged bull finally set free. He followed her into bed, his
hands all over her. He started to take off her underwear but it was laced up
in some complicated way. Eventually he had to sit up and take a look: she
was wearing some elaborate canvas contraption, of a kind he had never
seen. No matter how hard he tugged and pulled, it would not come off.
He felt like hitting Conchita, he was so distraught, but instead he started to
cry. She explained: she wanted to do everything with him, yet to remain a
mozita. This was her protection. Exasperated, he sent her home.
Over the next few weeks, Don Mateo began to reassess his opinion of
Conchita. He saw her flirting with other men, and dancing a suggestive fla-
menco in a bar: she was not a mozita, he decided, she was playing him for
money. And yet he could not leave her. Another man would take his
place—an unbearable thought. She would invite him to spend the night in
her bed, as long as he promised not to force himself on her; and then, as if
to torture him beyond reason, she would get into bed naked (supposedly
because of the heat). All this he put up with on the grounds that no other
man had such privileges. But one night, pushed to the limits of frustration,
he exploded with anger, and issued an ultimatum: either give me what I
conscious \ Of rivals, of
shared delights. Neglect \
These devices—his ardor
will wane. A racehorse runs
most strongly \ When the
field's ahead, to be paced \
And passed. So the dying
embers of passion can be
fanned to \ Fresh flame by
some outrage—I can only
love, \ Myself, I confess it,
when wronged. But don't
let the cause of \ Pain be
too obvious: let a lover
suspect \ More than he
knows. Invent a slave who
watches your every \
Movement, 
make clear
what a jealous martinet \
That man of yours is—
such things will excite him.
Pleasure \ Too safely
enjoyed lacks zest. You
want to be free \ As Thaïs?
Act scared. Though the
door's quite safe, let him in
by \ The window. Look
nervous. Have a smart \
Maid rush in, scream
"We're caught!" while you
bundle the quaking \ Youth
out of sight. But be sure \
To offset his fright with
some moments of carefree
pleasure— 
\ Or he'll think
a night with you isn't
worth the risk.
— O V I D . 
THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER 
GREEN
"Certainly," I said, "I
have often told you that
pain holds a peculiar
attraction for me, and that
nothing kindles my passion
quite so much as tyranny
cruelty and above all
unfaithfulness in a
beautiful 
woman."
—LEOPOLD VON SACHER-
MASOCH, 
VENUS IN FURS,
T R A N S L A T E D B Y J E A N M C N E I L
Mix Pleasure with Pain • 
373
want or you will never see me again. Suddenly Conchita started to cry. He
had never seen her cry, and it moved him. She too was tired of all this, she
said, her voice trembling; if it was not too late, she was ready to accept the
proposal she had once turned down. Set her up in a house, and he would
see what a devoted mistress she would be.
Don Mateo wasted no time. He bought her a villa, gave her plenty of
money to decorate it. After eight days the house was ready. She would re-
ceive him there at midnight. What joys awaited him.
Don Mateo showed up at the appointed hour. The barred door to the
courtyard was closed. He rang the bell. She came to the other side of the
door. "Kiss my hands," she said through the bars. "Now kiss the hem of my
skirt, and the tip of my foot in its slipper." He did as she requested. "That is
good," she said. "Now you may go." His shocked expression just made her
laugh. She ridiculed him, then made a confession: she was repulsed by him.
Now that she had a villa in her name, she was free of him at last. She called
out, and a young man appeared from the shadows of the courtyard. As Don
Mateo watched, too stunned to move, they began to make love on the
floor, right before his eyes.
The next morning Conchita appeared at Don Mateo's house, suppos-
edly to see if he had committed suicide. To her surprise, he hadn't—in fact
he slapped her so hard she fell to the ground. "Conchita," he said, "you
have made me suffer beyond all human strength. You have invented moral
tortures to try them on the only man who loved you passionately. I now
declare that I am going to possess you by force." Conchita screamed she
would never be his, but he hit her again and again. Finally, moved by her
tears, he stopped. Now she looked up at him lovingly. Forget the past, she
said, forget all that I have done. Now that he hit her, now that she could see
his pain, she felt certain he truly loved her. She was still a mozita—the affair
with the young man the night before had been only for show, ending as
soon as he had left—and she still belonged to him. "You are not going to
take me by force. I await you in my arms." Finally she was sincere. To his
supreme delight, he discovered that she was indeed still a virgin.
Interpretation. Don Mateo and Conchita Perez are characters in the 1896
novella Woman and Puppet, by Pierre Louÿs. Based on a true story—the
"Miss Charpillon" episode in Casanova's Memoirs—the novella has served as
the basis for two films: Josef von Sternberg's Devil Is a Woman, with Mar-
lene Dietrich, and Luis Buñuel's That Obscure Object of Desire. In Louÿs's
story, Conchita takes a proud and aggressive older man and in the space of a
few months turns him into an abject slave. Her method is simple: she stimu-
lates as many emotions as possible, including heavy doses of pain. She ex-
cites his lust, then makes him feel base for taking advantage of her. She gets
him to play the protector, then makes him feel guilty for trying to buy her.
Her sudden disappearance anguishes him—he has lost her—so that when
she reappears (never by accident) he feels intense joy; which, however, she
Oderint, 
dum 
metuant
[Let them hate me so long
as they fear me], as if only
fear and hate belong
together, whereas fear and
love have nothing to do
with each other, as if it
were not fear that makes
love interesting. 
With what
kind of love do we embrace
nature? Is there not a
secretive anxiety and horror
in it, because its beautiful
harmony works its way out
of lawlessness and wild
confusion, its security out
of perfidy? But precisely
this anxiety captivates the
most. So also with love, if
it is to he interesting.
Behind it ought to brood
the deep, anxious night
from which springs the
flower of love.
—SØREN 
KIERKEGAARD,
THE 
SEDUCER'S 
DIARY,
TRANSLATED BY HOWARD V.
HONG AND EDNA H. HONG
The lovely marble creature
coughed and rearranged the
sable around her shoulders.
• "Thank you for the
lesson in classics," I replied,
"but I cannot deny that in
your peaceful and sunny
world just as in our misty
climate man and woman
are natural enemies. Love
may unite them briefly to
form one mind, one heart,
one will, but all too soon
they are torn asunder. And
this you know better than
I: either one of them must
bend the other to his will,
or else he must let himself
be trampled underfoot. " •
"Under the woman's foot,
of course," said Lady
Venus impertinently. 
"And
that you know better than
I." 
• "Of course, that is
why I have no illusions." •
"In other words you are
now my slave without
illusions, and I shall
374 
• The Art of Seduction
quickly turns back into tears. Jealousy and humiliation then precede the fi-
nal moment when she gives him her virginity. (Even after this, according to
the story, she finds ways to continue to torment him.) Each low she
inspires—guilt, despair, jealousy, emptiness—creates the space for a more
intense high. He becomes an addict, hooked on the alternation of charge
and withdrawal.
Your seduction should never follow a simple course upward toward
pleasure and harmony. The climax will come too soon, and the pleasure
will be weak. What makes us intensely appreciate something is previous
suffering. A brush with death makes us fall in love with life; a long journey
makes a return home that much more pleasurable. Your task is to create
moments of sadness, despair, and anguish, to create the tension that allows
for a great release. Do not worry about making people angry; anger is a
sure sign that you have your hooks in them. Nor should you be afraid that
if you make yourself difficult people will flee—we only abandon those
who bore us. The ride on which you take your victims can be tortuous but
never dull. At all costs, keep your targets emotional and on edge. Create
enough highs and lows and you will wear away the last vestiges of their
willpower.
Harshness and Kindness
I
n 1972, Henry Kissinger, then President Richard Nixon's assistant for
national security affairs, received a request for an interview from the fa-
mous Italian journalist Oriana Fallaci. Kissinger rarely gave interviews; he
had no control over the final product, and he was a man who needed to be
in control. But he had read Fallaci's interview with a North Vietnamese
general, and it had been instructive. She was extremely well informed on
the Vietnam War; perhaps he could gather some information of his own,
pick her brain. He decided to ask for a preinterview, a preliminary meeting.
He would grill her on different subjects; if she passed the test, he would
grant her an interview proper. They met, and he was impressed; she was
extremely intelligent—and tough. It would be an enjoyable challenge to
outwit her and prove that he was tougher. He agreed to a short interview a
few days later.
To Kissinger's annoyance, Fallaci began the interview by asking him
whether he was disappointed by the slow pace of the peace negotiations
with North Vietnam. He would not discuss the negotiations—he had made
that clear in the preinterview. Yet she continued the same line of question-
ing. He grew a little angry "That's enough," he said. "I don't want to
talk any more about Vietnam." Although she didn't immediately aban-
don the subject, her questions became gentler: what were his personal feel-
ings toward the leaders of South and North Vietnam? Still, he ducked:
"I'm not the kind of person to be swayed by emotion. Emotions serve
no purpose." She moved to grander philosophical issues—war, peace. She
trample you mercilessly. " •
"Madam!" • "You do not
know me yet. I admit that
I am cruel—since the word
gives you so much
delight—but 
am I not
entitled to be so? It is man
who desires, woman who is
desired; this is woman's
only advantage, but it is a
decisive one. By making
man so vulnerable to
passion, nature has placed
him at woman's mercy, and
she who has not the sense
to treat him like a humble
subject, a slave, a
plaything, and finally to
betray him with a laugh—
well, she is a woman of
little wisdom." • "My
dear, your principles . . ."
I protested. • "Are
founded on the experience
of a thousand years," she
replied 
mischievously,
running her white fingers
through the dark fur. 
"The
more submissive woman is,
the more readily man
recovers his self-possession
and becomes domineering;
but the more cruel and
faithless she is, the more
she ill-treats him, the
more wantonly she toys
with him and the harsher
she is, the more she
quickens his desire and
secures his love and
admiration. It has always
been so, from the time of
Helen and Delilah all the
way to Catherine the
Great and Lola Montez. "
—LEOPOLD VON SACHER-
MASOCH, VENUS IN FURS,
TRANSLATED BY JEAN 
MCNEIL
In essence, the domain
of eroticism is the domain of
violence, of violation. . . .
The whole business of
eroticism is to strike to the
inmost core of the living
being, so that the heart
stands still. . . . The
Mix Pleasure with Pain 
• 
375
praised him for his role in the rapprochement with China. Without real-
izing it, Kissinger began to open up. He talked of the pain he felt in dealing
with Vietnam, the pleasures of wielding power. Then suddenly the harsher
questions returned—was he simply Nixon's lackey, as many suspected? Up
and down she went, alternately baiting and flattering him. His goal had
been to pump her for information while revealing nothing about himself;
by the end, though, she had given him nothing, while he had revealed a
range of embarrassing opinions—his view of women as playthings, for in-
stance, and his belief that he was popular with the public because people
saw him as a kind of lonesome cowboy, the hero who cleans things up by
himself. When the interview was published, Nixon, Kissinger's boss, was
livid about it.
In 1973, the Shah of Iran, Mohammed Riza Pahlavi, granted Fallaci an
interview. He knew how to handle the press—be noncommittal, speak in
generalities, seem firm, yet polite. This approach had worked a thousand
times before. Fallaci began the interview on a personal level, asking how it
felt to be a king, to be the target of assassination attempts, and why the
shah always seemed so sad. He talked of the burdens of his position, the
pain and loneliness he felt. It seemed a release of sorts to talk about his pro-
fessional problems. As he talked, Fallaci said little, her silence goading him
on. Then she suddenly changed the subject: he was having difficulties with
his second wife. Surely that must hurt him? This was a sore spot, and
Pahlavi got angry. He tried to change the subject, but she kept returning to
it. Why waste time talking about wives and women, he said. He then went
so far as to criticize women in general—their lack of creativity, their cru-
elty. Fallaci kept at him: he had dictatorial tendencies and his country
lacked basic freedoms. Fallaci's own books were on his government's black-
list. Hearing this, the shah seemed somewhat taken aback—perhaps he was
dealing with a subversive writer. But then she softened her tone again,
asked him about his many achievements. The pattern repeated: the mo-
ment he relaxed, she blindsided him with a sharp question; when he grew
bitter, she lightened the mood. Like Kissinger, he found himself opening
up despite himself and mentioning things he would later regret, such as his
intention to raise the price of oil. Slowly he fell under her spell, even began
to flirt with her. "Even if you're on the blacklist of my authorities," he said
at the end of the interview, "I'll put you on the white list of my heart."
Interpretation. Most of Fallaci's interviews were with powerful leaders,
men and women with an overwhelming need to control the situation, to
avoid revealing anything embarrassing. This put her and her subjects in con-
flict, since getting them to open up—grow emotional, give up control—
was exactly what she wanted. The classic seductive approach of charm and
flattery would get her nowhere with these people; they would see right
through it. Instead, Fallaci preyed on their emotions, alternating harshness
and kindness. She would ask a cruel question that touched on the deepest
whole business of
eroticism is to destroy the
self-contained character of
the participators as they are
in their normal lives. . . .
We ought never to forget
that in spite of the bliss
love promises its first effect
is one of turmoil and
distress. Passion fulfilled
itself provokes such violent
agitation that the
happiness involved, before
being a happiness to be
enjoyed, is so great as to be
more like its opposite,
suffering. . . . The
likelihood of suffering is all
the greater since suffering
alone reveals the total
significance of the beloved
object.
—GEORGES BATAILLE,
EROTISM: 
DEATH AND
SENSUALITY, TRANSLATED BY
MARY DALWOOD
Always a little doubt to set
at rest—that's what keeps
one craving in passionate
love. Because the keenest
misgivings are always
there, its pleasures never
become tedious. • Saint-
Simon, the only historian
France has ever possessed,
says: 
"After many passing
fancies the Duchesse de
Berry had fallen deeply in
love with Riom, a junior
member of the d'Aydie
family, the son of one of
Madame de Biron's sisters.
He had neither looks nor
brains; he was fat, short,
chubby-cheeked, pale, and
had such a crop of pimples
that he seemed one large
abscess; he had beautiful
teeth, but not the least idea
that he was going to inspire
a passion which quickly got
out of control, a passion
which lasted a lifetime,
notwithstanding a 
number
of subsidiary flirtations and
affairs. . . . • He would
376 
• 
The Art of Seduction
insecurities of the subject, who would get emotional and defensive; deep
down, though, something else would stir inside them—the desire to prove
to Fallaci that they did not deserve her implicit criticisms. Unconsciously
they wanted to please her, to make her like them. When she then shifted
tone, indirectly praising them, they felt they were winning her over and
were encouraged to open up. Without realizing it, they would give freer
rein to their emotions.
In social situations we all wear masks, and keep our defenses up. It is
embarrassing, after all, to reveal one's true feelings. As a seducer you must
find a way to lower these resistances. The Charmer's approach of flattery
and attention can be effective here, particularly with the insecure, but it can
take months of work, and can also backfire. To get a quicker result, and to
break down more inaccessible people, it is often better to alternate harsh-
ness and kindness. By being harsh you create inner tensions—your targets
may be upset with you, but they are also asking themselves questions. What
have they done to earn your dislike? When you then are kind, they feel
relieved, but also concerned that at any moment they might somehow dis-
please you again. Make use of this pattern to keep them in suspense—
dreading your harshness and keen to keep you kind. Your kindness and
harshness should be subtle; indirect digs and compliments are best. Play the
psychoanalyst: make cutting comments concerning their unconscious mo-
tives (you are only being truthful), then sit back and listen. Your silence will
goad them into embarrassing admissions. Leaven your judgments with oc-
casional praise and they will strive to please you, like dogs.
Love is a costly flower, but one must have the desire to
pluck it from the edge of a precipice.
—STENDHAL
Keys to Seduction
A
lmost everyone is more or less polite. We learn early on not to tell
people what we really think of them; we smile at their jokes, act inter-
ested in their stories and problems. It is the only way to live with them.
Eventually this becomes a habit; we are nice, even when it isn't really nec-
essary. We try to please other people, to not step on their toes, to avoid dis-
agreements and conflict.
Niceness in seduction, however, though it may at first draw someone to
you (it is soothing and comforting), soon loses all effect. Being too nice can
literally push the target away from you. Erotic feeling depends on the cre-
ation of tension. Without tension, without anxiety and suspense, there can
be no feeling of release, of true pleasure and joy It is your task to create
that tension in the target, to stimulate feelings of anxiety, to lead them to
and fro, so that the culmination of the seduction has real weight and inten-
sity. So rid yourself of your nasty habit of avoiding conflict, which is in any
excite but not requite the
desire of the princess; he
delighted in making her
jealous, or pretending to be
jealous himself. He would
often drive her to tears.
Gradually he forced her
into the position of doing
nothing without his leave,
even trifles of no
importance. 
Sometimes,
when she was ready to go
to the Opera, he insisted
that she stay at home; and
sometimes he made her go
there against her will. He
obliged her to grant favours
to ladies she did not like or
of whom she was jealous.
She was not even free to
dress as she chose; he
would amuse himself by
making her change her
coiffure or her dress at the
last minute; he did this so
often and so publicly that
she became accustomed to
take his orders in the
evening for what she would
do and wear the following
day; then the next day he
would alter everything, and
the princess would cry all
the more. In the end she
took to sending him
messages by trusted
footmen, for from the first
he had taken up residence
in Luxembourg; messages
which continued
throughout her toilette, to
know what ribbons she
would wear, what gown
and other ornaments;
almost invariably he made
her wear something she did
not wish to. When she
occasionally dared to do
anything, 
however small,
without his leave, he
treated her like a servant,
and she was in tears for
several days. • . . . Before
assembled company he
would give her such
brusque replies that
everyone lowered their eyes,
and the Duchess would
blush, though her passion
Mix Pleasure with Pain 
• 
377
case unnatural. You are most often nice not out of your own inner good-
ness but out of fear of displeasing, out of insecurity. Go beyond that fear
and you suddenly have options—the freedom to create pain, then magically
dissolve it. Your seductive powers will increase tenfold.
People will be less upset by your hurtful actions than you might imag-
ine. In the world today, we often feel starved for experience. We crave
emotion, even if it is negative. The pain you cause your targets, then, is
bracing—it makes them feel more alive. They have something to complain
about, they get to play the victim. As a result, once you have turned the
pain into pleasure they will readily forgive you. Stir up their jealousy, make
them feel insecure, and the validation you later give their ego by preferring
them over their rivals is doubly delightful. Remember: you have more to
fear by boring your targets than by shaking them up. Wounding people
binds them to you more deeply than kindness. Create tension so you can
release it. If you need inspiration, find the part of the target that most irri-
tates you and use it as a springboard for some therapeutic conflict. The
more real your cruelty, the more effective it is.
In 1818, the French writer Stendhal, then living in Milan, met the
Countess Metilda Viscontini. For him, it was love at first sight. She was a
proud, somewhat difficult woman, and she intimidated Stendhal, who was
terribly afraid of displeasing her with a stupid comment or undignified act.
Finally, unable to take it any longer, he one day took her hand and confessed
his love. Horrified, the countess told him to leave and never come back.
Stendhal flooded Viscontini with letters, begging her to forgive him. At
last, she relented: she would see him again, but under one condition—he
could visit only once every two weeks, for no more than an hour, and only
in the presence of company. Stendhal agreed; he had no choice. He now
lived for those short fortnightly visits, which became occasions of intense
anxiety and fear, since he was never quite sure whether she would change
her mind and banish him forever. This went on for over two years, during
which the countess never showed him the slightest sign of favor. Stendhal
never found out why she had insisted on this arrangement—perhaps she
wanted to toy with him or keep him at a distance. All he knew was that his
love for her only grew stronger, became unbearably intense, until finally he
had to leave Milan.
To get over this sad affair, Stendhal wrote his famous book On Love, in
which he described the effect of fear on desire. First, if you fear the loved
one, you can never get too close or familiar with him or her. The beloved
then retains an element of mystery, which only intensifies your love. Sec-
ond, there is something bracing about fear. It makes you vibrate with sensa-
tion, heightens your awareness, is intensely erotic. According to Stendhal,
the closer the loved one brings you to the edge of the precipice, to the feel-
ing that they could abandon you, the dizzier and more lost you will be-
come. Falling in love means literally falling—losing control, a mix of fear
and excitement.
Apply this wisdom in reverse: never let your targets get too comfortable
for him was in no way
curtailed." • For the
princess, Riom was a
sovereign remedy against
boredom.
—STENDHAL, LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY GILBERT AND
SUZANNE SALE
378 
• 
The Art of Seduction
with you. They need to feel fear and anxiety. Show them some coldness, a
flash of anger they did not expect. Be irrational if necessary. There is always
the trump card: a breakup. Let them feel they have lost you forever, make
them fear that they have lost the power to charm you. Let these feelings sit
with them for a while, then pull them back from the precipice. The recon-
ciliation will be intense.
In 33 B.C., Mark Antony heard a rumor that Cleopatra, his lover of
several years, had decided to seduce his rival, Octavius, and that she was
planning to poison Antony. Cleopatra had poisoned people before; in fact
she was an expert in the art. Antony grew paranoid, and finally one day
confronted her. Cleopatra did not protest her innocence. Yes, that was true,
it was quite within her power to poison Antony at any moment; there were
no precautions he could take. Only the love she felt for him could protect
him. To demonstrate, she took some flowers and dropped them into his
wine. Antony hesitated, then raised the cup to his lips; Cleopatra grabbed
his arm and stopped him. She had a prisoner brought in to drink the wine,
and the prisoner promptly dropped dead. Falling at Cleopatra's feet,
Antony professed that he loved her now more than ever. He did not speak
out of cowardice; there was no man braver than he, and if Cleopatra could
have poisoned him, he for his part could have left her and gone back to
Rome. No, what pushed him over the edge was the feeling that she had
control over his emotions, over life and death. He was her slave. Her
demonstration of her power over him was not only effective but erotic.
Like Antony, many of us have masochistic yearnings without realizing
it. It takes someone to inflict some pain on us for these deeply repressed de-
sires to come to the surface. You must learn to recognize the types of hid-
den masochists out there, for each one enjoys a particular kind of pain. For
instance, there are people who feel that they deserve nothing good in life,
and who, unable to deal with success, sabotage themselves constantly. Be
nice to them, admit that you admire them, and they are uncomfortable,
since they feel that they cannot possibly match up to the ideal figure you
have clearly imagined them to be. Such self-saboteurs do better with a little
punishment; scold them, make them aware of their inadequacies. They feel
they deserve such criticism and when it comes it is with a sense of relief. It
is also easy to make them feel guilty, a feeling that deep down they enjoy.
Other people experience the responsibilities and duties of modern life
as such a heavy burden, they long to give it all up. These people are often
looking for someone or something to worship—a cause, a religion, a guru.
Make them worship you. And then there are those who want to play the
martyr. Recognize them by the joy they take in complaining, in feeling
righteous and wronged; then give them a reason to complain. Remember:
appearances deceive. Often the strongest-looking people—the Kissingers
and Don Mateos—may secretly want to be punished. In any event, follow
up pain with pleasure and you will create a state of dependency that will
last for a long time.
Mix Pleasure with Pain 
• 
379
Symbol: The Precipice. At the edge of a cliff, people often feel
lightheaded, both fearful and dizzy. For a moment they
can imagine themselves falling headlong. At the
same time, a part of them is tempted. Lead
your targets as close to the edge as
possible, then pull them
back. No thrill
without
fear.
Reversal
P
eople who have recently experienced a lot of pain or a loss will flee if
you try to inflict more on them. They have enough in their lives al-
ready. Far better to surround these types with pleasure—that will put them
under your spell. The technique of inflicting pain works best on those who
have it easy, who have power and few problems. People with comfortable
lives may also feel a gnawing sense of guilt, as if they had gotten away with
something. They may not consciously know it, but secretly they long for
some punishment, a good mental thrashing, something that will bring
them back down to earth.
Also, remember to not use the pleasure-through-pain tactic too early
on. Some of the greatest seducers in history—Byron, Jiang Qing (Madame
Mao), Picasso—had a sadistic streak, an ability to inflict mental torture. If
their victims had known in advance what they were getting themselves
into, they would have run for the hills. In truth, most of these seducers
lured their targets into their webs by appearing to be paragons of sweetness
and affection. Even Byron seemed like an angel when he first met a
woman, so that she tended to doubt his devilish reputation—a seductive
doubt, for it allowed her to think of herself as the only one who really
understood him. His cruelty would come out later on, but by then it would
be too late. The victim's emotions were engaged, and his harshness would
only intensify her feelings.
In the beginning, then, wear the mask of a lamb, making pleasure and
attentiveness your bait. First get under their skin, then lead them on a wild
ride.
Phase Four
Moving In for the Kill
First you worked on their mind—the mental seduction. Then you
confused and stirred them up—the emotional seduction. Now the
time has come for hand-to-hand combat—the physical seduction.
At this point, your victims are weak and ripe with desire: by show-.
ing a little coldness or uninterest, you will spark panic—they will
come after you with impatience and erotic energy (21: Give them
space to fall—the pursuer is pursued). To bring them to a boil, you
need to put their minds to sleep and heat up their senses. It is best
to lure them into lust by sending certain loaded signals that will get
under their skin and spread sexual desire like a poison (22: Use
physical lures). The moment to strike and move in for the kill is
when your victim is brimming with desire, but not consciously ex-
pecting the climax to come (23: Master the art of the bold move).
Once the seduction is over, there is the danger that disenchant-
ment will set in and ruin all your hard work (24: Beware the
aftereffects). If you are after a relationship, then you must con-
stantly re-seduce the victim, creating tension and releasing it. If
your victim is to be sacrificed, then it must be done swiftly and
cleanly, leaving you free (physically and psychologically) to move
on to the next victim. 
Then the game begins all over.
If your targets become too used to you as the ag-
gressor, they will give less of their own energy, and the
tension will slacken. You need to wake them up, turn the
tables. Once they are under your spell, take a step back and
they will start to come after you. Begin with a touch of aloof-
ness, an unexpected nonappearance, a hint that you are grow-
ing bored. Stir the pot by seeming interested in someone else.
Make none of this explicit; let them only sense it and their
imagination will do the rest, creating the doubt you desire.
Soon they will want to possess you physically, and re-
straint will go out the window. The goal is to have them
fall into your arms of their own will. Create the
illusion that the seducer is being seduced.
Give Them Space to Fall—
The Pursuer Is Pursued
Seductive Gravity
I
n the early 1840s, the center of attention in the French art world was a
young woman named Apollonie Sabatier. She was so much the natural
beauty that sculptors and painters vied to immortalize her in their works,
and she was also charming, easy to talk to, and seductively self-sufficient—
men were drawn to her. Her Paris apartment became a gathering spot for
writers and artists, and soon Madame Sabatier—as she came to be known,
although she was not married—was hosting one of the most important lit-
erary salons in France. Writers such as Gustave Flaubert, the elder Alexan-
dre Dumas, and Theophile Gautier were among her regular guests.
Near the end of 1852, when she was thirty, Madame Sabatier received
an anonymous letter. The writer confessed that he loved her deeply. Wor-
ried that she would find his sentiments ridiculous, he would not reveal his
name; yet he had to let her know that he adored her. Sabatier was used to
such attentions—one man after another had fallen in love with her—but
this letter was different: in this man she seemed to have inspired a quasi-
religious ardor. The letter, written in a disguised handwriting, contained a
poem dedicated to her; titled "To One Who Is Too Gay," it began by prais-
ing her beauty, yet ended with the lines
And so, one night, I'd like to sneak,
When darkness tolls the hour of pleasure,
A craven thief, toward the treasure
Which is your person, plump and sleek. . . .
And, most vertiginous delight!
Into those lips, so freshly striking
And daily lovelier to my liking—
Infuse the venom of my spite.
Mixed in with her admirer's adoration, clearly, was a strange kind of lust,
with a touch of cruelty to it. The poem both intrigued and disturbed
her—and she had no idea who had written it.
A few weeks later another letter arrived. As before, the writer en-
veloped Sabatier in cultlike worship, mixing the physical and the spiritual.
And as before, there was a poem, "All in One," in which he wrote,
Omissions, 
denials,
deflections, deceptions,
diversions, 
and humility—
all aimed at provoking this
second state, the secret of
true seduction. Vulgar
seduction might proceed by
persistence, but true seduc-
tion proceeds by absence. .
. . It is like fencing: one
needs a field for the feint.
Throughout this period,
the seducer [Johannes], far
from seeking to close in on
her, seeks to maintain his
distance by various ploys:
he does not speak directly
to her but only to her aunt,
and then about trivial or
stupid subjects; he neutral-
izes everything by irony
and feigned 
pedanticism;
he fails to respond to any
feminine or erotic move-
ment, and even finds her a
sitcom suitor to disenchant
and deceive her, to the
point where she herself
takes the initiative and
breaks off her engagement,
thus completing the
seduction and creating the
ideal situation for her total
abandon.
—JEAN BAUDRILLARD,
SEDUCTION, 
TRANSLATED 
BY
BRIAN SINGER
385
386 
• 
The Art of Seduction
No single beauty is the best,
Since she is all one flower divine
O mystic metamorphosis!
My senses into one sense flow—
Her voice makes perfume when she speaks,
Her breath is music faint and low!
Clearly the author was haunted by Sabatier's presence, and thought of her
constantly—but now she began to be haunted by him, thinking of him
night and day, and wondering who he was. His subsequent letters only
deepened the spell. It was flattering to hear that he was enchanted by more
than her beauty, yet also flattering to know that he was not immune to her
physical charms.
One day an idea occurred to Madame Sabatier as to who the writer
might be: a young poet who had frequented her salon for several years,
Charles Baudelaire. He seemed shy, in fact had hardly spoken to her, but
she had read some of his poetry, and although the poems in the letters were
more polished, the style was similar. At her apartment Baudelaire would al-
ways sit politely in a corner, but now that she thought of it, he would smile
at her strangely, nervously. It was the look of a young man in love. Now
when he visited she watched him carefully, and the more she watched, the
surer she was that he was the writer, but she never confirmed her intuition,
because she did not want to confront him—he might be shy, but he was a
man, and at some point he would have to come to her. And she felt certain
that he would. Then, suddenly the letters stopped coming—and Madame
Sabatier could not understand why, since the last one had been even more
adoring than all of the others before.
Several years went by, in which she often thought of her anonymous
admirer's letters, but they were never renewed. In 1857, however, Baude-
laire published a book of poetry, The Flowers of Evil, and Madame Sabatier
recognized several of the verses—they were the ones he had written for
her. Now they were out in the open for everyone to see. A little while later
the poet sent her a gift: a specially bound copy of the book, and a letter,
this time signed with his name. Yes, he wrote, he was the anonymous
writer—would she forgive him for being so mysterious in the past?
Furthermore, his feelings for her were as strong as ever: "You didn't think
for a moment that I could have forgotten you? . . . You to me are more
than a cherished image conjured up in dream, you're my superstition . . .
my constant companion, my secret! Farewell, dear Madame. I kiss your
hands with profound devotion."
This letter had a stronger effect on Madame Sabatier than the others
had. Perhaps it was his childlike sincerity, and the fact that he had finally
written to her directly; perhaps it was that he loved her but asked nothing
of her, unlike all the other men she knew who at some point had always
turned out to want something. Whatever it was, she had an uncontrollable
desire to see him. The next day she invited him to her apartment, alone.
The rumor spread
everywhere. It was even
told to the queen
[Guinevere], who was
seated at dinner. She
nearly killed herself when
she heard the perfidious
rumor of Lancelot's death.
She thought it was true
and was so greatly
perturbed that she was
scarcely able to speak. . . .
She arose at once from the
table, and was able to give
vent to her grief without
being noticed or overheard.
She was so crazed with the
thought of killing herself
that she repeatedly grabbed
at her throat. Yet first she
confessed in conscience,
repented and asked God's
pardon; she accused herself
of having sinned against
the one she knew had
always been hers, and who
would still be, were he
alive. . . . She counted all
of the unkindnesses and
recalled each individual
unkindness; she noted
every one, and repeated
often: 
"Oh misery! What
was I thinking, when my
lover came before me and I
did not deign to welcome
him, nor even care to
listen! Was I not a fool to
refuse to speak or even look
at him? A fool? No, so
help me God, I was cruel
and deceitful! . . . 7 believe
that it was I alone who
struck him that mortal
blow. When he came
happily before me expecting
me to receive him joyfully
and I shunned him and
would never even look at
him, was this not a mortal
blow? At that moment,
when I refused to speak, I
believe I severed both his
heart and his life. Those
two blows killed him, I
think, and not any hired
killers. • "Ah God! Will I
be forgiven this murder, this
sin? Never! All the rivers
Give Them Space to Fall—The Pursuer Is Pursued • 
387
Baudelaire appeared at the appointed hour. He sat nervously in his seat,
gazing at her with his large eyes, saying little, and what he did say was for-
mal and polite. He seemed aloof. After he left a kind of panic seized
Madame Sabatier, and the next day she wrote him a first letter of her own:
"Today I'm more calm, and I can feel more clearly the impression of our
Tuesday evening together. I can tell you, without the danger of your think-
ing I'm exaggerating, that I'm the happiest woman on the face of the earth,
that I've never felt more truly that I love you, and that I've never seen you
look more beautiful, more adorable, my divine friend!"
Madame Sabatier had never before written such a letter; she had always
been the one who was pursued. Now she had lost her usual self-possession.
And it only got worse: Baudelaire did not answer right away. When she saw
him next, he was colder than before. She had the feeling there was some-
one else, that his old mistress, Jeanne Duval, had suddenly reappeared in his
life and was pulling him away from her. One night she turned aggressive,
embracing him, trying to kiss him, but he did not respond, and quickly
found an excuse to leave. Why was he suddenly inaccessible? She began to
flood him with letters, begging him to come to her. Unable to sleep, she
would wait all night for him to show up. She had never experienced such
desperation. Somehow she had to seduce him, possess him, have him all
to herself. She tried everything—letters, coquetry, all kinds of promises—
until he finally wrote that he was no longer in love with her and that was
that.
Interpretation. Baudelaire was an intellectual seducer. He wanted to over-
whelm Madame Sabatier with words, dominate her thoughts, make her fall
in love with him. Physically, he knew, he could not compete with her
many other admirers—he was shy, awkward, not particularly handsome. So
he resorted to his one strength, poetry. Haunting her with anonymous let-
ters gave him a perverse thrill. He had to know she would realize, eventu-
ally, that he was her correspondent—no one else wrote like him—but he
wanted her to figure this out on her own. He stopped writing to her be-
cause he had become interested in someone else, but he knew she would be
thinking of him, wondering, perhaps waiting for him. And when he pub-
lished his book, he decided to write to her again, this time directly, stirring
up the old venom he had injected in her. When they were alone, he could
see she was waiting for him to do something, to take hold of her, but he
was not that kind of seducer. Besides, it gave him pleasure to hold himself
back, to sense his power over a woman whom so many desired. By the time
she turned physical and aggressive, the seduction was over for him. He had
made her fall in love; that was enough.
The devastating effect of Baudelaire's push-and-pull on Madame
Sabatier teaches us a great lesson in seduction. First, it is always best to keep
at some distance from your targets. You do not have to go as far as remain-
ing anonymous, but you do not want to be seen too often, or to be seen as
and the seas will dry up
first! Oh, misery! How it
would have brought me
comfort and healing if I
had held him in my arms
once before he died. How?
Yes, quite naked next to
him, in order to enjoy him
fully. . . . " • . . . When
they came within six or
seven leagues of the castle
where King Bademagu was
staying, news that was
pleasing came to him about
Lancelot—news 
that he
was glad to hear; Lancelot
was alive and was
returning, hale and hearty.
He behaved most properly
in going to inform the
queen. "Good sir," she
told him, "I believe it,
since you have told me.
But were he dead, I assure
you that I could never
again be happy."
• . . . Now Lancelot had
his every wish: the queen
willingly sought his
company and affection as
he held her in his arms and
she held him in hers. Her
love-play seemed so gentle
and good to him, both her
kisses and caresses, that in
truth the two of them felt a
joy and wonder of which
has never been heard or
known. But I shall let it
remain a secret for ever,
since it should not be
written of: the most
delightful and choicest
pleasure is that which is
hinted at, but never told.
—CHRÉTIEN DE TROYES,
ARTHURIAN 
ROMANCES,
TRANSLATED BY WILLIAM W.
KIBLER
He was sometimes so
intellectual that I felt
myself annihilated as a
woman; at other times
he was so wild and
passionate, so desiring,
that I almost trembled
388 
• 
The 
Art of Seduction
intrusive. If you are always in their face, always the aggressor, they will be-
come used to being passive, and the tension in your seduction will flag. Use
letters to make them think about you all the time, to feed their imagina-
tion. Cultivate mystery—stop them from figuring you out. Baudelaire's let-
ters were delightfully ambiguous, mixing the physical and the spiritual,
teasing Sabatier with their multiplicity of possible interpretations.
Then, at the point when they are ripe with desire and interest, when
perhaps they are expecting you to make a move—as Madame Sabatier ex-
pected that day in her apartment—take a step back. You are unexpectedly
distant, friendly but no more than that—certainly not sexual. Let this sink
in for a day or two. Your withdrawal will trigger anxiety; the only way to
relieve this anxiety is to pursue and possess you. Step back now and you
make your targets fall into your arms like ripe fruit, blind to the force of
gravity that is drawing them to you. The more they participate, the more
their willpower is engaged, the deeper the erotic effect. You have chal-
lenged them to use their own seductive powers on you, and when they re-
spond, the tables will turn and they will pursue you with desperate energy.
/ retreat and thereby teach her to be victorious as she pur-
sues me. I continually fall back, and in this backward
movement I teach her to know through me all the powers of
erotic love, its turbulent thoughts, its passion, what longing
is, and hope, and impatient expectancy.
—SØREN 
KIERKEGAARD
Keys to Seduction
S
ince humans are naturally obstinate and willful creatures, and prone to
suspicions of people's motives, it is only natural, in the course of any se-
duction, that in some ways your target will resist you. Seductions, then, are
rarely easy or without setbacks. But once your victims overcome some of
their doubts, and begin to fall under your spell, they will reach a point
where they start to let go. They may sense that you are leading them along,
but they are enjoying it. No one likes things to be complicated and diffi-
cult, and your target will expect the conclusion to come quickly. That is
the point, however, where you must train yourself to hold back. Deliver
the pleasurable climax they are so greedily awaiting, succumb to the natural
tendency to bring the seduction to a rapid end, and you will have missed an
opportunity to ratchet up the tension, to make the affair more heated. After
all, you don't want a passive little victim to toy with; you want the seduced
to engage their will in all its force, to become active participants in the se-
duction. You want them to pursue you, hopelessly ensnaring themselves in
your web in the process. The only way to accomplish this is to take a step
back and make them anxious.
You have strategically retreated before (see chapter 12), but this is dif-
before him. At times I was
like a stranger to him; at
times he surrendered
completely. Then when I
threw my arms around
him, everything changed,
and I embraced a cloud.
—CORDELIA DESCRIBING
JOHANNES, IN SØREN
KIERKEGAARD, 
THE 
SEDUCER'S
DIARY, TRANSLATED BY HOWARD
V. HONG AND EDNA V. HONG
It is true that we could not
love if there were not some
memory in us—to the
greatest extent an
unconscious memory—that
we were once loved. But
neither could we love if this
feeling of being loved had
not at some time suffered
doubt; if we had always
been sure of it. In other
words, love would not be
possible without having
been loved and then having
missed the certainty of
being loved. . . . • The
need to be loved is not
elementary. This need is
certainly acquired by
experience in later
childhood. It would be
better to say: by many
experiences or by a
repetition of similar ones. I
believe that these
experiences are of a
negative kind. The child
becomes aware that he is
not loved or that his
mother's love is not
unconditional. The baby
learns that his mother can
be dissatisfied with him,
that she can withdraw her
affection if he does not
behave as she wishes, that
she can be angry or cross. I
believe that this experience
arouses feelings of anxiety
in the infant. The
possibility of losing his
mother's love certainly
strikes the child with a
force which can no more be
Give Them Space to Fall—The Pursuer Is Pursued • 389
ferent. The target is falling for you now, and your retreat will lead to pan-
icky thoughts: you are losing interest, it is somehow my fault, perhaps it is
something I have done. Rather than think you are rejecting them on your
own, your targets will want to make this interpretation, since if the cause of
the problem is something they have done, they have the power to win you
back by changing their behavior. If you are simply rejecting them, on the
other hand, they have no control. People always want to preserve hope.
Now they will come to you, turn aggressive, thinking that will do the trick.
They will raise the erotic temperature. Understand: a person's willpower is
directly linked to their libido, their erotic desire. When your victims are
passively waiting for you, their erotic level is low. When they turn pursuer,
getting involved in the process, brimming with tension and anxiety, the
temperature is raised. So raise it as high as you can.
When you withdraw, make it subtle; you are instilling unease. Your
coldness or distance should dawn on your targets when they are alone, in
the form of a poisonous doubt creeping into their mind. Their paranoia
will become self-generating. Your subtle step back will make them want to
possess you, so they will willingly advance into your arms without being
pushed. This is different from the strategy in chapter 20, in which you are
inflicting deep wounds, creating a pattern of pain and pleasure. There the
goal is to make your victims weak and dependent, here it is to make them
active and aggressive. Which strategy you prefer to use (the two cannot be
combined) depends on what you want and the proclivities of your victim.
In Søren Kierkegaard's The Seducer's Diary, Johannes aims to seduce the
young and beautiful Cordelia. He begins by being rather intellectual with
her, and slowly intriguing her. Then he sends her letters that are romantic
and seductive. Now her fascination blossoms into love. Although in person
he remains a little distant, she senses in him great depths and is certain that
he loves her. Then one day, while they're talking, Cordelia has a strange
sensation: something about him is different. He seems more interested in
ideas than in her. Over the next few days, this doubt gets stronger—the let-
ters are a little less romantic, something is missing. Feeling anxious, she
slowly turns aggressive, becomes the pursuer instead of the pursued. The
seduction is now much more exciting, at least for Johannes.
Johannes's step back is subtle; he merely gives Cordelia the impression
that his interest is a little less romantic than the day before. He returns to
being the intellectual. This stirs the worrisome thought that her natural
charms and beauty no longer have as much effect on him. She must try
harder, provoke him sexually, prove to herself that she has some power over
him. She is now brimming with erotic desire, brought to that point by Jo-
hannes's subtle withdrawal of affection.
Each gender has its own seductive lures, which come naturally to them.
When you seem interested in someone but do not respond sexually, it is
disturbing, and presents a challenge: they will find a way to seduce you. To
produce this effect, first reveal an interest in your targets, through letters or
subtle insinuation. But when you are in their presence, assume a kind of
coped with than an
earthquake. . . . • The
child who experiences his
mother's dissatisfaction and
apparent 
withdrawal of
affection reacts to this
menace at first with fear. He
tries to regain what seems
lost by expressing hostility
and aggressiveness. . . .
The change of its character
comes about only after
failure; when the child
realizes that the effort is a
failure. 
And now
something very strange
takes place, something
which is foreign to our
conscious thinking but
which is very near to the
infantile way. Instead of
grasping the object directly
and taking possession of it
in an aggressive way, the
child identifies with the
object as it was before. The
child does the same that
the mother did to him in
that happy time which has
passed. The process is very
illuminating because it
shapes the pattern of love
in general. The little boy
thus demonstrates in his
own behavior what he
wants his mother to do to
him, how she should
behave to him. He
announces this wish by
displaying his tenderness
and affection toward his
mother who gave these
before to him. It is an
attempt to overcome the
despair and sense of loss in
taking over the role of the
mother. The boy tries to
demonstrate what he
wishes by doing it himself:
look, I would like you to
act thus toward me, to be
thus tender and loving to
me. Of course this attitude
is not the result of
consideration or reasoned
planning but an emotional
process by identification, a
natural exchange of roles
with the unconscious aim
390 
• The Art of Seduction
sexless neutrality. Be friendly, even warm, but no more. You are pushing
them into arming themselves with the seductive charms that are natural to
their sex—exactly what you want.
In the latter stages of the seduction, let your targets feel that you are be-
coming interested in another person—this is another form of taking a step
back. When Napoleon Bonaparte first met the young widow Josephine de
Beauharnais in 1795, he was excited by her exotic beauty and the looks she
gave him. He began to attend her weekly soirees and, to his delight, she
would ignore the other men and remain at his side, listening to him so at-
tentively. He found himself falling in love with Josephine, and had every
reason to believe she felt the same.
Then, at one soiree, she was friendly and attentive, as usual—except
that she was equally friendly to another man there, a former aristocrat, like
Josephine, the kind of man that Napoleon could never compete with when
it came to manners and wit. Doubts and jealousies began to stir within. As
a military man, he knew the value of going on the offensive, and after a few
weeks of a swift and aggressive campaign he had her all to himself, eventu-
ally marrying her. Of course Josephine, a clever seductress, had set it all up.
She did not say she was interested in another man, but his mere presence
at her house, a look here and there, subtle gestures, made it seem that way.
There is no more powerful way to hint that you are losing your desire. Make
your interest in another too obvious, though, and it could backfire. This is
not the situation in which you want to seem cruel; doubt and anxiety
are the effects you are after. Make your possible interest in another barely
perceptible to the naked eye.
Once someone has fallen for you, any physical absence will create un-
ease. You are literally creating space. The Russian seductress Lou Andreas-
Salomé had an intense presence; when a man was with her, he felt her eyes
boring into him, and often became entranced with her coquettish ways and
spirit. But then, almost invariably, something would come up—she would
have to leave town for a while, or would be too busy to see him. It was
during her absences that men fell hopelessly in love with her, and vowed to
be more aggressive next time they were with her. Your absences at this
latter point of the seduction should seem at least somewhat justified. You
are insinuating not a blatant brush-off but a slight doubt: perhaps you
could have found some reason to stay, perhaps you are losing interest, per-
haps there is someone else. In your absence, their appreciation of you will
grow. They will forget your faults, forgive your sins. The moment you re-
turn, they will chase after you as you desire. It will be as if you had come
back from the dead.
According to the psychologist Theodor Reik, we learn to love only
through rejection. As infants, we are showered with love by our mother—
we know nothing else. But when we get a little older, we begin to sense
that her love is not unconditional. If we do not behave, if we do not please
her, she can withdraw it. The idea that she will withdraw her affection fills
us with anxiety, and, at first, with anger—we will show her, we will throw
of seducing the mother into
fulfilling his wish. He
demonstrates by his own
actions how he wants to be
loved. It is a primitive
presentation 
through
reversal, an example of
how to do the thing which
he wishes done by her. In
this presentation lives the
memory of the attentions,
tendernesses, and
endearments once received
from the mother or
loving persons.
—THEODOR REIK,
OF LOVE AND 
LUST
Give Them Space to Fall—The Pursuer Is Pursued • 391
a tantrum. But that never works, and we slowly realize that the only way to
keep her from rejecting us again is to imitate her—to be as loving, kind,
and affectionate as she is. This will bond her to us in the deepest way. The
pattern is ingrained in us for the rest of our lives: by experiencing a rejec-
tion or a coldness, we learn to court and pursue, to love.
Re-create this primal pattern in your seduction. First, shower your tar-
gets with affection. They will not be sure where this is coming from, but it
is a delightful feeling, and they will never want to lose it. When it does go
away, in your strategic step back, they will have moments of anxiety and
anger, perhaps throwing a tantrum, and then the same childlike reaction:
the only way to win you back, to have you for sure, will be to reverse the
pattern, to imitate you, to be the affectionate, giving one. It is the terror of
rejection that turns the tables.
This pattern will often repeat itself naturally in an affair or relationship.
One person goes cold, the other pursues, then goes cold in turn, making
the first person the pursuer, and on and on. As a seducer, do not leave this
to chance. Make it happen. You are teaching the other person to become a
seducer, just as the mother in her own way taught the child to return her
love by turning her back. For your own sake learn to relish this reversal of
roles. Do not merely play at being the pursued, but enjoy it, give in to it.
The pleasure of being pursued by your victim can often surpass the thrill of
the hunt.
Symbol: The
Pomegranate. Carefully cultivated and
tended, the pomegranate begins to ripen. Do not
gather it too early or force it off the stem—it will be hard and
bitter. Let the fruit grow heavy and full of juice, then stand back—
it will fall on its own. That is when its pulp is most delicious.
392 
• 
The 
Art of Seduction
Reversal
T
here are moments when creating space and absence will blow up in
your face. An absence at a critical moment in the seduction can make
the target lose interest in you. It also leaves too much to chance—while you
are away, they could find another person, who will distract their thoughts
from you. Cleopatra easily seduced Mark Antony, but after their first en-
counters, he returned to Rome. Cleopatra was mysterious and alluring, but
if she let too much time pass, he would forget her charms. So she let go of
her usual coquetry and came after him when he was on one of his military
campaigns. She knew that once he saw her, he would fall under her spell
again and pursue her.
Use absence only when you are sure of the target's affection, and never
let it go on too long. It is most effective later in the seduction. Also, never
create too much space—don't write too rarely, don't act too cold, don't
show too much interest in someone else. That is the strategy of mixing
pleasure with pain, detailed in chapter 20, and will create a dependent vic-
tim, or will even make him or her give up completely. Some people, too,
are inveterately passive: they are waiting for you to make the bold move,
and if you don't, they will think you are weak. The pleasure to be had from
such a victim is less than the pleasure you will get from someone more ac-
tive. But if you are involved with such a type, do what you need to if you
are to have your way, then end the affair and move on.
Use Physical Lures
Targets with active minds
are dangerous: if they see through your
manipulations, 
they 
may 
suddenly 
develop
doubts. Put their minds gently to rest, and waken
their dormant senses, by combining a nondefen-
sive attitude with a charged sexual presence.
While your cool, nonchalant air is calming
their minds and lowering their inhibitions,
your glances, voice, and bearing—oozing sex
and desire—are getting under their skin, agi-
tating their senses and raising their temperature.
Never force the physical; instead infect your targets
with heat, lure them into lust. Lead them into the
moment—an 
intensified present in which mo-
rality, judgment, and concern for the fu-
ture all melt away and the body
succumbs to pleasure.
Raising the Temperature
I
n 1889, the top New York theatrical manager Ernest Jurgens visited
France on one of his many scouting trips. Jurgens was known for his
honesty, a rare commodity in the shady entertainment world, and for
his ability to find unusual acts. He had to spend the night in Marseilles, and
while wandering along the quay of the old harbor, he heard excited catcalls
issuing from a working-class cabaret, and decided to go in. A twenty-one-
year-old Spanish dancer named Caroline Otero was performing, and the
minute Jurgens laid eyes on her he was a changed man. Her appearance was
startling—five foot ten, fiery dark eyes, black waist-length hair, her body
corseted into a perfect hourglass figure. But it was the way she danced that
made his heart pound—her whole body alive, writhing like an animal in
heat, as she performed a fandango. Her dancing was hardly professional, but
she enjoyed herself so much and was so unrestrained that none of that mat-
tered. Jurgens also could not help but notice the men in the cabaret watch-
ing her, their mouths agape.
After the show, Jurgens went backstage to introduce himself. Otero's
eyes came alive as he spoke of his job and of New York. He felt a heat, a
twitching, in his body as she looked him up and down. Her voice was deep
and raspy, the tongue constantly in play as she rolled her Rs. Closing the
door, Otero ignored the knocks and pleas of the admirers dying to speak to
her. She said that her way of dancing was natural—her mother was a gypsy,
Soon she asked Jurgens to be her escort that evening, and as he helped her
with her coat, she leaned back toward him slightly, as if she had lost her
balance. As they walked around the city, her arm in his, she would occa-
sionally whisper in his ear. Jurgens felt his usual reserve melt away. He held
her tighter. He was a family man, had never considered cheating on his
wife, but without thinking, he brought Otero back to his hotel room. She
began to take off some of her clothes—coat, gloves, hat—a perfectly nor-
mal thing to do, but the way she did it made him lose all restraint. The nor-
mally timid Jurgens went on the attack.
The next morning Jurgens signed Otero to a lucrative contract—a great
risk, considering that she was an amateur at best. He brought her to Paris
and assigned a top theatrical coach to her. Hurrying back to New York, he
fed the newspapers with reports of this mysterious Spanish beauty poised to
conquer the city. Soon rival papers were claiming she was an Andalusian
countess, an escaped harem girl, the widow of a sheik, on and on. He
The year was 1907 and
La Belle [Otero], by then,
had been an international
figure for over a dozen
years. The story was told
by M. Maurice Chevalier.
• "I was a young star
about to make my first
appearance at the Folies.
Otero had been the
headliner there for several
weeks and although I
knew who she was I had
never seen her before on
stage or off • "I was
scurrying along, head bent,
thinking of something or
other, when I looked up.
There was La Belle, in the
company of another
woman, walking in my
direction. Otero was then
nearly forty and I was not
yet out of my teens but—
ah!—she 
was so beautiful!
• "She was tall, dark-
haired, with a magnificent
body, like the bodies of the
women of those days, not
like the lightweight ones of
today." • Chevalier smiled.
• "Of course I like modern
women, too, but there was
something of a fatal charm
about Otero. We three
stood there for a moment or
two, not saying a word, I
staring at La Belle, not so
young as she once was and
maybe not so beautiful, but
395
396 
• The Art of Seduction
made frequent trips to Paris to be with her, forgetting about his family, lav-
ishing money and gifts on her.
Otero's New York debut, in October of 1890, was an astounding suc-
cess. "Otero dances with abandon," read an article in The New York Times.
"Her lithe and supple body looks like that of a serpent writhing in quick,
graceful curves." In a few short weeks she became the toast of New York
society, performing at private parties late into the night. The tycoon Wil-
liam Vanderbilt courted her with expensive jewels and evenings on his
yacht. Other millionaires vied for her attention. Meanwhile Jurgens was
dipping into the company till to pay for presents for her—he would do
anything to keep her, a task in which he was facing heavy competition. A
few months later, after his embezzling became public, he was a ruined man.
He eventually committed suicide.
Otero went back to France, to Paris, and over the next few years rose to
become the most infamous courtesan of the Belle Epoque. Word spread
quickly: a night with La Belle Otero (as she was now known) was more ef-
fective than all the aphrodisiacs in the world. She had a temper, and was de-
manding, but that was to be expected. Prince Albert of Monaco, a man
who had been plagued by doubts of his virility, felt like an insatiable tiger
after a night with Otero. She became his mistress. Other royalty followed—
Prince Albert of Wales (later King Edward VII), the Shah of Persia, Grand
Duke Nicholas of Russia. Less wealthy men emptied their bank accounts,
and Jurgens was only the first of many whom Otero drove to suicide.
During World War I, a twenty-nine-year-old American soldier named
Frederick, stationed in France, won $37,000 in a four-day crap game. On
his next leave he went to Nice and checked himself into the finest hotel.
On his first night in the hotel restaurant, he recognized Otero sitting alone
at a table. He had seen her perform in Paris ten years before, and had be-
come obsessed with her. She was now close to fifty, but was more alluring
than ever. He greased some palms and was able to sit at her table. He could
hardly talk: the way her eyes bored into him, a simple readjustment in her
chair, her body brushing up against him as she got up, the way she managed
to walk in front of him and display herself. Later, strolling along a boule-
vard, they passed a jewelry store. He went inside, and moments later found
himself plopping down $31,000 for a diamond necklace. For three nights
La Belle Otero was his. Never in his life had he felt so masculine and im-
petuous. Years later, he still believed it was well worth the price he had
paid.
Interpretation. Although La Belle Otero was beautiful, hundreds of
women were more so, or were more charming and talented. But Otero was
constantly on fire. Men could read it in her eyes, the way her body moved,
a dozen other signs. The heat that radiated out from her came from her
own inner desires: she was insatiably sexual. But she was also a practiced
and calculating courtesan, and knew how to put her sexuality to effect.
still quite a woman. •
"She looked right at me,
then turned to the lady she
was with—some friend, I
guess—and 
spoke to her in
English, which she thought
I didn't understand.
However, I did. •
" 'Who's 
the very
handsome young man?'
Otero asked. • "The other
one answered, 'He's
Chevalier.' • " 'He has
such beautiful eyes' ha
Belle said, looking straight
at me, right up and down.
• 
"Then she almost floored
me with her frankness. •
" 'I wonder if he'd like to
go to bed with me. I think
I'll ask him!' Only she
didn't say it so delicately.
She was much cruder and
more to the point. • "It
was at this moment I had
to make up my mind
rather quickly. La Belle
moved toward me. Instead
of introducing myself and
succumbing to the
consequences, I pretended I
didn't understand what
she'd said, uttered some
pleasantry in French and
moved away to my dressing
room. • "I could see La
Belle smile in an odd
fashion as I passed her;
like a sleek tigress watching
its dinner go away. For a
fleeting second I thought
she might turn around and
follow me. " • What would
Chevalier have done had
she pursued him? His
lower lip dropped into that
half pout which is the
Frenchman's 
exclusive
possession. 
Then he
grinned. • "I'd have
slowed down and let her
catch up."
—ARTHUR H . LEWIS,
LA 
BELLE 
OTERO
Use Physical Lures • 397
Onstage she made every man in the audience come alive, abandoning her-
self in dance. In person she was cooler, or slightly so. A man likes to feel
that a woman is enflamed not because she has an insatiable appetite but be-
cause of him; so Otero personalized her sexuality, using glances, a brushing
of skin, a more languorous tone of voice, a saucy comment, to suggest that
the man was heating her up. In her memoirs she revealed that Prince Albert
was a most inept lover. Yet he believed, along with many other men, that
with her he was Hercules himself. Her sexuality actually originated from
her, but she created the illusion that the man was the aggressor.
The key to luring the target into the final act of your seduction is not
to make it obvious, not to announce that you are ready (to pounce or be
pounced upon). Everything should be geared, not to the conscious mind,
but to the senses. You want your target to read cues not from your words or
actions but from your body. You must make your body glow with desire—
for the target. Your desire should be read in your eyes, in a trembling in
your voice, in your reaction when your bodies draw near.
You cannot train your body to act this way, but by choosing a victim
(see chapter 1) who has this effect on you, it will all flow naturally. During
the seduction, you will have had to hold yourself back, to intrigue and
frustrate the victim. You will have frustrated yourself in the process, and
will already be champing at the bit. Once you sense that the target has
fallen for you and cannot turn back, let those frustrated desires course
through your blood and warm you up. You do not need to touch your tar-
gets, or become physical. As La Belle Otero understood, sexual desire is
contagious. They will catch your heat and glow in return. Let them make
the first move. It will cover your tracks. The second and third moves are
yours.
Spell SEX with capital letters when you talk about Otero.
She exuded it.
—MAURICE CHEVALIER
Lowering Inhibitions
O
ne day in 1931, in a village in New Guinea, a young girl named Tu-
perselai heard some happy news: her father, Allaman, who had left
some months before to work on a tobacco plantation, had returned for a
visit. Tuperselai ran to greet him. Accompanying her father was a white
man, an unusual sight in these parts. He was a twenty-two-year-old Aus-
tralian from Tasmania, and he was the owner of the plantation. His name
was Errol Flynn.
Flynn smiled warmly at Tuperselai, seeming particularly interested in
her bare breasts. (As was the custom in New Guinea then, she wore only a
grass skirt.) He said in pidgin English how beautiful she was, and kept re-
peating her name, which he pronounced remarkably well. He did not say
You're anxiously expecting
me to escort you \ To
parties: here too solicit my
advice. \ Arrive late, when
the lamps are lit; make a
graceful entrance— \ Delay
enhances charm, delay's a
great bawd. \ Plain you
may be, but at night you'll
look fine to the tipsy: \
Soft lights and shadows
will mask your faults. \
Take your food with dainty
fingers: good table manners
matter: \ Don't besmear
your whole face with a
greasy paw. \ Don't cat
first at home, and nibble—
but equally, don't indulge
your \ Appetite to the full,
leave something in hand. \
If Paris saw Helen stuffing
herself to the eyeballs \
He'd detest her, he'd feel
her abduction had been \ A
stupid mistake. . . . \ Each
woman should know
herself, pick methods \ To
suit her body: one fashion .
won't do for all. \ Let the
girl with a pretty face lie
supine, let the lady \ Who
boasts a good back be
viewed \ From behind.
Milanion bore Atalanta's
legs on \ His shoulders:
nice legs should always be
used this way \ The petite
should ride a horse
(Andromache, 
Hector's
Theban \ Bride, was too
tall for these games: no
jockey she); \ If you 're
built like a fashion model,
with a willowy figure, \
Then kneel on the bed,
your neck \ A little arched;
the girl who has perfect legs
and bosom \ Should lie
sideways on, and make her
lover stand. \ Don't blush
to unbind your hair like
some ecstatic maenad \
And tumble long tresses
about \ Your uncurved
throat.
— O V I D , THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
398 
• 
The Art of Seduction
much else, mind you—he did not speak her language—so she said goodbye
and walked away with her father. But later that day she discovered, to her
dismay, that Mr. Flynn had taken a liking to her and had purchased her
from her father for two pigs, some English coins, and some seashell money.
The family was poor and the father liked the price. Tuperselai had a
boyfriend in the village whom she did not want to leave, but she did not
dare disobey her father, and she left with Mr. Flynn for the tobacco planta-
tion. On the other hand, she had no intention of being friendly with this
man, from whom she expected the worst kind of treatment.
In the first few days, Tuperselai missed her village terribly, and felt ner-
vous and out of sorts. But Mr. Flynn was polite, and talked in a soothing
voice. She began to relax, and since he kept his distance, she decided it was
safe to approach him. His white skin was tasty to the mosquitoes, so she be-
gan to wash him every night with scented bush herbs to keep them away.
Soon she had a thought: Mr. Flynn was lonely, and wanted a companion.
That was why he had bought her. At night he usually read; instead, she be-
gan to entertain him by singing and dancing. Sometimes he tried to com-
municate in words and gestures, struggling in pidgin. She had no idea what
he was trying to say, but he made her laugh. And one day she did under-
stand something: the word "swim." He was inviting her to go swimming
with him in the Laloki River. She was happy to go along, but the river was
full of crocodiles, so she brought along her spear just in case.
At the sight of the river, Mr. Flynn seemed to come alive—he tore off
his clothes and dove in. She followed and swam after him. He put his arms
around her and kissed her. They drifted downstream, and she clung to him.
She had forgotten about the crocodiles; she had also forgotten about her fa-
ther, her boyfriend, her village, and everything else there was to forget.
Around a bend of the river, he picked her up and carried her to a secluded
grove near the river's edge. It all happened rather suddenly, which was fine
with Tuperselai. From then on this was a daily ritual—the river, the
grove—until the time came when the tobacco plantation was no longer
doing so well, and Mr. Flynn left New Guinea.
One day some ten years later, a young girl named Blanca Rosa Welter
went to a party at the Ritz Hotel in Mexico City. As she wandered through
the bar, looking for her friends, a tall older man blocked her path and said
in a charming accent, "You must be Blanca Rosa." He did not have to in-
troduce himself—he was the famous Hollywood actor Errol Flynn. His
face was plastered on posters everywhere, and he was friends of the party's
hosts, the Davises, and had heard them praise the beauty of Blanca Rosa,
who was turning eighteen the following day. He led her to a table in the
corner. His manner was graceful and confident, and listening to him talk,
she forgot about her friends. He spoke of her beauty, repeated her name,
said he could make her a star. Before she knew what was happening, he had
invited her to join him in Acapulco, where he was vacationing. The
Davises, their mutual friends, could come along as chaperones. That would
be wonderful, she said, but her mother would never agree. Don't worry
"How do you attract a
man," the Paris
correspondent of the
Stockholm 
Aftonbladet
asked La Belle on July 3,
1910. • "Make yourself
as feminine as possible;
dress so that the most
interesting portions of your
anatomy are emphasized;
and subtly allow the
gentleman to know you are
willing to yield at the
proper time. . . ." • "The
way to hold a man" Otero
revealed a little later to a
staff writer from 
the
Johannesburg 
M o r n i n g
Journal, "is to keep acting
as though every time you
meet him you are overcome
with fresh 
enthusiasm 
and,
with barely restrained
eagerness, you await his
impetuosity."
—ARTHUR H . LEWIS,
LA 
BELLE 
OTERO
"I missed the mental
stimulation when I was
younger," he answered.
"But from the time I began
to have women, shall we
say, on the assembly-line
basis, I discovered that the
only thing you need, want,
or should have is the
absolutely physical. 
Simply
the physical. No mind at
all. A woman's mind will
get in the way." • "Really?"
• "For me . . . I am
speaking of myself. I don't
speak for 
male 
humankind.
I am speaking for what I've
discovered or what I need:
the body, the face, the
physical motion, the voice,
the femaleness, 
the female
presence . . . totally that,
nothing else. That's the
best. There's no
possessiveness in that."
• I watched him closely. •
"I'm serious," he said.
"That's my view and
feeling. Just the elementary
Use Physical Lures 
• 399
about that, Flynn replied; and the following day he showed up at their
house with a beautiful gift for Blanca, a ring with her birthstone. Melting
under his charming smile, Blanca's mother agreed to his plan. Later that
day, Blanca found herself on a plane to Acapulco. It was all like a dream.
The Davises, under orders from Blanca's mother, tried not to let her
out of their sight, so Flynn put her on a raft and they drifted out into the
ocean, far from the shore. His flattering words filled her ears, and she let
him hold her hand and kiss her cheek. That night they danced together,
and when the evening was over he escorted her to her room and serenaded
her with a song as they finally parted. It was the end of a perfect day. In the
middle of the night, she woke up to hear him calling her name, from her
hotel-room balcony. How had he gotten there? His room was a floor
above; he must have somehow jumped or swung down, a dangerous ma-
neuver. She approached, not at all afraid, but curious. He pulled her gently
into his arms and kissed her. Her body convulsed; overwhelmed with new
sensations, totally at sea, she began to cry—out of happiness, she said.
Flynn comforted her with a kiss and returned to his room above, in the
same inexplicable way he had arrived. Now Blanca was hopelessly in love
with him and would do anything he asked of her. A few weeks later, in
fact, she followed him to Hollywood, where she went on to become a suc-
cessful actress, known as Linda Christian.
In 1942, an eighteen-year-old girl named Nora Eddington had a tem-
porary job selling cigarettes at the Los Angeles County courthouse. The
place was a madhouse at the time, teeming with tabloid journalists: two
young girls had charged Errol Flynn with rape. Nora of course noticed
Flynn, a tall, dashing man who occasionally bought cigarettes from her, but
her thoughts were with her boyfriend, a young Marine. A few weeks later
Flynn was acquitted, the trial ended, and the place settled down. A man she
had met during the trial called her up one day: he was Flynn's right-hand
man, and on Flynn's behalf, he wanted to invite her up to the actor's house
on Mulholland Drive. Nora had no interest in Flynn, and in fact she was a
little afraid of him, but a girlfriend who was dying to meet him talked her
into going and bringing her along. What did she have to lose? Nora agreed
to go. On the day, Flynn's friend showed up and drove them to a splendid
house on top of a hill. When they arrived, Flynn was standing shirtless by
his swimming pool. He came to greet her and her girlfriend, moving so
gracefully—like a lithe cat—and his manner so relaxed, she felt her jitters
melt away. He gave them a tour of the house, which was full of artifacts of
his various sea voyages. He talked so delightfully of his love of adventure
that she wished she had had adventures of her own. He was the perfect
gentleman, and even let her talk about her boyfriend without the slightest
sign of jealousy.
Nora had a visit from her boyfriend the next day. Somehow he didn't
seem so interesting anymore; they had a fight and broke up on the spot.
That night, Flynn took her out on the town, to the famous Mocambo
nightclub. He was drinking and joking, and she fell into the spirit, and hap-
physical female. Nothing
more than that. When you
get hold of that—hang on
to it, for a short while."
—EARL CONRAD,
ERROL 
FLYNN: A 
MEMOIR
A sweet disorder in the
dress \ Kindles in clothes a
wantonness: \ A lawn
about the shoulders thrown
\ Into a fine distraction: \
An erring lace, which here
and there \ Enthralls the
crimson stomacher: \ A cuff
neglectful, and thereby \
Ribbands to flow
confusedly: \ A winning
wave (deserving note) \ In
the tempestuous petticoat: \
A careless shoestring, in
whose tie \ I see a wild
civility: \ Do more bewitch
me, than when art \ Is too
precise in every part.
—ROBERT HERRICK,"DELIGHT
IN DISORDER," QUOTED IN
PETER WASHINGTON, ED.,
EROTIC 
POEMS
Satni, the son of Pharaoh
Usimares, saw a very
beautiful woman on the
plain-stones of the temple.
He called his page, and
said, "Go and tell her that
I, Pharaoh's son, shall give
her ten pieces of gold to
spend an hour with me."
"I am a Pure One, I am
not a low person," answers
the Lady Thubuit. "If you
wish to have your pleasure
with me, you will come to
my house at Bubastis.
Everything will be ready
there." Satni went to
Bubastis by boat. "By my
life," 
said Thubuit, "come
upstairs with me." On the
upper floor, sanded with
dust of lapis lazuli and
turquoise, Satni saw
several beds covered with
royal linen and many gold
400 
• 
The Art of Seduction
pily let him touch her hand. Then suddenly she panicked. "I'm a Catholic
and a virgin," she blurted out, "and some day I'm going to walk down the
church aisle wearing a veil—and if you think you're going to sleep with
me, you're mistaken." Totally calm and unruffled, Flynn said she had noth-
ing to fear. He simply liked being with her. She relaxed, and politely asked
him to put his hand back. Over the next few weeks she saw him almost
every day. She became his secretary. Soon she was spending weekend nights
as his house guest. He took her on skiing and boating trips. He remained
the perfect gentleman, but when he looked at her or touched her hand, she
felt overwhelmed by an exhilarating sensation, a tingling on her skin that
she compared to stepping into a cold-needle shower on a red-hot day. Soon
she was going to church less often, drifting away from the life she had
known. Although outwardly nothing had changed between them, inwardly
all semblance of resistance to him had melted away. One night, after a party,
she succumbed. She and Flynn eventually engaged in a stormy marriage
that lasted seven years.
Interpretation. The women who became involved with Errol Flynn (and
by the end of his life they numbered in the thousands) had every reason in
the world to feel suspicious of him: he was real life's closest thing to a Don
Juan. (In fact he had played the legendary seducer in a film.) He was con-
stantly surrounded by women, who knew that no involvement with him
could last. And then there were the rumors of his temper, and his love of
danger and adventure. No woman had greater reason to resist him than
Nora Eddington: when she met him he stood accused of rape; she was in-
volved with another man; she was a God-fearing Catholic. Yet she fell un-
der his spell, just like all the rest. Some seducers—D. H. Lawrence for
instance—operate mostly on the mind, creating fascination, stirring up the
need to possess them. Flynn operated on the body. His cool, nonchalant
manner infected women, lowering their resistance. This happened almost
the minute they met him, like a drug: he was at ease around women, grace-
ful and confident. They fell into this spirit, drifting along on a current he
created, leaving the world and its heaviness behind—it was only you and
him. Then—perhaps that same day, perhaps a few weeks later—there would
come a touch of his hand, a certain look, that would make them feel a tin-
gling, a vibration, a dangerously physical excitement. They would betray
that moment in their eyes, a blush, a nervous laugh, and he would swoop in
for the kill. No one moved faster than Errol Flynn.
The greatest obstacle to the physical part of the seduction is the target's
education, the degree to which he or she has been civilized and socialized.
Such education conspires to constrain the body, dull the senses, fill the
mind with doubts and worries. Flynn had the ability to return a woman to
a more natural state, in which desire, pleasure, and sex had nothing negative
attached to them. He lured women into adventure not with arguments but
bowls on a table. "Please
take your meal," said
Thubuit. "That is not
what I have come to do,"
answered Satni, while the
slaves put aromatic wood
on the fire and scattered
scent about. "Do that for
which we have come here,"
Satni repeated. 
"First you
will make out a deed for
my 
maintenance," 
Thubuit
replied, 
"and you will
establish a dowry for me of
all the things and goods
which belong to you, in
writing." 
Satni acquiesced,
saying, 
"Bring me the
scribe of the school." •
When 
he had done what
she asked, 
Thubuit rose
and dressed herself in a
robe of fine linen, through
which Satni could see all
her limbs. His passion
increased, but she said, "If
it is true that you desire to
have your pleasure of me,
you will make your
children subscribe to my
deed, that they may not
seek a quarrel with my
children." 
Satni sent for
his children. "If it is true
that you desire to have
your pleasure of me, you
will cause your children to
be killed, that they may
not seek a quarrel with my
children." 
Satni consented
again: "Let any crime be
done to them which your
heart desires." "Go into
that room," said Thubuit;
and while the little corpses
were thrown out to the
stray dogs and cats, Satni
at last lay on a bed of ivory
and ebony, that his love
might be rewarded, and
Thubuit lay down at his
side. 
"Then," the texts
modestly say, 
"magic and
the god Amen did much."
• The charms of the
Divine Women must have
been irresistible, if even
"the wisest men" were
Use Physical Lures • 
401
with an open, unrestrained attitude that infected their minds. Understand:
it all starts from you. When the time comes to make the seduction physical,
train yourself to let go of your own inhibitions, your doubts, your linger-
ing feelings of guilt and anxiety. Your confidence and ease will have more
power to intoxicate the victim than all the alcohol you could apply. Exhibit
a lightness of spirit—nothing bothers you, nothing daunts you, you take
nothing personally. You are inviting your targets to shed the burdens of
civilization, to follow your lead and drift. Do not talk of work, duty, mar-
riage, the past or future. Plenty of other people will do that. Instead, offer
the rare thrill of losing oneself in the moment, where the senses come dive
and the mind is left behind.
When he kissed me, it evoked a response I had never
known or imagined before, a giddying of all my senses. It
was instinctive joy, against which no warning, reasoning
monitor within me availed. It was new and irresistible and
finally overpowering. Seduction—the word implies being
led—and so gently, so tenderly.
—LINDA CHRISTIAN
Keys to Seduction
N
ow more than ever, our minds are in a state of constant distraction,
barraged with endless information, pulled in every direction. Many
of us recognize the problem: articles are written, studies are completed, but
they simply become more information to digest. It is almost impossible to
turn off an overactive mind; the attempt simply triggers more thoughts—
an inescapable hall of mirrors. Perhaps we turn to alcohol, to drugs, to
physical activity—anything to help us slow the mind, be more present in
the moment. Our discontent presents the crafty seducer with infinite op-
portunity. The waters around you are teeming with people seeking some
kind of release from mental overstimulation. The lure of unencumbered
physical pleasure will make them take your bait, but as you prowl the wa-
ters, understand: the only way to relax a distracted mind is to make it focus
on one thing. A hypnotist asks the patient to focus on a watch swinging
back and forth. Once the patient focuses, the mind relaxes, the senses
awaken, the body becomes prone to all kinds of novel sensations and sug-
gestions. As a seducer, you are a hypnotist, and what you are making the
target focus on is you.
Throughout the seductive process you have been filling the target's
mind. Letters, mementos, shared experiences keep you constantly present,
even when you are not there. Now, as you shift to the physical part of
the seduction, you must see your targets more often. Your attention must
become more intense. Errol Flynn was a master at this game. When he
ready to do anything in
their desire to abandon
themselves, even for a few
moments, to their trained
embraces.
—G. 
R.TABOUIS, 
THE PRIVATE
LIFE 
OF TUTANKHAMEN,
T R A N S L A T E D B Y M . R . D O B I E
CÉLIE: What is the
moment, and how do you
define it? Because I must
say in all good honesty that
I do not understand you. •
THE DUKE: A certain
disposition of the senses, as
unexpected as it is
involuntary, which a
woman can conceal, but
which, should it be
perceived or sensed by
someone who might profit
from it, puts her in the
greatest danger of being a
little more willing than she
thought she ever should or
could be.
—CRÉBILLON FILS, LE HASARD
AU COIN DU FEU, QUOTED IN
MICHEL FEHER, ED., THE
LIBERTINE 
READER
When, on an autumn
evening, with closed eyes, \
I breathe the warm dark
fragrance of your breast, \
Before me blissful shores
unfold, caressed \ By
dazzling fires from 
blue
unchanging skies. \ 
And
there, upon that calm and
drowsing isle, \ Grow
luscious fruits amid
fantastic trees: \ There,
men are lithe: the women
of those seas \ Amaze one
with their gaze that knows
no guile. \ Your perfume
wafts me thither like a
wind: \ I see a harbor
thronged with masts and
sails \ Still weary from the
tumult of the gales; \ And
402 
• 
The Art of Seduction
honied in on a victim, he dropped everything else. The woman was made
to feel that everything came second to her—his career, his friends, every-
thing. Then he would take her on a little trip, preferably with water
around. Slowly the rest of the world would fade into the background, and
Flynn would take center stage. The more your targets think of you, the less
they are distracted by thoughts of work and duty. When the mind focuses
on one thing it relaxes, and when the mind relaxes, all the little paranoid
thoughts that we are prone to—do you really like me, am I intelligent or
beautiful enough, what does the future hold—vanish from the surface. Re-
member: it all starts with you. Be undistracted, present in the moment, and
the target will follow suit. The intense gaze of the hypnotist creates a simi-
lar reaction in the patient.
Once the target's overactive mind starts to slow down, their senses will
come to life, and your physical lures will have double their power. Now a
heated glance will give them flush. You will have a tendency to employ
physical lures that work primarily on the eyes, the sense we most rely on in
our culture. Physical appearances are critical, but you are after a general agi-
tation of the senses. La Belle Otero made sure men noticed her breasts, her
figure, her perfume, her walk; no part was allowed to predominate. The
senses are interconnected—an appeal to smell will trigger touch, an appeal
to touch will trigger vision: casual or "accidental" contact—better a brush-
ing of the skin than something more forceful right now—will create a
jolt and activate the eyes. Subtly modulate the voice, make it slower and
deeper. Living senses will crowd out rational thought.
In the eighteenth-century libertine novel The Wayward Head and Heart,
by Crébillon fils, Madame de Lursay is trying to seduce a younger man,
Meilcour. Her weapons are several. One night at a party she is hosting, she
wears a revealing gown; her hair is slightly tousled; she throws him heated
glances; her voice trembles a bit. When they are alone, she innocently gets
him to sit close to her, and talks more slowly; at one point she starts to cry.
Meilcour has many reasons to resist her; he has fallen in love with a girl his
own age, and he has heard rumors about Madame de Lursay that should
make him distrust her. But the clothes, the looks, the perfume, the voice,
the closeness of her body, the tears—it all begins to overwhelm him. "An
indescribable agitation stirred my senses." Meilcour succumbs.
The French libertines of the eighteenth century called this "the mo-
ment." The seducer leads the victim to a point where he or she reveals in-
voluntary signs of physical excitation that can be read in various symptoms.
Once those signs are detected, the seducer must work quickly, applying
pressure on the target to get lost in the moment—the past, the future, all
moral scruples vanishing in air. Once your victims lose themselves in the
moment, it is all over—their mind, their conscience, no longer holds them
back. The body gives in to pleasure. Madame de Lursay lures Meilcour into
the moment by creating a generalized disorder of the senses, rendering him
incapable of thinking straight.
In leading your victims into the moment, remember a few things. First,
with the sailors' song that
drifts to me \ Are mingled
odors of the tamarind, \
— A n d all my soul is scent
and melody.
—CHARLES BAUDELAIRE,
"EXOTIC PERFUME,"
THE FLOWERS 
OF 
EVIL,
TRANSLATED BY ALAN CONDER
Use Physical Lures • 
403
a disordered look (Madame de Lursay's tousled hair, her ruffled dress) has
more effect on the senses than a neat appearance. It suggests the bedroom.
Second, be alert to the signs of physical excitation. Blushing, trembling of
the voice, tears, unusually forceful laughter, relaxing movements of the
body (any kind of involuntary mirroring, their gestures imitating yours), a
revealing slip of the tongue—these are signs that the victim is slipping into
the moment and pressure is to be applied.
In 1934, a Chinese football player named Li met a young actress named
Lan Ping in Shanghai. He began to see her often at his matches, cheering
him on. They would meet at public affairs, and he would notice her glanc-
ing at him with her "strange, yearning eyes," then looking away. One eve-
ning he found her seated next to him at a reception. Her leg brushed up
against his. They chatted, and she asked him to see a movie with her at a
nearby cinema. Once they were there, her head found its way onto his
shoulder; she whispered into his ear, something about the film. Later they
strolled the streets, and she put her arm around his waist. She brought him
to a restaurant where they drank some wine. Li took her to his hotel room,
and there he found himself overwhelmed by caresses and sweet words. She
gave him no room to retreat, no time to cool down. Three years later Lan
Ping—soon to be renamed Jiang Qing—played a similar game on Mao Ze-
dong. She was to become Mao's wife—the infamous Madame Mao, leader
of the Gang of Four.
Seduction, like warfare, is often a game of distance and closeness. At
first you track your enemy from a distance. Your main weapons are your
eyes, and a mysterious manner. Byron had his famous underlook, Madame
Mao her yearning eyes. The key is to make the look short and to the point,
then look away, like a rapier glancing the flesh. Make your eyes reveal de-
sire, and keep the rest of the face still. (A smile will spoil the effect.) Once
the victim is heated up, you quickly bridge the distance, turning to hand-
to-hand combat in which you give the enemy no room to withdraw, no
time to think or to consider the position in which you have placed him or
her. To take the element of fear out of this, use flattery, make the target feel
more masculine or feminine, praise their charms. It is their fault that you
have become so physical and aggressive. There is no greater physical lure
than to make the target feel alluring. Remember: the girdle of Aphrodite,
which gave her untold seductive powers, included that of sweet flattery.
Shared physical activity is always an excellent lure. The Russian mystic
Rasputin would begin his seductions with a spiritual lure—the promise of
a shared religious experience. But then his eyes would bore into his target
at a party, and inevitably he would lead her in a dance, which would be-
come more and more suggestive as he moved closer to her. Hundreds of
women succumbed to this technique. For Flynn it was swimming or sail-
ing. In such physical activity, the mind turns off and the body operates ac-
cording to its own laws. The target's body will follow your lead, will mirror
your moves, as far as you want it to go.
In the moment, all moral considerations fade away, and the body re-
404 
• 
The Art of Seduction
turns to a state of innocence. You can partly create that feeling through a
devil-may-care attitude. You do not worry about the world, or what peo-
ple think of you; you do not judge your target in any way. Part of Flynn's
appeal was his total acceptance of a woman. He was not interested in a par-
ticular body type, a woman's race, her level of education, her political be-
liefs. He was in love with her feminine presence. He was luring her into an
adventure, free of society's strictures and moral judgments. With him she
could act out a fantasy—which, for many, was the chance to be aggressive
or transgressive, to experience danger. So empty yourself of your tendency
to moralize and judge. You have lured your targets into a momentary world
of pleasure—soft and accommodating, all rules and taboos thrown out the
window.
Symbol: The Raft. Floating out to sea, drifting with the current. Soon the shore-
line disappears from sight, and the two of you are alone. The water invites you to
forget all cares and worries, to submerge yourself. Without anchor or direction, cut
off from the past, you give in to the drifting sensation and slowly lose all restraint.
Reversal
S
ome people panic when they sense they are falling into the moment.
Often, using spiritual lures will help disguise the increasingly physical
nature of the seduction. That is how the lesbian seductress Natalie Barney
operated. In her heyday, at the turn of the twentieth century, lesbian sex
was immensely transgressive, and women new to it often felt a sense of
shame or dirtiness. Barney led them into the physical, but so enveloped it
in poetry and mysticism that they relaxed and felt purified by the experi-
ence. Today, few people feel repulsed by their sexual nature, but many are
uncomfortable with their bodies. A purely physical approach will frighten
and disturb them. Instead, make it seem a spiritual, mystical union, and
they will take less notice of your physical manipulations.
Master the Art of the Bold Move
A moment has
arrived: your victim clearly desires you,
but is not ready to admit it openly, let alone act on it.
This is the time to throw aside chivalry, kindness, and coquetry
and to overwhelm with a bold move. Don't give the victim time to consider
the consequences; create conflict, stir up tension, so that the bold move comes as
a great release. Showing hesitation or awkwardness means you are thinking of
yourself, as opposed to being overwhelmed by the victim's charms. Never hold
back or meet the target halfway, under the belief that you are being
correct and considerate; you must be seductive now, not
political. One person must go on the of-
fensive, and it is you.
The Perfect Climax
T
hrough a campaign of deception—the misleading appearance of a
transformation into goodness—the rake Valmont laid siege to the vir-
tuous young Présidente de Tourvel until the day came when, disturbed by
his confession of love for her, she insisted he leave the château where both
of them were staying as guests. He complied. From Paris, however, he
flooded her with letters, describing his love for her in the most intense
terms; she begged him to stop, and once again he complied. Then, several
weeks later, he paid a surprise visit to the château. In his company Tourvel
was flushed and jumpy, and kept her eyes averted—all signs of his effect on
her. Again she asked him to leave. What have you to fear? he replied, I have
always done what you have asked, I have never forced myself on you. He
kept his distance and she slowly relaxed. She no longer left the room when
he entered, and she could look at him directly. When he offered to accom-
pany her on a walk, she did not refuse. They were friends, she said. She
even put her arm in his as they strolled, a friendly gesture.
One rainy day they could not take their usual walk. He met her in the
hallway as she was entering her room; for the first time, she invited him in.
She seemed relaxed, and Valmont sat near her on a sofa. He talked of his
love for her. She gave the faintest protest. He took her hand; she left it
there and leaned against his arm. Her voice trembled. She looked at him,
and he felt his heart flutter—it was a tender, loving look. She started to
speak—"Well! yes, I . . ."—then suddenly collapsed into his arms, crying. It
was a moment of weakness, yet Valmont held himself back. Her crying be-
came convulsive; she begged him to help her, to leave the room before
something terrible happened. He did so. The following morning he awoke
to some surprising news: in the middle of the night, claiming she was feel-
ing ill, Tourvel had suddenly left the château and returned home.
Valmont did not follow her to Paris. Instead he began staying up late,
and using no powder to hide the peaked looks that soon ensued. He went
to the chapel every day, and dragged himself despondently around the
château. He knew that his hostess would be writing to the Présidente, who
would hear of his sad state. Next he wrote to a church father in Paris, and
asked him to pass along a message to Tourvel: he was ready to change his
life for good. He wanted one last meeting, to say goodbye and to return the
letters she had written him over the last few months. The father arranged a
It afforded, moreover,
another advantage: that of
observing at my leisure her
charming face, 
more
beautiful than ever, as it
proffered the powerful
enticement of tears. My
blood was on fire, and I
was so little in control of
myself that I was tempted
to make the most of the
occasion. • How weak we
must be, how strong the
dominion 
of circumstance,
if even I, without a
thought for my plans, could
risk losing all the charm of
a prolonged struggle, all the
fascination of a laboriously
administered defeat, by
concluding a premature
victory; if distracted by the
most puerile of desires, I
could be willing that the
conqueror of Madame de
Tourvel should take
nothing for the fruit of his
labors but the tasteless
distinction of having added
one more name to the roll.
Ah, let her surrender, but
let her fight! Let her be too
weak to prevail but strong
enough to resist; let her
savor the knowledge of her
weakness at her leisure, but
let her be unwilling to
admit defeat. Leave the
407
408 
• 
The Art of Seduction
meeting, and so, one late afternoon in Paris, Valmont found himself once
again alone with Tourvel, in a room in her house.
The Présidente was clearly on edge; she could not look him in the eye.
They exchanged pleasantries, but then Valmont turned harsh: she had
treated him cruelly, had apparently been determined to make him unhappy.
Well, this was the end, they were separating for good, since that was how
she wanted it. Tourvel argued back: she was a married woman, she had no
choice. Valmont softened his tone and apologized: he was unused to having
such strong feelings, he said, and could not control himself. Still, he would
never trouble her again. Then he laid on a table the letters he had come to
return.
Tourvel came closer: the sight of her letters, and the memory of all the
turmoil they represented, affected her powerfully. She had thought his de-
cision to renounce his libertine way of life was voluntary, she said—with a
touch of bitterness in her voice, as if she resented being abandoned. No, it
was not voluntary, he replied, it was because she had spurned him. Then
he suddenly stepped closer and took her in his arms. She did not resist.
"Adorable woman!" he cried. "You have no idea of the love you inspire.
You will never know how I have worshipped you, how much dearer my
feelings have been to me than life! . . . May [your days] be blessed with all
of the happiness of which you have deprived me!" Then he let her go and
turned to leave.
Tourvel suddenly snapped. "You shall listen to me. I insist," she said,
and grabbed his arm. He turned around and they embraced. This time he
waited no longer, picking her up, carrying her to an ottoman, overwhelm-
ing her with kisses and sweet words of the happiness he now felt. Before
this sudden flood of caresses, all her resistance gave way. "From this mo-
ment on I am yours," she said, "and you will hear neither refusals nor re-
grets from my lips." Tourvel was true to her word, and Valmont's suspicions
were to prove correct: the pleasures he won from her were far greater than
with any other woman he had seduced.
Interpretation. Valmont—a character in Choderlos de Laclos's eighteenth-
century novel Dangerous Liaisons—can sense several things about the Prési-
dente at first glance. She is timid and nervous. Her husband almost
certainly treats her with respect—probably too much of it. Beneath her in-
terest in God, religion, and virtue is a passionate woman, vulnerable to the
lure of a romance and to the flattering attention of an ardent suitor. No
one, not even her husband, has given her this feeling, because they have all
been so daunted by her prudish exterior.
Valmont begins his seduction, then, by being indirect. He knows
Tourvel is secretly fascinated with his bad reputation. By acting as if he is
contemplating a change in his life, he can make her want to reform him—a
desire that is unconsciously a desire to love him. Once she has opened up
ever so slightly to his influence, he strikes at her vanity: she has never felt
humble poacher to kill the
stag where he has surprised
it in its hiding place;
the true hunter will
bring it to bay.
—VICOMTE DE VALMONT,
IN CHODERLOS DE LACLOS,
DANGEROUS 
LIAISONS,
TRANSLATED BY P.W.K. STONE,
IN MICHEL FEHER, ED.,
THE 
LIBERTINE 
READER
Don't you know that
however willing, 
however
eager we are to give
ourselves, we must
nevertheless have an
excuse? And is there any
more convenient than an
appearance of yielding to
force? As for me, I shall
admit that one thing that
most flatters me is a lively
and well-executed attack,
when everything happens
in quick but orderly
succession; which never
puts us in the painfully
embarrassing position of
having to cover up some
blunder of which, on the
contrary, we ought to be
taking advantage; which
keeps up an appearance of
taking by storm even that
which we are quite
prepared to surrender; and
adroitly flatters our two
favorite 
passions—the
pride of defense and the
pleasure of defeat.
—MARQUISE DE MERTEUIL IN
CHODERLOS DE LACLOS,
DANGEROUS 
LIAISONS,
TRANSLATED BY P.W.K. STONE
IN MICHEL FEHER, ED.,
THE 
LIBERTINE 
READER
What sensible man will
not intersperse his coaxing \
With kisses? Even if she
doesn't kiss back, \ Still
force on regardless! She
may struggle, cry
"Naughty!" \ Yet she
wants to be overcome. Just
Master the Art of the Bold Move • 
409
desired as a woman, and on some level cannot help but enjoy his love for
her. Of course she struggles and resists, but that is only a sign that her emo-
tions are engaged. (Indifference is the single most effective deterrent to
seduction.) By taking his time, by making no bold moves even when he has
the opportunity for them, he instills in her a false sense of security and
proves himself by being patient. On what he pretends is his last visit to her,
however, he can sense she is ready—weak, confused, more afraid of losing
the addictive feeling of being desired than of suffering the consequences of
adultery. He deliberately makes her emotional, dramatically displays her let-
ters, creates some tension by playing a game of push-and-pull, and when
she takes his arm, he knows it is the time to strike. Now he moves quickly,
allowing her no time for doubts or second thoughts. But his move seems to
arise out of love, not lust. After so much resistance and tension, what a
pleasure to finally surrender. The climax now comes as a great release.
Never underestimate the role of vanity in love and seduction. If you
seem impatient, champing at the bit for sex, you signal that it is all about
libido, and that it has little to do with the target's own charms. That is
why you must defer the climax. A lengthier courtship will feed the target's
vanity, and will make the effect of your bold move all the more powerful
and enduring. Wait too long, though—showing desire, but then proving
too timid to make your move—and you will stir up a different kind of inse-
curity: "You found me desirable, but you are not acting on your desires;
maybe you're not so interested." Doubts like these affront your target's
vanity (if you're not interested, maybe I'm not so interesting), and are fatal
in the latter stages of seduction; awkwardness and misunderstandings will
spring up everywhere. Once you read in your targets' gestures that they are
ready and open—a look in the eye, mirroring behavior, a strange nervous-
ness in your presence—you must go on the offensive, make them feel that
their charms have unhinged you and pushed you into the bold move. They
will then have the ultimate pleasure: physical surrender and a psychological
boost to their vanity.
The more timidity a lover shows with us the more it con-
cerns our pride to goad him on; the more respect he has for
our resistance, the more respect we demand of him. We
would willingly say to you men: "Ah, in pity's name do
not suppose us to be so very virtuous; you are forcing us to
have too much of it."
—NINON DE L'ENCLOS
Keys to Seduction
T
hink of seduction as a world you enter, a world that is separate and
distinct from the real world. The rules are different here; what works
in daily life can have the opposite effect in seduction. The real world fea-
take care \ Not to bruise
her tender lips with such
hard-snatched kisses, \
Don't give her a chance to
protest \ You're too rough.
Those who grab their
kisses, but not what
follows, \ Deserve to lose
all they've gained. How
short were you \ Of the
ultimate goal after all your
kissing? That was \
Gaucheness, not modesty,
I'm afraid . . .
— O V I D , THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
I have tested all manner of
pleasures, and known every
variety of joy; and I have
found that neither intimacy
with princes, nor wealth
acquired, nor finding after
lacking, nor returning after
long absence, nor security
after fear and repose in a
safe refuge—none of these
things so powerfully affects
the soul as union with the
beloved, especially if it
come after long denial and
continual banishment. 
For
then the flame of passion
waxes exceeding hot, and
the furnace of yearning
blazes up, and the fire of
eager hope rages ever more
fiercely.
— I B N HAZM, THE RING OF
THE DOVE: A TREATISE ON THE
ART AND PRACTICE 
OF ARAB
LOVE, TRANSLATED BY A. J.
ARBERRY
I knew once two great
lords, brothers, both of
them highly bred and
highly accomplished
gentlemen which did love
two ladies, but the one of
these was of much higher
quality and more account
than the other in all
respects. Now being entered
both into the chamber of
410 
• The Art of Seduction
tures a democratizing, leveling impulse, in which everything has to seem at
least something like equal. An overt imbalance of power, an overt desire for
power, will stir envy and resentment; we learn to be kind and polite, at least
on the surface. Even those who have power generally try to act humble and
modest—they do not want to offend. In seduction, on the other hand, you
can throw all of that out, revel in your dark side, inflict a little pain—in
some ways be more yourself. Your naturalness in this respect will prove se-
ductive in itself. The problem is that after years of living in the real world,
we lose the ability to be ourselves. We become timid, humble, overpolite.
Your task is to regain some of your childhood qualities, to root out all this
false humility. And the most important quality to recapture is boldness.
No one is born timid; timidity is a protection we develop. If we never
stick our necks out, if we never try, we will never have to suffer the conse-
quences of failure or success. If we are kind and unobtrusive, no one will
be offended—in fact we will seem saintly and likable. In truth, timid peo-
ple are often self-absorbed, obsessed with the way people see them, and not
at all saintly. And humility may have its social uses, but it is deadly in seduc-
tion. You need to be able to play the humble saint at times; it is a mask you
wear. But in seduction, take it off. Boldness is bracing, erotic, and ab-
solutely necessary to bring the seduction to its conclusion. Done right, it
tells your targets that they have made you lose your normal restraint, and
gives them license to do so as well. People are yearning to have a chance to
play out the repressed sides of their personality. At the final stage of a se-
duction, boldness eliminates any awkwardness or doubts. In a dance, two
people cannot lead. One takes over, sweeping the other along. Seduction is
not egalitarian; it is not a harmonic convergence. Holding back at the end
out of fear of offending, or thinking it correct to share the power, is a
recipe for disaster. This is an arena not for politics but for pleasure. It can be
by the man or woman, but a bold move is required. If you are so con-
cerned about the other person, console yourself with the thought that
the pleasure of the one who surrenders is often greater than that of the
aggressor.
As a young man, the actor Errol Flynn was uncontrollably bold. This
often got him into trouble; he became too aggressive around desirable
women. Then, while traveling through the Far East, he became interested
in the Asian practice of tantric sex, in which the male must train himself
not to ejaculate, preserving his potency and heightening both partners'
pleasure in the process. Flynn later applied this principle to his seductions as
well, teaching himself to restrain his natural boldness and delay the end of
the seduction as long as possible. So, while boldness can work wonders, un-
controllable boldness is not seductive but frightening; you need to be able
to turn it on and off at will, know when to use it. As in Tantrism, you can
create more pleasure by delaying the inevitable.
In the 1720s, the Duc de Richelieu developed an infatuation with a
certain duchess. The woman was exceptionally beautiful, and was desired
by one and all, but she was far too virtuous to take a lover, although she
this great lady, who for the
time being was keeping her
bed, each did withdraw
apart for to entertain his
mistress. The one did
converse with the high-born
dame with every possible
respect and humble saluta-
tion and kissing of hands,
with words of honor and
stately compliment, 
without
making ever an attempt to
come near and try to force
the place. The other brother,
without any ceremony of
words or fine phrases, did
take his fair one to a
recessed window, and
incontinently making free
with her (for he was very
strong), he did soon show
her 'twas not his way to
love à l'espagnole, with
eyes and tricks of face and
words, but in the genuine
fashion and proper mode
every true lover should
desire. Presently having
finished his task, he doth
quit the chamber; but as he
goes, saith to his brother,
loud enough for his lady to
hear the words: "Do you
as I have done, brother
mine; else you do naught at
all. Be you as brave and
hardy as you will else-
where, yet if you show not
your hardihood here and
now, you are disgraced; for
here is no place of cere-
mony and respect, but one
where you do see your lady
before you, which doth but
wait your attack." So with
this he did leave his brother,
which yet for that while did
refrain him and put it off to
another time. But for this
the lady did by no means
esteem him more highly,
whether it was she did put
it down to an overchilliness
in love, or a lack of courage,
or a defect of bodily vigor.
—SEIGNEUR DE BRANTÔME,
LIVES 
OF 
FAIR 
& GALLANT
LADIES, TRANSLATED BY A. R.
ALLINSON
Master the Art of the Bold Move 
• 
411
could be quite coquettish. Richelieu bided his time. He befriended her,
charming her with the wit that had made him the favorite of the ladies.
One night a group of such women, including the duchess, decided to play
a practical joke on him, in which he was to be forced naked out of his
room at the palace of Versailles. The joke worked to perfection, the ladies
all got to see him in his native glory, and had a good chuckle watching him
run away. There were many places Richelieu could have hidden; the place
he chose was the duchess's bedroom. Minutes later he watched her enter
and undress, and once the candles were extinguished, he crept into bed
with her. She protested, tried to scream. He covered her mouth with kisses,
and she eventually and happily relented. Richelieu had decided to make his
bold move then for several reasons. First, the duchess had come to like him,
and even to harbor a secret desire for him. She would never act upon it or
admit it, but he was certain it existed. Second, she had seen him naked, and
could not help but be impressed. Third, she would feel a touch of pity for
his predicament, and for the joke played on him. Richelieu, a consummate
seducer, would find no more perfect moment.
The bold move should come as a pleasant surprise, but not too much of
a surprise. Learn to read the signs that the target is falling for you. His or
her manner toward you will have changed—it will be more pliant, with
more words and gestures mirroring yours—yet there will still be a touch of
nervousness and uncertainty. Inwardly they have given in to you, but they
do not expect a bold move. This is the time to strike. If you wait too long,
to the point where they consciously desire and expect you to make a move,
it loses the piquancy of coming as a surprise. You want a degree of tension
and ambivalence, so that the move represents a great release. Their surren-
der will relieve tension like a long-awaited summer storm. Don't plan your
bold move in advance; it cannot seem calculated. Wait for the opportune
moment, as Richelieu did. Be attentive to favorable circumstances. This
will give you room to improvise and go with the moment, which will
heighten the impression you want to create of being suddenly over-
whelmed by desire. If you ever sense that the victim is expecting the bold
move, take a step back, lull them into a false sense of security, then strike.
Sometime in the fifteenth century, the writer Bandello relates, a young
Venetian widow had a sudden lust for a handsome nobleman. She had her
father invite him to their palace to discuss business, but during the meeting
the father had to leave, and she offered to give the young man a tour of the
place. His curiosity was piqued by her bedroom, which she described as the
most splendid room in the palace, but which she also passed by without let-
ting him enter. He begged to be shown the room, and she granted his wish.
He was spellbound: the velvets, the rare objets, the suggestive paintings, the
delicate white candles. A beguiling scent filled the room. The widow put
out all of the candles but one, then led the man to the bed, which had been
heated with a warming pan. He quickly succumbed to her caresses. Follow
the widow's example: your bold move should have a theatrical quality to it.
That will make it memorable, and make your aggressiveness seem pleasant,
A man should proceed to
enjoy any woman when
she gives him an
opportunity and makes her
own love manifest to him
by the following signs: she
calls out to a man without
first being addressed by
him; she shows herself to
him in secret places; she
speaks to him tremblingly
and inarticulately; her face
blooms with delight and
her fingers or toes perspire;
and sometimes she remains
with both hands placed on
his body as if she had been
surprised by something, or
as if overcome with fatigue.
• After a woman has
manifested her love to him
by outward signs, and by
the motions of her body,
the man should make every
possible attempt to conquer
her. There should be no
indecision or hesitancy: if
an opening is found the
man should make the most •
of it. 
The woman, indeed,
becomes disgusted with the
man if he is timid about
his chances and throws
them away. Boldness is the
rule, for everything is to be
gained, and nothing lost.
— T H E HINDU ART OF 
LOVE,
COLLECTED AND EDITED BY
EDWARD WINDSOR
412 
• 
The Art of'Seduction
part of the drama. The theatricality can come from the setting—an exotic
or sensual location. It can also come from your actions. The widow piqued
her victim's curiosity by creating the suspense about her bedroom. An ele-
ment of fear—someone might find you, say—will heighten the tension.
Remember: you are creating a moment that must stand out from the same-
ness of daily life.
Keeping your targets emotional will both weaken them and heighten
the drama of the moment. And the best way to keep them at an emotional
pitch is by infecting them with emotions of your own. When Valmont
wanted the Presidents to become calm, angry, or tender, he showed that
emotion first, and she mirrored it. People are very susceptible to the moods
of those around them; this is particularly acute at the latter stages of a se-
duction, when resistance is low and the target has fallen under your spell.
At the point of the bold move, learn to infect your target with whatever
emotional mood you require, as opposed to suggesting the mood with
words. You want access to the target's unconscious, which is best obtained
by infecting them with emotions, bypassing their conscious ability to resist.
It may seem expected for the male to make the bold move, but history
is full of successfully bold females. There are two main forms of feminine
boldness. In the first, more traditional form, the coquettish woman stirs
male desire, is completely in control, then at the last minute, after bringing
her victim to a boil, steps back and lets him make the bold move. She sets it
up, then signals with her eyes, her gestures, that she is ready for him. Cour-
tesans have used this method throughout history; it is how Cleopatra
worked on Antony, how Josephine seduced Napoleon, how La Belle Otero
amassed a fortune during the Belle Epoque. It lets the man maintain his
masculine illusions, although the woman is really the aggressor.
The second form of feminine boldness does not bother with such illu-
sions: the woman simply takes charge, initiates the first kiss, pounces on
her victim. This is how Marguerite de Valois, Lou Andreas-Salomé, and
Madame Mao operated, and many men find it not emasculating at all but
very exciting. It all depends on the insecurities and proclivities of the vic-
tim. This kind of feminine boldness has its allure because it is more rare
than the first kind, but then all boldness is somewhat rare. A bold move will
always stand out compared to the usual treatment afforded by the tepid hus-
band, the timid lover, the hesitant suitor. That is how you want it. If every-
one were bold, boldness would quickly lose its allure.
Master the Art of the Bold Move • 
413
Symbol: The Summer Storm. The hot days follow one another,
with no end in sight. The earth is parched and dry. Then there
comes a stillness in the air, thick and oppressive—the calm
before the storm. Suddenly gusts of wind arrive, and
flashes of lightning, exciting and frightening. Allow-
ing no time to react or run for shelter, the rain
comes, and brings with it a sense of
release. At last.
Reversal
I
f two people come together by mutual consent, that is not a seduction.
There is no reversal.
Beware the Aftereffects
Danger follows
in the aftermath of a successful se-
duction. After emotions have reached a pitch,
they often swing in the opposite direction—toward
lassitude, distrust, disappointment. Beware of the long,
drawn-out goodbye; insecure, the victim will cling and claw,
and both sides will suffer. If you are to part, make the sacrifice
swift and sudden. If necessary, deliberately break the spell you
have created. If you are to stay in a relationship, beware a flag-
ging of energy, a creeping familiarity that will spoil the
fantasy. If the game is to go on, a second seduction is
required. Never let the other person take you for
granted—use absence, create pain and con-
flict, to keep the seduced on ten-
terhooks.
Disenchantment
S
eduction is a kind of spell, an enchantment. When you seduce, you are
not quite your normal self; your presence is heightened, you are playing
more than one role, you are strategically concealing your tics and insecuri-
ties. You have deliberately created mystery and suspense to make the victim
experience a real-life drama. Under your spell, the seduced gets to feel
transported away from the world of work and responsibility.
You will keep this going for as long as you want or can, heightening the
tension, stirring the emotions, until the time finally comes to complete the
seduction. After that, disenchantment almost inevitably sets in. The release of
tension is followed by a letdown—of excitement, of energy—that can even
materialize as a kind of disgust directed at you by your victim, even though
what is happening is really a natural emotional course. It is as if a drug were
wearing off, allowing the target to see you as you are—and being disap-
pointed by the flaws that are inevitably there. On your side, you too have
probably tended to idealize your targets somewhat, and once your desire is
satisfied, you may see them as weak. (After all, they have given in to you.)
You too may feel disappointed. Even in the best of circumstances, you are
dealing now with the reality rather than the fantasy, and the flames will
slowly die down—unless you start up a second seduction.
You may think that if the victim is to be sacrificed, none of this mat-
ters. But sometimes your effort to break off the relationship will inadver-
tently revive the spell for the other person, causing him or her to cling to
you tenaciously. No, in either direction—sacrifice, or the integration of the
two of you into a couple—you must take disenchantment into account.
There is an art to the post-seduction as well.
Master the following tactics to avoid undesired aftereffects.
Fight against inertia. The sense that you are trying less hard is often
enough to disenchant your victims. Reflecting back on what you did dur-
ing the seduction, they will see you as manipulative: you wanted something
then, and so you worked at it, but now you are taking them for granted.
After the first seduction is over, then, show that it isn't really over—that
you want to keep proving yourself, focusing your attention on them, luring
them. That is often enough to keep them enchanted. Fight the tendency to
let things settle into comfort and routine. Stir the pot, even if that means a
In a word, woe to the
woman of too monotonous
a temperament; her
monotony satiates and
disgusts. She is always the
same statue, with her a
man is always right. She is
so good, so gentle, that she
takes away from people the
privilege of quarreling with
her, and this is often such a
great pleasure! Put in her
place a vivacious woman,
capricious, decided, to a
certain limit, however, and
things assume a different
aspect. The lover will find
in the same person the
pleasure of variety. Temper
is the salt, the quality
which prevents it front
becoming stale.
Restlessness, 
jealousy,
quarrels, 
making friends
again, spitefulness, all are
the food of love. Enchant-
ing variety? . . . Too
constant a peace is produc-
tive of a deadly ennui.
Uniformity kills love, for
as soon as the spirit of
method mingles in an affair
of the heart, the passion
disappears, languor super-
venes, weariness begins to
wear, and disgust ends the
chapter.
— N I N O N D E L ' E N C L O S ,
LIFE, 
LETTERS 
AND 
EPICUREAN
PHILOSOPHY 
OF 
NINON 
DE
L'ENCLOS
417
418 
• 
The Art of Seduction
return to inflicting pain and pulling back. Never rely on your physical
charms; even beauty loses its appeal with repeated exposure. Only strategy
and effort will fight off inertia.
Maintain mystery. Familiarity is the death of seduction. If the target
knows everything about you, the relationship gains a level of comfort but
loses the elements of fantasy and anxiety. Without anxiety and a touch of
fear, the erotic tension is dissolved. Remember: reality is not seductive.
Keep some dark corners in your character, flout expectations, use absences
to fragment the clinging, possessive pull that allows familiarity to creep in.
Maintain some mystery or be taken for granted. You will have only yourself
to blame for what follows.
Maintain lightness. Seduction is a game, not a matter of life and death.
There will be a tendency in the "post" phase to take things more seriously
and personally, and to whine about behavior that does not please you. Fight
this as much as possible, for it will create exactly the effect you do not want.
You cannot control the other person by nagging and complaining; it will
make them defensive, exacerbating the problem. You will have more con-
trol if you maintain the proper spirit. Your playfulness, the little ruses you
employ to please and delight them, your indulgence of their faults, will
make your victims compliant and easy to handle. Never try to change your
victims; instead, induce them to follow your lead.
Avoid the slow burnout. Often, one person becomes disenchanted but
lacks the courage to make the break. Instead, he or she withdraws inside. As
an absence, this psychological step back may inadvertently reignite the
other person's desire, and a frustrating cycle begins of pursuit and retreat.
Everything unravels, slowly. Once you feel disenchanted and know it is
over, end it quickly, without apology. That would only insult the other per-
son. A quick separation is often easier to get over—it is as if you had a
problem being faithful, as opposed to your feeling that the seduced was no
longer being desirable. Once you are truly disenchanted, there is no going
back, so don't hang on out of false pity. It is more compassionate to make a
clean break. If that seems inappropriate or too ugly, then deliberately disen-
chant the victim with anti-seductive behavior.
Examples of Sacrifice and Integration
1. In the 1770s, the handsome Chevalier de Belleroche began an affair
with an older woman, the Marquise de Merteuil. He saw a lot of her, but
soon she began to pick quarrels with him. Entranced by her unpredictable
Age cannot wither her, nor
custom stale \ Her infinite
variety: other women cloy \
The appetites they feed;
but she makes hungry \
Where most she satisfies.
—WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE,
ANTONY 
AND 
CLEOPATRA
Cry hurrah, and hurrah
again, for a splendid
triumph— 
\ The quarry I
sought has fallen into my
toils. . . . \ Why hurry,
young man? Your ship's
still in mid-passage, \ And
the harbor I seek is far
away \ Through my verses,
it's true, you may have
acquired a mistress, \ But
that's not enough. If my
art \ Caught her, my art
must keep her. To guard a
conquest's \As tricky as
making it. There was luck
in the chase, \ But this task
will call for skill. If ever I
needed support from \
Venus and Son, and
Erato—the 
Muse \ Erotic
by name—it's now, for my
too-ambitious project \ To
relate some techniques that
might restrain \ That fickle
young globetrotter,
Love. . . . \ To be loved
you must show yourself
lovable— 
\ Something
good looks alone \ Can
never achieve. You may be
handsome as Homer's
Nireus, \ Or young Hylas,
snatched by those bad \
Naiads; but all the same,
to avoid a surprise
desertion \And keep your
girl, it's best you have gifts
of mind \ In addition to
physical charms. 
Beauty's
fragile, the passing \ Years
diminish its substance, eat
it away. \ Violets and
bell-mouthed lilies do not
bloom for ever, \ Hard
thorns are all that's left of
the blown rose. \ So with
you, my handsome youth:
Beware the Aftereffects • 
419
moods, he worked hard to please her, showering her with attention and
tenderness. Eventually the quarreling stopped, and as the days went by, de
Belleroche felt confident that Merteuil loved him—until one day, when he
came to visit, and found that she was not at home. Her footman greeted
him at the door, and said he would take the chevalier to a secret house of
Merteuil's outside Paris. There the marquise was waiting for him, in a re-
newed mood of coquettishness: she acted as if this were their first tryst.
The chevalier had never seen her so ardent. He left at daybreak more in
love than ever, but a few days later they quarreled again. The marquise
seemed cold after that, and he saw her flirt with another man at a party.
He felt horribly jealous, but as before, his solution was to become more
attentive and loving. This, he thought, was the way to appease a difficult
woman.
Now Merteuil had to spend a few weeks at her country home to han-
dle some business there. She invited de Belleroche to join her for an ex-
tended stay, and he happily agreed, remembering the new life an earlier stay
there had brought to their affair. Once again she surprised him: her affec-
tion and desire to please him were rejuvenated. This time, though, he did
not have to leave the next morning. Days went by, and she refused to enter-
tain any guests. The world would not intrude on them. And this time there
was no coldness or quarreling, only good cheer and love. Yet now de Belle-
roche began to grow a little tired of the marquise. He thought of Paris and
the balls he was missing; a week later he cut short his stay on some business
pretext and hurried back to the city. Somehow the marquise did not seem
so charming anymore.
Interpretation. The Marquise de Merteuil, a character in Choderlos de La-
clos's novel Dangerous Liaisons, is a practiced seductress who never lets her
affairs drag on too long. De Belleroche is young and handsome but that is
all. As her interest in him wanes, she decides to bring him to the secret
house to try to inject some novelty into the affair. This works for a while,
but it isn't enough. The chevalier must be gotten rid of. She tries coldness,
anger (hoping to start a fight), even a show of interest in another man. All
this only intensifies his attachment. She can't just leave him—he might be-
come vengeful, or try even harder to win her back. The solution: she delib-
erately breaks the spell by overwhelming him with attention. Abandoning
the pattern of alternating warmth with coldness, she acts hopelessly in love.
Alone with her day after day, with no space to fantasize, he no longer sees
her as enchanting and breaks off the affair. This was her goal all along.
If a break with the victim is too messy or difficult (or you lack the
nerve), then do the next best thing: deliberately break the spell that ties him
or her to you. Aloofness or anger will only stir the other person s insecurity,
producing a clinging horror. Instead, try suffocating them with love and at-
tention: be clinging and possessive yourself, moon over the lover's every ac-
tion and character trait, create the sense that this monotonous affection will
soon wrinkles will furrow \
Your body; soon, too soon,
your hair turn gray. \ Then
build an enduring mind,
add that to your beauty: \
It alone will last till the
flames \ Consume you.
Keep your wits sharp,
explore the liberal \Arts,
win mastery over Greek \
As well as Latin. Ulysses
was eloquent, not
handsome— 
\ Yet he filled
sea-goddesses' hearts \
With aching passion. . . .
\ Nothing works on a
mood like tactful tolerance:
harshness \ Provokes
hatred, makes nasty rows. \
We detest the hawk and
the wolf, those natural
hunters, 
\ Always preying
on timid flocks; \ But the
gentle swallow goes safe
from man's snares, we
fashion \ Little turreted
houses for doves. \ Keep
clear of all quarrels, sharp-
tongued recriminations— \
Love's sensitive, needs to
be fed \ With gentle words.
Leave nagging to wives
and husbands, \ Let them,
if they want, think it a
natural law, \ A permanent
state of feud. 
Wives thrive
on wrangling, \ That's their
dowry. A mistress should
always hear \ What she
wants to be told. . . . \
Use tender blandishments,
language that caresses \
The ear, make her glad
you came.
— O V I D , T H E A R T O F L O V E ,
TRANSLATED BY PETER GREEN
In Paris the band played a
concert at the Palais
Chaleux. 
They played the
first half, and then there
was an hour interval—
intermission, we call it—
during which there was a
fabulous buffet on a great
long table laden with
delicious foods and cognac,
420 
• 
The Art of Seduction
go on forever. No more mystery, no more coquetry, no more retreats—-just
endless love. Few can endure such a threat. A few weeks of it and they will
be gone.
2. King Charles II of England was a devoted libertine. He kept a stable of
lovers: there was always a favorite mistress from the aristocracy, and count-
less other less important women. He craved variety. One evening in 1668,
the king spent an evening at the theater, where he conceived a sudden de-
sire for a young actress called Nell Gwyn. She was pretty and innocent
looking (only eighteen at the time), with a girlish glow in her cheeks, but
the lines she recited onstage were so impudent and saucy. Deeply excited,
the king decided he had to have her. After the performance he took her
out for a night of drinking and merriment, then led her to his royal bed.
Nell was the daughter of a fishmonger, and had begun by selling or-
anges in the theater. She rose to the status of actress by sleeping with writ-
ers and other theater men. She had no shame about this. (When a footman
of hers got into a fight with someone who said he worked for a whore, she
broke it up by saying, "I am a whore. Find something better to fight
about.") Nell's humor and sass amused the king greatly, but she was low-
born, and an actress, and he could hardly make her a favorite. After several
nights with "pretty, witty Nell," he returned to his principal mistress,
Louise Keroualle, a well-born Frenchwoman.
Keroualle was a clever seductress. She played hard to get, and made it
clear she would not give the king her virginity until he had promised her a
title. It was the kind of chase Charles enjoyed, and he made her the
Duchess of Portsmouth. But soon her greed and difficultness began to wear
on his nerves. To divert himself, he turned back to Nell. Whenever he vis-
ited her, he was royally entertained with food, drink, and her great good
humor. The king was bored or melancholy? She took him drinking or
gambling, or out to the country, where she taught him to fish. She always
had a pleasant surprise up her sleeve. What he loved most of all was her
wit, the way she mocked the pretentious Keroualle. The duchess had the
habit of going into mourning whenever a nobleman of another country
died, as if he were a relation. Nell, too, would show up at the palace on
these occasions dressed in black, and would sorrowfully say that she was
mourning for the "Cham of Tartary" or the "Boog of Oronooko"—grand
relatives of her own. To her face, she called the duchess "Squintabella" and
the "Weeping Willow," because of her simpering manners and melancholic
airs. Soon the king was spending more time with Nell than with the
duchess. By the time Keroualle fell out of favor, Nell had in essence be-
come the king's favorite, which she remained until his death, in 1685.
Interpretation. Nell Gwyn was ambitious. She wanted power and fame,
but in the seventeenth century the only way a woman could get those
champagne, 
wine and that
rarity in Paris . . . Scotch.
The people, aristocrats and
servants, some on their
hands and knees, were
busily searching for
something on the floor. A
duchess, who was one of
the hostesses, had lost one
of her larger diamonds. . . .
The duchess finally got
bored seeing people looking
all over the floor for the
ring. She looked around
haughtily, then took Duke
by the arm, saying, "It
doesn't mean anything. I
can always get diamonds,
but how often can I get a
man like Duke
Ellington?" 
• She
disappeared with Duke.
The band started the
second half by themselves,
and eventually 
Duke
smilingly reappeared to
finish the concert.
— D O N GEORGE, SWEET MAN:
THE 
REAL 
DUKE 
ELLINGTON
I do know, however, that
men become bigger-hearted
and better lovers once they
get the suspicion that their
mistresses care less about
them. 
When a man
believes himself to be the
one and only lover in a
woman's life, he'll whistle
and go his way. • / ought
to know; I have followed
this profession for the last
twenty years. If you want
me to, I will tell you what
happened to me a few years
ago. • At that time I had a
steady lover, a certain
Demophantos, a usurer
living near Poikile. He had
never given me more than
five drachmas and he
pretended to be my man.
But his love was only
superficial, Chrysis. He
never sighed, he never shed
tears for me and he never
spent the night waiting at
Beware the Aftereffects • 
421
things was through a man—and who better than the king? But to get in-
volved with Charles was a dangerous game. A man like him, easily bored
and in need of variety, would use her for a fling, then find someone else.
Nell's strategy for the problem was simple: she let the king have his
other girls, and never complained. Every time he saw her, though, she
made sure he was entertained and diverted. She filled his senses with plea-
sure, acting as if his position had nothing to do with her love for him. Vari-
ety in women could wear on the nerves, tiring a busy king. They all made
so many demands. If one woman could provide the same variety (and Nell,
as an actress, knew how to play different roles), she had a big advantage.
Nell never asked for money, so Charles plied her with wealth. She never
asked to be the favorite—how could she? She was a commoner—but he ele-
vated her to the position.
Many of your targets will be like kings and queens, particularly those
who are easily bored. Once the seduction is over they will not only have
trouble idealizing you, they may also turn to another man or woman whose
unfamiliarity seems exciting and poetic. Needing other people to divert
them, they often satisfy this need through variety. Do not play into the
hands of these bored royals by complaining, becoming self-pitying, or de-
manding privileges. That would only further their natural disenchantment
once the seduction is over. Instead, make them see that you are not the per-
son they thought you were. Make it a delightful game to play new roles, to
surprise them, to be an endless source of entertainment. It is almost impos-
sible to resist a person who provides pleasure with no strings attached.
When they are with you, keep the spirit light and playful. Play up the parts
of your character they find delightful, but never let them feel they know
you too well. In the end you will control the dynamic, and a haughty king
or queen will become your abject slave.
3. When the great jazz composer Duke Ellington came to town, he and his
band were always a big attraction, but especially so for the ladies of the area.
They came to hear his music, of course, but once there they were mesmer-
ized by "the Duke" himself. Onstage, Ellington was relaxed and elegant,
and seemed to be having such a good time. His face was very handsome,
and his bedroom eyes were infamous. (He slept very little, and his eyes had
permanent pouches under them.) After the performance, some woman
would inevitably invite him to her table, another would sneak into his
dressing room, yet another would approach him on his way out. Duke
made a point of being accessible, and when he kissed a woman's hand, his
eyes and hers would meet for a moment. Sometimes she would signal an
interest in him, and his glance in return would say he was more than ready.
Sometimes his eyes were the first to speak; few women could resist that
look, even the most happily married.
With the night's music still ringing in her ears, the woman would show
up at Ellington's hotel room. He would be dressed in a stylish suit—he
my door. One day he came
to see me, knocked at my
door, but I did not open it.
You see, I had the painter,
Callides, in my room;
Callides had given me ten
drachmas. 
Demophantos
swore and beat his fists on
the door and left cursing
me. Several days passed
without my sending for
him; Callides was still in
my house. 
Thereupon
Demophantos, who was
already quite excited, went
wild. He broke open my
door, wept, pulled me
about, threatened to kill
me, tore my tunic, and did
everything, in fact, that a
jealous man would do, and
finally presented me with
six thousand drachmas. In
consideration of this sum, I
was his for a period of
eight months. His wife
used to say that I had
bewitched him with some
powder. 
That bewitching
powder, to be sure, was
jealousy. That is why,
Chrysis, I advise you to act
likewise with Corgi as.
—LUCIAN, 
DIALOGUES 
OF 
THE
COURTESANS, TRANSLATED BY
A . L . H .
"A wife is someone on
whom one gazes all one's
life; yet it is just as well if
she be not beautiful''—so
spake Jinta of the Gion.
I'll is may be the flippant
saying of a go-between, but
it is not to be dismissed too
lightly. . . . Besides, it is
with beautiful women as
with beautiful views: if one
is forever looking at them,
one soon tires of their
charm. 
This I can judge
from my own experience.
One year I went to
Matsushima, 
and, 
though
at first I was moved by the
beauty of the place and
clapped my hands with
422 
• 
The Art of Seduction
loved good clothes—and the room would be full of flowers; there would
be a piano in the corner. He would play some music. His playing, and his
elegant, nonchalant manner, would come across to the woman as pure the-
ater, a pleasant continuation of the performance she had just witnessed.
And when it was over, and Ellington had to leave town, he would give her
a thoughtful gift. He would make it seem that the only thing taking him
away from her was his touring. A few weeks later, the woman might hear a
new Ellington song on the radio, with lyrics suggesting that she had in-
spired it. If ever he passed through the area again, she would find a way to
be there, and Ellington would often renew the affair, if only for a night.
Sometime in the 1940s, two young women from Alabama came to
Chicago to attend a debutante ball. Ellington and his band were the enter-
tainment. He was the women's favorite musician, and after the show, they
asked him for an autograph. He was so charming and engaging that one of
the girls found herself asking what hotel he was staying at. He told them,
with a big grin. The girls switched hotels, and later that day they called up
Ellington and invited him to their room for a drink. He accepted. They
wore beautiful negligees that they had just bought. When Ellington ar-
rived, he acted completely naturally, as if the warm greeting they gave him
were completely usual. The three of them ended up in the bedroom, when
one of the young women had an idea: her mother adored Ellington. She
had to call her now and put Ellington on the phone. Not at all put out by
the suggestion, Ellington played along. For several minutes he talked to the
mother on the telephone, lavishing her with compliments on the charming
daughter she had raised, and telling her not to worry—he was taking good
care of the girl. The daughter got back on the phone and said, "We're fine
because we're with Mr. Ellington and he's such a perfect gentleman." As
soon as she hung up, the three of them resumed the naughtiness they had
started. To the two girls, it later seemed an innocent but unforgettable night
of pleasure.
Sometimes several of these far-flung mistresses would show up at the
same concert. Ellington would go up and kiss each of them four times (a
habit of his designed for just this dilemma). And each of the ladies would
assume she was the one with whom the kisses really mattered.
Interpretation. Duke Ellington had two passions: music and women. The
two were interrelated. His endless affairs were a constant inspiration for his
music; he also treated them as if they were theater, a work of art in them-
selves. When it came time to separate, he always managed it with a theatri-
cal touch. A clever remark and a gift would make it seem that for him the
affair was hardly over. Song lyrics referring to their night together would
keep up the aesthetic atmosphere long after he had left town. No wonder
women kept coming back for more. This was not a sexual affair, a tawdry
one-nighter, but a heightened moment in the woman's life. And his care-
free attitude made it impossible to feel guilty; thoughts of one's mother or
admiration, 
saying to
myself, "Oh, if only I
could bring some poet here
to show him this great
wonder!"—yet, 
after I had
been gazing at the scene
from morning until night,
the myriad islands began to
smell unpleasantly of
seaweed, the waves that
beat on Matsuyama Point
became obstreperous; before
I knew it I had let all the
cherry blossoms at
Shiogama scatter; in the
morning I overslept and
missed the dawn snow on
Mount Kinka; nor was I
much impressed by the
evening moon at Nagané
or Oshima; and in the end
I picked up a few white
and black pebbles on the
cove and became engrossed
in a game of Six Musashi
with some children.
—IHARA 
SAIKAKU, 
THE LIFE OF
AN AMOROUS WOMAN,
TRANSLATED BY IVAN MORRIS
Men despise women who
love too much and
unwisely.
—LUCIAN, 
DIALOGUES
OF THE COURTESANS,
T R A N S L A T E D B Y A . L . H .
I shall endeavor briefly to
outline to you how a love
when gained can be
deepened. They say it can
be increased in particular
by making it an infrequent
and 
difficult 
business for
lovers to set eyes on each
other, for the greater the
difficulty of offering and
receiving shared
consolations, the greater
become the desire for, and
feeling of love. Love also
grows if one of the lovers
shows anger to the other,
for a lover is at once sorely
afraid that a partner's
Beware the Aftereffects • 423
husband would not spoil the illusion. Ellington was never defensive or
apologetic about his appetite for women; it was his nature and never the
fault of the woman that he was unfaithful. And if he could not help his de-
sires, how could she hold him responsible? It was impossible to hold a
grudge against such a man or complain about his behavior.
Ellington was an Aesthetic Rake, a type whose obsession with women
can only be satisfied by endless variety. A normal man's tomcatting will
eventually land him in hot water, but the Aesthetic Rake rarely stirs up ugly
emotions. After he seduces a woman, there is neither an integration nor a
sacrifice. He keeps them hanging and hoping. The spell is not broken the
next day, because the Aesthetic Rake makes the separation a pleasant, even
elegant experience. The spell Ellington cast on a woman never went away.
The lesson is simple: keep the moments after the seduction and the
separation in the same key as before, heightened, aesthetic, and pleasant. If
you do not act guilty for your feckless behavior, it is hard for the other per-
son to feel angry or resentful. Seduction is a lighthearted game, in which
you invest all of your energy in the moment. The separation should be
lighthearted and stylish as well: it is work, travel, some dreaded responsi-
bility that calls you away. Create a memorable experience and then move
on, and your victim will most likely remember the delightful seduction,
not the separation. You will have made no enemies, and will have a lifelong
harem of lovers to whom you can always return when you feel so inclined.
4. In 1899, twenty-year-old Baroness Frieda von Richthofen married an
Englishman named Ernest Weekley, a professor at the University of Not-
tingham, and soon settled into the role of the professor's wife. Weekley
treated her well, but she grew bored with their quiet life and his tepid love-
making. On trips home to Germany she had a few love affairs, but this
wasn't what she wanted either, and so she returned to being faithful and
caring for their three children.
One day in 1912, a former student of Weekley's, David Herbert
Lawrence, paid a visit to the couple's house. A struggling writer, Lawrence
wanted the professor's professional advice. He was not home yet so Frieda
entertained him. She had never met such an intense young man. He talked
of his impoverished youth, his inability to understand women. And he lis-
tened attentively to her own complaints. He even scolded her for the bad
tea she had made him—somehow, even though she was a baroness, this ex-
cited her.
Lawrence returned for later visits, but now to see Frieda, not Weekley.
One day he confessed to her that he had fallen deeply in love with her. She
admitted to similar feelings, and proposed they find a trysting spot. Instead
Lawrence had a proposal of his own: Leave your husband tomorrow—leave
him for me. What about the children? Frieda asked. If the children are
more important than our love, Lawrence replied, then stay with them. But
if you don't run away with me within a few days, you will never see me
wrath when roused may
harden indefinitely. Love
again experiences increase
when 
genuine jealousy
preoccupies one of the
lovers, for jealousy is called
the nurturer of love. In fact
even if the lover is
oppressed not by genuine
jealousy but by base
suspicion, love always
increases because of it, and
becomes more powerful by
its own strength.
—ANDREAS 
CAPELLANUS
ON LOVE, TRANSLATED
BY P. G. WALSH
You've seen the fire that
smolders \ Down to
nothing, grows a crown of
pale ash \ Over its hidden
embers (yet a sprinkling of
sulphur \ Will suffice to
rekindle the flame)? \ So
with the heart. It grows
torpid from lack of worry, \
Needs a sharp stimulus to
elicit love. \ Get her
anxious about you, reheat
her tepid passions, \ Tell
her your guilty secrets,
watch her blanch. \ Thrice
fortunate that man, lucky
past calculation, \ Who can
make some poor injured
girl \ Torture herself over
him, lose voice, go pale,
pass out when \ The
unwelcome news reaches
her. Ah, may I \ Be the
one whose hair she tears
out in her fury, the one
whose \ Soft cheeks she rips
with her nails, \ Whom she
sees, eyes glaring, through
a rain of tears; without
whom, \ Try as she will,
she cannot live! \ How long
(you may ask) should you
leave her lamenting her
wrong? A little \ While
only, lest rage gather
strength \ Through
procrastination. 
By then
you should have her
sobbing \ All over your
424 
• 
The Art of Seduction
again. To Frieda the choice was horrific. She did not care at all about her
husband, but the children were what she lived for. Even so, a few days later,
she succumbed to Lawrence's proposal. How could she resist a man who
was willing to ask for so much, to take such a gamble? If she refused she
would always wonder, for such a man only passes once through your life.
The couple left England and headed for Germany. Frieda would men-
tion sometimes how much she missed her children, but Lawrence had no
patience with her: You are free to go back to them at any moment, he
would say, but if you stay, don't look back. He took her on an arduous
mountaineering trip in the Alps. A baroness, she had never experienced
such hardship, but Lawrence was firm: if two people are in love, why should
comfort matter?
In 1914, Frieda and Lawrence were married, but over the following
years the same pattern repeated. He would scold her for her laziness, the
nostalgia for her children, her abysmal housekeeping. He would take her
on trips around the world, on very little money, never letting her settle
down, although it was her fondest wish. They fought and fought. Once in
New Mexico, in front of friends, he yelled at her, "Take that dirty cigarette
out of your mouth! And stop sticking out that fat belly of yours!" "You'd
better stop that talk or I'll tell about your things," she yelled back. (She had
learned to give him a taste of his own medicine.) They both went outside.
Their friends watched, worried it might turn violent. They disappeared from
sight only to reappear moments later, arm in arm, laughing and mooning
over one another. That was the most disconcerting thing about the Law-
rences: married for years, they often behaved like infatuated newlyweds.
Interpretation. When Lawrence first met Frieda, he could sense right away
what her weakness was: she felt trapped, in a stultifying relationship and a
pampered life. Her husband, like so many husbands, was kind, but never
paid enough attention to her. She craved drama and adventure, but was too
lazy to get it on her own. Drama and adventure were just what Lawrence
would provide. Instead of feeling trapped, she had the freedom to leave
him at any moment. Instead of ignoring her, he criticized her constantly—
at least he was paying attention, never taking her for granted. Instead of
comfort and boredom, he gave her adventure and romance. The fights he
picked with ritualistic frequency also ensured nonstop drama and the space
for a powerful reconciliation. He inspired a touch of fear in her, which
kept her off balance, never quite sure of him. As a result, the relationship
never grew stale. It kept renewing itself.
If it is integration you are after, seduction must never stop. Otherwise
boredom will creep in. And the best way to keep the process going is often
to inject intermittent drama. This can be painful—opening old wounds,
stirring up jealousy, withdrawing a little. (Do not confuse this behavior
with nagging or carping criticism—this pain is strategic, designed to break
up rigid patterns.) On the other hand it can also be pleasant: think about
chest, your arms tight
around her neck. \ You
want peace? Give her
kisses, make love to the girl
while she's crying— \
That's the only way to
melt her angry mood.
— O V I D , THE ART OF LOVE,
TRANSLATED BY PETER 
GREEN
Beware the Aftereffects 
• 
425
proving yourself all over again, paying attention to nice little details, creat-
ing new temptations. In fact you should mix the two aspects, for too much
pain or pleasure will not prove seductive. You are not repeating the first se-
duction, for the target has already surrendered. You are simply supplying
little jolts, little wake-up calls that show two things: you have not stopped
trying, and they cannot take you for granted. The little jolt will stir up the
old poison, stoke the embers, bring you temporarily back to the beginning,
when your involvement had a most pleasant freshness and tension.
Remember: comfort and security are the death of seduction. A shared
journey with a little bit of hardship will do more to create a deep bond
than will expensive gifts and luxuries. The young are right to not care
about comfort in matters of love, and when you return to that sentiment, a
youthful spark will reignite.
5. In 1652, the famous French courtesan Ninon de l'Enclos met and fell in
love with the Marquis de Villarceaux. Ninon was a libertine; philosophy
and pleasure were more important to her than love. But the marquis in-
spired new sensations: he was so bold, so impetuous, that for once in her
life she let herself lose a little control. The marquis was possessive, a trait
she normally abhorred. But in him it seemed natural, almost charming: he
simply could not help himself. And so Ninon accepted his conditions:
there were to be no other men in her life. For her part she told him that she
would accept no money or gifts from him. This was to be about love, noth-
ing else.
She rented a house opposite his in Paris, and they saw each other daily.
One afternoon the marquis suddenly burst in and accused her of having
another lover. His suspicions were unfounded, his accusations absurd, and
she told him so. This did not satisfy him, and he stormed out. The next day
Ninon received news that he had fallen quite ill. She was deeply con-
cerned. As a desperate recourse, a sign of her love and submission, she de-
cided to cut off her beautiful long hair, for which she was famous, and send
it to him. The gesture worked, the marquis recovered, and they resumed
their affair still more passionately. Friends and former lovers complained of
her sudden transformation into the devoted woman, but she did not care—
she was happy.
Now Ninon suggested that they go away together. The marquis, a mar-
ried man, could not take her to his château, but a friend offered his own in
the country as a refuge for the lovers. Weeks became months, and their lit-
tle stay turned into a prolonged honeymoon. Slowly, though, Ninon had
the feeling that something was wrong: the marquis was acting more like
a husband. Although he was as passionate as before, he seemed so con-
fident, as if he had certain rights and privileges that no other man could
expect. The possessiveness that once had charmed her began to seem
oppressive. Nor did he stimulate her mind. She could get other men, and
equally handsome ones, to satisfy her physically without all that jealousy.
426 
• 
The Art of Seduction
Once this realization set in, Ninon wasted no time. She told the mar-
quis that she was returning to Paris, and that it was over for good. He
begged and pleaded his case with much emotion—how could she be so
heartless? Although moved, Ninon was firm. Explanations would only
make it worse. She returned to Paris and resumed the life of a courtesan.
Her abrupt departure apparently shook up the marquis, but apparently not
too badly, for a few months later word reached her that he had fallen in love
with another woman.
Interpretation. A woman often spends months pondering the subtle
changes in her lover's behavior. She might complain or grow angry; she
might even blame herself. Under the weight of her complaints, the man
may change for a while, but an ugly dynamic and endless misunderstand-
ings will ensue. What is the point of all of this? Once you are disenchanted
it is really too late. Ninon could have tried to figure out what had disen-
chanted her—the good looks that now bored her, the lack of mental stimu-
lation, the feeling of being taken for granted. But why waste time figuring
it out? The spell was broken, so she moved on. She did not bother to ex-
plain, to worry about de Villarceaux's feelings, to make it all soft and easy
for him. She simply left. The person who seems so considerate of the
other, who tries to mend things or make excuses, is really just timid. Being
kind in such matters can be rather cruel. The marquis was able to blame
everything on his mistress's heartless, fickle nature. His vanity and pride in-
tact, he could easily move on to another affair and put her behind him.
Not only does the long, lingering death of a relationship cause your
partner needless pain, it will have long-term consequences for you as well,
making you more skittish in the future, and weighing you down with guilt.
Never feel guilty, even if you were both the seducer and the one who now
feels disenchanted. It is not your fault. Nothing can last forever. You have
created pleasure for your victims, stirring them out of their rut. If you
make a clean quick break, in the long run they will appreciate it. The more
you apologize, the more you insult their pride, stirring up negative feelings
that will reverberate for years. Spare them the disingenuous explanations
that only complicate matters. The victim should be sacrificed, not tortured.
6. After fifteen years under the rule of Napoleon Bonaparte, the French
were exhausted. Too many wars, too much drama. When Napoleon was
defeated in 1814, and was imprisoned on the island of Elba, the French
were more than ready for peace and quiet. The Bourbons—the royal family
deposed by the revolution of 1789—returned to power. The king was
Louis XVIII; he was fat, boring, and pompous, but at least there would be
peace.
Then, in February of 1815, news reached France of Napoleon's dra-
matic escape from Elba, with seven small ships and a thousand men. He
Beware the Aftereffects 
• 
427
could head for America, start all over, but instead he was just crazy enough
to land at Cannes. What was he thinking? A thousand men against all the
armies of France? He set off toward Grenoble with his ragtag army. One at
least had to admire his courage, his insatiable love of glory and of France.
Then, too, the French peasantry were spellbound at the sight of their
former emperor. This man, after all, had redistributed a great deal of land
to them, which the new king was trying to take back. They swooned at the
sight of his famous eagle standards, revivals of symbols from the revolution.
They left their fields and joined his march. Outside Grenoble, the first of
the troops that the king sent to stop Napoleon caught up with him.
Napoleon dismounted and walked on foot toward them. "Soldiers of the
Fifth Army Corps!" he cried out. "Don't you know me? If there is one
among you who wishes to kill his emperor, let him come forward and do
so. Here I am!" He threw open his gray cloak, inviting them to take aim.
There was a moment of silence, and then, from all sides, cries rang out of
"Vive l'Empereur!" In one stroke, Napoleon's army had doubled in size.
The march continued. More soldiers, remembering the glory he had
given them, changed sides. The city of Lyons fell without a battle. Generals
with larger armies were dispatched to stop him, but the sight of Napoleon
at the head of his troops was an overwhelmingly emotional experience for
them, and they switched allegiance. King Louis fled France, abdicating in
the process. On March 20, Napoleon reentered Paris and returned to the
palace he had left only thirteen months before—all without having had to
fire a single shot.
The peasantry and the soldiers had embraced Napoleon, but Parisians
were less enthusiastic, particularly those who had served in his government.
They feared the storms he would bring. Napoleon ruled the country for
one hundred days, until the allies and his enemies from within defeated
him. This time he was shipped off to the remote island of St. Helena,
where he was to die.
Interpretation. Napoleon always thought of France, and his army, as a tar-
get to be wooed and seduced. As General de Ségur wrote of Napoleon: "In
moments of sublime power, he no longer commands like a man, but se-
duces like a woman." In the case of his escape from Elba, he planned a
bold, surprising gesture that would titillate a bored nation. He began his re-
turn to France among the people who would be most receptive to him: the
peasantry who had revered him. He revived the symbols—the revolution-
ary colors, the eagle standards—that would stir up the old sentiments. He
placed himself at the head of his army, daring his former soldiers to fire on
him. The march on Paris that brought him back to power was pure theater,
calculated for emotional effect every step of the way. What a contrast this
former amour presented to the dolt of a king who now ruled them.
Napoleon's second seduction of France was not a classical seduction,
following the usual steps, but a re-seduction. It was built on old emotions
428 
• 
The Art of Seduction
and revived an old love. Once you have seduced a person (or a nation)
there is almost always a lull, a slight letdown, which sometimes leads to a
separation; it is surprisingly easy, though, to re-seduce the same target. The
old feelings never go away, they lie dormant, and in a flash you can take
your target by surprise.
It is a rare pleasure to be able to relive the past, and one's youth—to feel
the old emotions. Like Napoleon, add a dramatic flair to your re-seduction:
revive the old images, the symbols, the expressions that will stir memory.
Like the French, your targets will tend to forget the ugliness of the separa-
tion and will remember only the good things. You should make this second
seduction bold and quick, giving your targets no time to reflect or wonder.
Like Napoleon, play on the contrast to their current lover, making his or
her behavior seem timid and stodgy by comparison.
Not everyone will be receptive to a re-seduction, and some moments
will be inappropriate. When Napoleon came back from Elba, the Parisians
were too sophisticated for him, and could see right through him. Unlike
the peasants of the South, they already knew him well; and his reentry
came too soon, they were too worn out by him. If you want to re-seduce
someone, choose one who does not know you so well, whose memories of
you are cleaner, who is less suspicious by nature, and who is dissatisfied
with present circumstances. Also, you might want to let some time pass.
Time will restore your luster and make your faults fade away. Never see a
separation or sacrifice as final. With a little drama and planning, a victim
can be retaken in no time.
Symbol: Em-
bers, the remains of the fire on the
morning after. Left to themselves, the embers will
slowly die out. Do not leave the fire to chance and to the
elements. To put it out, douse it, suffocate it, give it nothing to
feed on. To bring it back to life, fan it, stoke it, until it blazes
anew. Only your constant attention and vigilance will keep it burning.
Beware the Aftereffects • 
429
Reversal
T
o keep a person enchanted, you will have to re-seduce them con-
stantly. But you can allow a little familiarity to creep in. The target
wants to feel that he or she is getting to know you. Too much mystery will
create doubt. It will also be tiring for you, who will have to sustain it. The
point is not to remain completely unfamiliar but rather, on occasion, to jolt
victims out of their complacency, surprising them as you surprised them in
the past. Do this right and they will have the delightful feeling that they are
constantly getting to know more about you—but never too much.
Appendix A
Seductive Environment/Seductive Time
In se-
duction, your vic-
tims must slowly come
to feel an inner change.
Under your influence, 
they
lower their defenses, feeling free to
act differently, to be a different per-
son. Certain places, environments,
and experiences will greatly aid you in
your quest to change and transform the
seduced. 
Spaces with a theatrical,
heightened quality—opulence, glittering
surfaces, a playful spirit—create a buoy-
ant, childlike feeling that make it hard
for the victim to think straight. The cre-
ation of an altered sense of time has a
similar effect—memorable, dizzying
moments that stand out, a mood of
festival and play. You must make
your victims feel that being
with you gives them a dif-
ferent experience from
being in the real
world.
Festival Time and Place
C
enturies ago, life in most cultures was filled with work and routine.
But at certain moments in the year, this life was interrupted by festi-
val. During these festivals—saturnalias of ancient Rome, the maypole festi-
vals of Europe, the great potlatches of the Chinook Indians—work in the
fields or marketplace stopped. The entire tribe or town gathered in a sacred
space set apart for the festival. Temporarily relieved of duty and responsi-
bility, people were granted license to run amok; they would wear masks or
costumes, which gave them other identities, sometimes those of powerful
figures reenacting the great myths of their culture. The festival was a
tremendous release from the burdens of daily life. It altered people's sense
of time, bringing moments in which they stepped outside of themselves.
Time seemed to stand still. Something like this experience can still be
found in the world's great surviving carnivals.
The festival represented a break in a person's daily life, a radically differ-
ent experience from routine. On a more intimate level, that is how you
must envision your seductions. As the process advances, your targets expe-
rience a radical difference from daily life—a freedom from work or respon-
sibility. Plunged into pleasure and play, they can act differently, can become
someone else, as if they were wearing a mask. The time you spend with
them is devoted to them and nothing else. Instead of the usual rotation of
work and rest, you are giving them grand, dramatic moments that stand
out. You bring them to places unlike the places they see in daily life—
heightened, theatrical places. Physical environment strongly affects people's
moods; a place dedicated to pleasure and play insinuates thoughts of plea-
sure and play. When your victims return to their duties and to the real
world, they feel the contrast strongly and they will start to crave that other
place into which you have drawn them. What you are essentially creating is
festival time and place, moments when the real world stops and fantasy
takes over. Our culture no longer supplies such experiences, and people
yearn for them. That is why almost everyone is waiting to be seduced and
why they will fall into your arms if you play this right.
The following are key components to reproducing festival time and place:
Create theatrical effects. Theater creates a sense of a separate, magical
world. The actors' makeup, the fake but alluring sets, the slightly unreal
433
434 
• 
Appendix A: Seductive Environment /Seductive Time
costumes—these heightened visuals, along with the story of the play, create
illusion. To produce this effect in real life, you must fashion your clothes,
makeup, and attitude to have a playful, artificial, edge—a feeling that you
have dressed for the pleasure of your audience. This is the goddesslike effect
of a Marlene Dietrich, or the fascinating effect of a dandy like Beau Brum-
mel. Your encounters with your targets should also have a sense of drama,
achieved through the settings you choose and through your actions. The
target should not know what will happen next. Create suspense through
twists and turns that lead to the happy ending; you are performing. When-
ever your targets meet you, they are returned to this vague feeling of being
in a play. You both have the thrill of wearing masks, of playing a different
role from the one your life has allotted you.
Use the visual language of pleasure. Certain kinds of visual stimuli signal
that you are not in the real world. You want to avoid images that have
depth, which might provoke thought, or guilt; instead, you should work in
environments that are all surface, full of glittering objects, mirrors, pools of
water, a constant play of light. The sensory overload of these spaces creates
an intoxicating, buoyant feeling. The more artificial, the better. Show your
targets a playful world, full of the sights and sounds that excite the baby or
child within them. Luxury—the sense that money has been spent or even
wasted—adds to the feeling that the real world of duty and morality has
been banished. Call it the brothel effect.
Keep it crowded or close. People crowding together raise the psychologi-
cal temperature to hothouse levels. Festivals and carnivals depend on the
contagious feeling a crowd creates. Bring your target to such environments
sometimes, to lower their normal defensiveness. Similarly, any kind of
situation that brings people together in a small space for a long period of
time is extremely conducive to seduction. For years, Sigmund Freud had a
small, tight-knit stable of disciples who attended his private lectures and
who engaged in an astonishing number of love affairs. Either lead the se-
duced into a crowded, festivallike environment or go trolling for targets in a
closed world.
Manufacture mystical effects. Spiritual or mystical effects distract people's
minds from reality, making them feel elevated and euphoric. From here it
is but a small step to physical pleasure. Use whatever props are at hand—
astrology books, angelic imagery, mystical-sounding music from some far-
off culture. The great eighteenth-century Austrian charlatan Franz Mesmer
filled his salons with harp music, the perfume of exotic incense, and a fe-
male voice singing in a distant room. On the walls he put stained glass and
Appendix A: Seductive 
Environment/Seductive 
Time 
• 
435
mirrors. His dupes would feel relaxed, uplifted, and as they sat in the room
where he used magnets for their healing powers, they would feel a kind of
spiritual tingling pass from body to body. Anything vaguely mystical helps
block out the real world, and it is easy to move from the spiritual to the
sexual.
Distort their sense of time—speed and youth. Festival time has a kind of
speed and frenzy that make people feel more alive. Seduction should make
the heart beat faster, so that the seduced loses track of time passing. Take
them to places of constant activity and movement. Embark with them on
some kind of journey together, distracting their minds with new sights.
Youth may fade and disappear, but seduction brings the feeling of being
young, no matter the age of those involved. And youth is mostly energy.
The pace of the seduction must pick up at a certain moment, creating
a whirling effect in the mind. It is no wonder that Casanova did much of
his seducing at balls, or that the waltz was the preferred tool of many a
nineteenth-century rake.
Create moments. Everyday life is a drudgery in which the same actions
endlessly repeat. The festival, on the other hand, we remember as a mo-
ment when everything was transformed—when a little bit of eternity and
myth entered our lives. Your seduction must have such peaks, moments
when something dramatic happens and time is experienced differently.
You must give your targets such moments, whether by staging the seduc-
tion in a place—a carnival, a theater—where they naturally occur or by
creating them yourself, with dramatic actions that stir up strong emo-
tions. Those moments should be pure leisure and pleasure—no thoughts
of work or morality can intrude. Madame de Pompadour, the mistress of
King Louis XV, had to re-seduce her easily bored lover every few months;
intensely creative, she devised parties, balls, games, a little theater at Ver-
sailles. The seduced revels in affairs like this, sensing the effort you have ex-
pended to divert and enchant them.
Scenes from Seductive Time and Place
1. Around the year 1710, a young man whose father was a prosperous
wine dealer in Osaka, Japan, found himself daydreaming more and more.
He worked night and day for his father, and the burden of family life and
all of its duties was oppressive. Like every young man, he had heard of the
pleasure districts of the city—the quarters where the normally strict laws of
the shogunate could be violated. It was here that you would find the ukiyo,
the "floating world" of transient pleasures, a place where actors and courte-
436 
• 
Appendix A: Seductive 
Environment/Seductive 
Time
sans ruled. This was what the young man was daydreaming about. Biding
his time, he managed to find an evening when he could slip out unnoticed.
He headed straight for the pleasure quarters.
This was a cluster of buildings—restaurants, exclusive clubs, tea-
houses—that stood out from the rest of the city by their magnificence and
color. The moment the young man stepped into it, he knew he was in
a different world. Actors wandered the streets in elaborately dyed kimonos.
They had such manners and attitudes, as if they were still on stage. The
streets bustled with energy; the pace was fast. Bright lanterns stood out
against the night, as did the colorful posters for the nearby kabuki theater.
The women had a completely different air about them. They stared at him
brazenly, acting with the freedom of a man. He caught sight of an onnagata,
one of the men who played female roles in the theater—a man more beau-
tiful than most women he had seen and whom the passersby treated like
royalty.
The young man saw other young men like himself entering a teahouse,
so he followed them in. Here the highest class of courtesans, the great
tayus, plied their trade. A few minutes after the young man sat down, he
heard a noise and bustle, and down the stairs came a few of the tayus, fol-
lowed by musicians and jesters. The women's eyebrows were shaved, re-
placed by a thick black painted line. Their hair was swept up in a perfect
fold, and he had never seen such beautiful kimonos. The tayus seemed to
float across the floor, using different kinds of steps (suggestive, creeping,
cautious, etc.), depending on whom they were approaching and what they
wanted to communicate to him. They ignored the young man; he had no
idea how to invite them over, but he noticed that some of the older men
had a way of bantering with them that was a language all its own. The
wine began to flow, music was played, and finally some lower-level courte-
sans came in. By then the young man's tongue was loosened. These courtesans
were much friendlier and the young man began to lose all track of time.
Later he managed to stagger home, and only the next morning did he real-
ize how much money he had spent. If father ever found out . . .
Yet a few weeks later he was back. Like hundreds of such sons in Japan
whose stories filled the literature of the period, he was on the path toward
squandering his father's wealth on the "floating world."
Seduction is another world into which you initiate your victims. Like the
ukiyo, it depends on a strict separation from the day-to-day world. When
your victims are in your presence, the outside world—with its morality, its
codes, its responsibilities—is banished. Anything is allowed, particularly
anything normally repressed. The conversation is lighter and more sugges-
tive. Clothes and places have a touch of theatricality. The license exists to
act differently, to be someone else, without any heaviness or judging. It is a
kind of concentrated psychological "floating world" that you create for the
others, and it becomes addictive. When they leave you and return to their
routines, they are doubly aware of what they are missing. The moment
they crave the atmosphere you have created, the seduction is complete. As
in the floating world, money is to be wasted. Generosity and luxury go
hand in hand with a seductive environment.
2. It began in the early 1960s: people would come to Andy Warhol's New
York studio, soak up the atmosphere, and stay awhile. Then in 1963, the
artist moved into a new Manhattan space and a member of his entourage
covered some of the walls and pillars in tin foil and spray-painted a brick
wall and other things silver. A red quilted couch in the center, some five-
foot-high plastic candy bars, a turntable that glittered with tiny mirrors, and
helium-filled silver pillows that floated in the air completed the set. Now
the L-shaped space became known as The Factory, and a scene began to
develop. More and more people started showing up—why not just leave
the door open, Andy reasoned, and come what may. During the day, while
Andy would work on his paintings and films, people would gather—actors,
hustlers, drug dealers, other artists. And the elevator would keep groaning
all night as the beautiful people began to make the place their home. Here
might be Montgomery Clift, nursing a drink by himself; over there, a
beautiful young socialite chatting with a drag queen and a museum curator.
They kept pouring in, all of them young and glamorously dressed. It was
like one of those children's shows on TV, Andy once said to a friend, where
guests keep dropping in on the endless party and there's always some new
bit of entertainment. And that was indeed what it seemed like—with noth-
ing serious happening, just lots of talk and flirting and flashbulbs popping
and endless posing, as if everyone were in a film. The museum curator
would begin to giggle like a teenager and the socialite would flounce about
like a hooker.
By midnight everyone would be packed together. You could hardly
move. The band would arrive, the light show would begin, and it would all
careen in a new direction, wilder and wilder. Somehow the crowd would
disperse at some point, then in the afternoon it would all start up again
as the entourage trickled back. Hardly anyone went to The Factory just
once.
It is oppressive always to have to act the same way, playing the same boring
role that work or duty imposes on you. People yearn for a place or a mo-
ment when they can wear a mask, act differently, be someone else. That is
why we glorify actors: they have the freedom and playfulness in relation to
their own ego that we would love to have. Any environment that offers a
chance to play a different role, to be an actor, is immensely seductive. It can
be an environment that you create, like The Factory. Or a place where you
take your target. In such environments you simply cannot be defensive; the
playful atmosphere, the sense that anything is allowed (except seriousness),
dispels any kind of reactiveness. Being in such a place becomes a drug. To
re-create the effect, remember Warhol's metaphor of the children's TV
Appendix A: Seductive Environment/Seductive Time • 
437
438 
• 
Appendix 
A: Seductive 
Environment/Seductive 
Time
show. Keep everything light and playful, full of distractions, noise, color,
and a bit of chaos. No weight, responsibilities, or judgments. A place to
lose yourself in.
3. In 1746, a seventeen-year-old girl named Cristina had come to the city
of Venice, Italy, with her uncle, a priest, in search of a husband. Cristina
was from a small village but had a substantial dowry to offer. The Venetian
men who were willing to marry her, however, did not please her. So after
two weeks of futile searching, she and her uncle prepared to return to their
village. They were seated in their gondola, about to leave the city, when
Cristina saw an elegantly dressed young man walking toward them.
"There's a handsome fellow!" she said to her uncle. "I wish he was in the
boat with us." The gentleman could not have heard this, yet he approached,
handed the gondolier some money, and sat down beside Cristina, much to
her delight. He introduced himself as Jacques Casanova. When the priest
complimented him on his friendly manners, Casanova replied, "Perhaps I
should not have been so friendly, my reverend father, if I had not been at-
tracted by the beauty of your niece."
Cristina told him why they had come to Venice and why they were
leaving. Casanova laughed and chided her—a man cannot decide to marry
a girl after seeing her for a few days. He must know more about her charac-
ter; it would take at least six months. He himself was looking for a wife,
and he explained to her why he had been as disappointed by the girls he
had met as she had been disappointed by the men. Casanova seemed to
have no destination; he simply accompanied them, entertaining Cristina
the whole way with witty conversation. When the gondola arrived at the
edge of Venice, Casanova hired a carriage to the nearby city of Treviso and
invited them to join him. From there they could catch a chaise to their vil-
lage. The uncle accepted, and on the way to their carriage, Casanova of-
fered his arm to Cristina. What would his mistress say if she saw them, she
asked. "I have no mistress," he answered, "and I shall never have one again,
for I shall never find such a pretty girl as you—no, not in Venice." His
words went to her head, filling it with all kinds of strange thoughts, and she
began to talk and act in a manner that was new to her, becoming almost
brazen. What a pity she could not stay in Venice for the six months he
needed to get to know a girl, she told Casanova. Without hesitation he of-
fered to pay her expenses in Venice for that period while he courted her.
On the carriage ride she turned this offer over in her mind, and once in
Treviso she got her uncle alone and begged him to return to the village by
himself, then come back for her in a few days. She was in love with
Casanova; she wanted to know him better; he was a perfect gentleman,
who could be trusted. The uncle agreed to do as she wished.
The following day Casanova never left her side. There was not the
slightest hint of disagreement in his nature. They spent the day wandering
around the city, shopping and talking. He took her to a play in the evening
Appendix A: Seductive 
Environment/Seductive 
Time 
• 
439
and to the casino after that, supplying her with a domino and a mask. He
gave her money to gamble and she won. By the time the uncle returned to
Treviso, she had all but forgotten about her marriage plans—all she could
think of was the six months she would spend with Casanova. But she re-
turned to her village with her uncle and waited for Casanova to visit her.
He showed up a few weeks later, bringing with him a handsome young
man named Charles. Alone with Cristina, Casanova explained the situa-
tion: Charles was the most eligible bachelor in Venice, a man who would
make a much better husband than he would. Cristina admitted to Casanova
that she too had had her doubts. He was too exciting, had made her think
of other things besides marriage, things she was ashamed of. Perhaps it was
for the better. She thanked him for taking such pains to find her a husband.
Over the next few days Charles courted her, and they were married several
weeks later. The fantasy and allure of Casanova, however, remained in her
mind forever.
Casanova could not marry—it was against everything in his nature. But it
was also against his nature to force himself on a young girl. Better to leave
her with the perfect fantasy image than to ruin her life. Besides, he enjoyed
the courting and flirting more than anything else.
Casanova supplied a young woman with the ultimate fantasy. While he
was in her orbit he devoted every moment to her. He never mentioned
work, allowing no boring, mundane details to interrupt the fantasy. And he
added great theater. He wore the most spectacular outfits, full of sparkling
jewels. He led her to the most wonderful entertainments—carnivals,
masked balls, the casinos, journeys with no destination. He was the great
master at creating seductive time and environment.
Casanova is the model to aspire to. While in your presence your targets
must sense a change. Time has a different rhythm—they barely notice its
passing. They have the feeling that everything is stopping for them, just as
all normal activity comes to a halt at a festival. The idle pleasures you pro-
vide them are contagious—one leads to another and to another, until it is
too late to turn back.
Appendix B
Soft Seduction: How to Sell
Anything to the Masses
The less you seem to be
selling something—including yourself—the better. By be-
ing too obvious in your pitch, you will raise suspicion; you will also bore
your audience, an unforgivable sin. Instead, make your approach soft, seductive, and
insidious. Soft: be indirect. Create news and events for the media to pick up, spreading your
name in a way that seems spontaneous, not hard or calculated. Seductive: keep it entertaining.
Your name and image are bathed in positive associations; you are selling pleasure and prom-
ise. Insidious: aim at the unconscious, using images that linger in the mind, placing
your message in the visuals. Frame what you are selling as part of a new
trend, and it will become one. It is almost impossible to
resist the soft seduction.
The Soft Sell
S
eduction is the ultimate form of power. Those who give in to it do so
willingly and happily. There is rarely any resentment on their part; they
forgive you any kind of manipulation because you have brought them plea-
sure, a rare commodity in the world. With such power at your fingertips,
though, why stop at the conquest of a man or woman? A crowd, an elec-
torate, a nation can be brought under your sway simply by applying on a
mass level the tactics that work so well on an individual. The only differ-
ence is the goal—not sex but influence, a vote, people's attention—and the
degree of tension. When you are after sex, you deliberately create anxiety, a
touch of pain, twists, and turns. Seduction on the mass level is more diffuse
and soft. Creating a constant titillation, you fascinate the masses with what
you are offering. They pay attention to you because it is pleasant to do so.
Let us say your goal is to sell yourself—as a personality, a trendsetter, a
candidate for office. There are two ways to go: the hard sell (the direct ap-
proach) and the soft sell (the indirect approach). In the hard sell you state
your case strongly and directly, explaining why your talents, your ideas,
your political message are superior to anyone else's. You tout your achieve-
ments, quote statistics, bring in expert opinions, even go so far as to induce
a bit of fear if the audience ignores your message. The approach is a tad ag-
gressive and might have unwanted consequences: some people will be of-
fended, resisting your message, even if what you say is true. Others will feel
you are manipulating them—who can trust experts and statistics, and why
are you trying so hard? You will also grate on people's nerves, becoming
unpleasant to listen to. In a world in which you cannot succeed without
selling to large numbers, the direct approach won't take you far.
The soft sell, on the other hand, has the potential to draw in millions
because it is entertaining, gentle on the ears, and can be repeated with-
out irritating people. The technique was invented by the great charlatans
of seventeenth-century Europe. To peddle their elixirs and alchemic
concoctions, they would first put on a show—clowns, music, vaudeville-
type routines—that had nothing to do with what they were selling. A
crowd would form, and as the audience laughed and relaxed, the charlatan
would come onstage and briefly and dramatically discuss the miraculous ef-
fects of the elixir. By honing this technique, the charlatans discovered that
instead of selling a few dozen bottles of the dubious medicine, they were
suddenly selling scores or even hundreds.
443
444 
• 
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
In the centuries since, publicists, advertisers, political strategists, and
others have taken this method to new heights, but the rudiments of the soft
sell remain the same. First bring pleasure by creating a positive atmosphere
around your name or message. Induce a warm, relaxed feeling. Never seem
to be selling something—that will look manipulative and suspicious. In-
stead, let entertainment value and good feelings take center stage, sneaking
the sale through the side door. And in that sale, you do not seem to be sell-
ing yourself or a particular idea or candidate; you are selling a life-style, a
good mood, a sense of adventure, a feeling of hipness, or a neatly packaged
rebellion.
Here are some of the key components of the soft sell.
Appear as news, never as publicity. First impressions are critical. If
your audience first sees you in the context of an advertisement or publicity
item, you instantly join the mass of other advertisements screaming for
attention—and everyone knows that advertisements are artful manipula-
tions, a kind of deception. So, for your first appearance in the public eye,
manufacture an event, some kind of attention-getting situation that the
media will "inadvertently" pick up as if it were news. People pay more at-
tention to what is broadcast as news—it seems more real. You suddenly
stand out from everything else, if only for a moment—but that moment
has more credibility than hours of advertising time. The key is to orches-
trate the details thoroughly, creating a story with dramatic impact and
movement, tension and resolution. The media will cover it for days. Con-
ceal your real purpose—to sell yourself—at any cost.
Stir basic emotions. Never promote your message through a rational, di-
rect argument. That will take effort on your audience's part and will not
gain its attention. Aim for the heart, not the head. Design your words and
images to stir basic emotions—lust, patriotism, family values. It is easier to
gain and hold people's attention once you have made them think of their
family, their children, their future. They feel stirred, uplifted. Now you
have their attention and the space to insinuate your true message. Days later
the audience will remember your name, and remembering your name is
half the game. Similarly, find ways to surround yourself with emotional
magnets—war heroes, children, saints, small animals, whatever it takes.
Make your appearance bring these emotionally positive associations to
mind, giving you extra presence. Never let these associations be defined or
created for you, and never leave them to chance.
Make the medium the message. Pay more attention to the form of your
message than to the content. Images are more seductive than words, and vi-
suals—soothing colors, appropriate backdrop, the suggestion of speed
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses 
• 
445
or movement—should actually be your real message. The audience may
focus superficially on the content or moral you are preaching, but they are
really absorbing the visuals, which get under their skin and stay there longer
than any words or preachy pronouncements. Your visuals should have a
hypnotic effect. They should make people feel happy or sad, depending on
what you want to accomplish. And the more they are distracted by visual
cues, the harder it will be for them to think straight or see through your
manipulations.
Speak the target's language—be chummy. At all costs, avoid appearing
superior to your audience. Any hint of smugness, the use of complicated
words or ideas, quoting too many statistics—all that is fatal. Instead, make
yourself seem equal to your targets and on intimate terms with them. You
understand them, you share their spirit, their language. If people are cynical
about the manipulations of advertisers and politicians, exploit their cyni-
cism for your own purposes. Portray yourself as one of the folk, warts and
all. Show that you share your audience's skepticism by revealing the tricks
of the trade. Make your publicity as down-home and minimal as possible,
so that your competitors look sophisticated and snobby in comparison.
Your selective honesty and strategic weakness will get people to trust you.
You are the audience's friend, an intimate. Enter their spirit and they will
relax and listen to you.
Start a chain reaction—everyone is doing it. People who seem to be de-
sired by others are immediately more seductive to their targets. Apply this
to the soft seduction. You need to act as if you have already excited crowds
of people; your behavior will become a self-fulfilling prophecy. Seem to be
in the vanguard of a trend or life-style and the public will lap you up for
fear of being left behind. Spread your image, with a logo, slogans, posters,
so that it appears everywhere. Announce your message as a trend and it will
become one. The goal is to create a kind of viral effect in which more and
more people become infected with the desire to have whatever you are of-
fering. This is the easiest and most seductive way to sell.
Tell people who they are. It is always unwise to engage an individual or
the public in any kind of argument. They will resist you. Instead of trying
to change people's ideas, try to change their identity, their perception of
reality, and you will have far more control of them in the long run. Tell
them who they are, create an image, an identity that they will want to as-
sume. Make them dissatisfied with their current status. Making them un-
happy with themselves gives you room to suggest a new life-style, a new
identity. Only by listening to you can they find out who they are. At the
same time, you want to change their perception of the world outside them
446 
• 
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
by controlling what they look at. Use as many media as possible to create a
kind of total environment for their perceptions. Your image should be seen
not as an advertisement but as part of the atmosphere.
Some Soft Seductions
1. Andrew Jackson was a true American hero. In 1814, in the Battle of
New Orleans, he led a ragtag band of American soldiers against a superior
English army and won. He also conquered Indians in Florida. Jackson's
army loved him for his rough-hewn ways: he fed on acorns when there was
nothing else to eat, he slept on a hard bed, he drank hard cider, just like his
men. Then, after he lost or was cheated out of the presidential election of
1824 (in fact he won the popular vote, but so narrowly that the election
was thrown into the House of Representatives, which chose John Quincy
Adams, after much deal making), he retired to his farm in Tennessee, where
he lived the simple life, tilling the soil, reading the Bible, staying far from
the corruptions of Washington. Where Adams had gone to Harvard, played
billiards, drunk soda water, and relished European finery, Jackson, like
many Americans of the time, had been raised in a log cabin. He was an un-
educated man, a man of the earth.
This, at any rate, was what Americans read in their newspapers in the
months after the controversial 1824 election. Spurred on by these articles,
people in taverns and halls across the country began talking of how the war
hero Andrew Jackson had been wronged, how an insidious aristocratic elite
was conspiring to take over the country. So when Jackson declared that he
would run again against Adams in the presidential election of 1828—but
this time as the leader of a new organization, the Democratic Party—the
public was thrilled. Jackson was the first major political figure to have a
nickname, Old Hickory, and soon Hickory clubs were sprouting up in
America's towns and cities. Their meetings resembled spiritual revivals. The
hot-button issues of the day were discussed (tariffs, the abolition of slav-
ery), and club members felt certain that Jackson was on their side. It was
hard to know for sure—he was a little vague on the issues—but this elec-
tion was about something larger than issues: it was about restoring democ-
racy and restoring basic American values to the White House.
Soon the Hickory clubs were sponsoring events like town barbecues,
the planting of hickory trees, dances around a hickory pole. They orga-
nized lavish public feasts, always including large quantities of liquor. In the
cities there were parades, and these were stirring events. They often took
place at night so that urbanites would witness a procession of Jackson sup-
porters holding torches. Others would carry colorful banners with portraits
of Jackson or caricatures of Adams and slogans ridiculing his decadent
ways. And everywhere there was hickory—hickory sticks, hickory brooms,
hickory canes, hickory leaves in people's hats. Men on horseback would
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses 
• 
447
ride through the crowd, spurring people into "huzzahs!" for Jackson. Oth-
ers would lead the crowd in songs about Old Hickory.
The Democrats, for the first time in an election, conducted opinion
polls, finding out what the common man thought about the candidates.
These polls were published in the papers, and the overwhelming conclu-
sion was that Jackson was ahead. Yes, a new movement was sweeping the
country. It all came to a head when Jackson made a personal appearance in
New Orleans as part of a celebration commemorating the battle he had
fought so bravely there fourteen years earlier. This was unprecedented: no
presidential candidate had ever campaigned in person before, and in fact
such an appearance would have been considered improper. But Jackson
was a new kind of politician, a true man of the people. Besides, he insisted
that his purpose for the visit was patriotism, not politics. The spectacle
was unforgettable—Jackson entering New Orleans on a steamboat as the
fog lifted, cannon fire ringing out from all sides, grand speeches, endless
feasts, a kind of mass delirium taking over the city. One man said it was
"like a dream. The world has never witnessed so glorious, so wonderful a
celebration—never have gratitude and patriotism so happily united."
This time the will of the people prevailed. Jackson was elected president.
And it was not one region that brought him victory: New Englanders,
Southerners, Westerners, merchants, farmers, and workers were all infected
with the Jackson fever.
Interpretation. After the debacle of 1824, Jackson and his supporters were
determined to do things differently in 1828. America was becoming more
diverse, developing populations of immigrants, Westerners, urban laborers,
and so on. To win a mandate Jackson would have to overcome new re-
gional and class differences. One of the first and most important steps his
supporters took was to found newspapers all around the country. While he
himself seemed to have retired from public life, these papers promulgated
an image of him as the wronged war hero, the victimized man of the peo-
ple. In truth, Jackson was wealthy, as were all of his major backers. He
owned one of the largest plantations in Tennessee, and he owned many
slaves. He drank more fine liquor than hard cider and slept on a soft bed
with European linens. And while he might have been uneducated, he was
extremely shrewd, with a shrewdness built on years of army combat.
The image of the man of the earth disguised all this, and, once it was
established, it could be contrasted with the aristocratic image of Adams. In
this way Jackson's strategists covered up his political inexperience and made
the election turn on questions of character and values. Instead of politi-
cal issues they raised trivial matters like drinking habits and church atten-
dance. To keep up the enthusiasm they staged spectacles that seemed to
be spontaneous celebrations but in fact were carefully choreographed. The
support for Jackson seemed to be a movement, as evidenced (and advanced)
448 
• 
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
by the opinion polls. The event in New Orleans—hardly nonpolitical, and
Louisiana was a swing state—bathed Jackson in an aura of patriotic, quasi-
religious grandeur.
Society has fractured into smaller and smaller units. Communities are
less cohesive; even individuals feel more inner conflict. To win an election
or to sell anything in large numbers, you have to paper over these differ-
ences somehow—you have to unify the masses. The only way to accom-
plish this is to create an inclusive image, one that attracts and excites people
on a basic, almost unconscious level. You are not talking about the truth, or
about reality; you are forging a myth.
Myths create identification. Build a myth about yourself and the com-
mon people will identify with your character, your plight, your aspirations,
just as you identify with theirs. This image should include your flaws, high-
light the fact that you are not the best orator, the most educated man, the
smoothest politician. Seeming human and down to earth disguises the
manufactured quality of your image. To sell this image you need to have
the proper vagueness. It is not that you avoid talk of issues and details—that
will make you seem insubstantial—but that all your talk of issues is framed
within the softer context of character, values, and vision. You want to
lower taxes, say, because it will help families—and you are a family person.
You must not only be inspiring but also entertaining—that is a popular,
friendly touch. This strategy will infuriate your opponents, who will try to
unmask you, reveal the truth behind the myth; but that will only make
them seem smug, overserious, defensive, and snobbish. That now becomes
part of their image, and it will help sink them.
2. On Easter Sunday, March 31, 1929, New York churchgoers began to
pour onto Fifth Avenue after the morning service for the annual Easter pa-
rade. The streets were blocked off, and as had been the custom for years,
people were wearing their finest outfits, women in particular showing off
the latest in spring fashions. But this year the promenaders on Fifth Avenue
noticed something else. Two young women were coming down the steps of
Saint Thomas's Church. At the bottom they reached into their purses, took
out cigarettes—Lucky Strikes—and lit up. Then they walked down the
avenue with their escorts, laughing and puffing away. A buzz went through
the crowd. Women had only recently begun smoking cigarettes, and it was
considered improper for a lady to be seen smoking in the street. Only a
certain kind of woman would do that. These two, however, were elegant
and fashionable. People watched them intently, and were further astounded
several minutes later when they reached the next church along the avenue.
Here two more young ladies—equally elegant and well bred—left the
church, approached the two holding cigarettes, and, as if suddenly inspired
to join them, pulled out Lucky Strikes of their own and asked for a light.
Now the four women were marching together down the avenue. They
were steadily joined by more, and soon ten young women were holding
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses • 449
cigarettes in public, as if nothing were more natural. Photographers ap-
peared and took pictures of this novel sight. Usually at the Easter parade,
people would have been whispering about a new hat style or the new
spring color. This year everyone was talking about the daring young
women and their cigarettes. The next day, photographs and articles ap-
peared in the papers about them. A United Press dispatch read, "Just as
Miss Federica Freylinghusen, conspicuous in a tailored outfit of dark grey,
pushed her way thru the jam in front of St. Patrick's, Miss Bertha Hunt and
six colleagues struck another blow in behalf of the liberty of women.
Down Fifth Avenue they strolled, puffing at cigarettes. Miss Hunt issued
the following communique from the smoke-clouded battlefield: 'I hope
that we have started something and that these torches of freedom, with no
particular brand favored, will smash the discriminatory taboo on cigarettes
for women and that our sex will go on breaking down all discriminations.' "
The story was picked up by newspapers around the country, and soon
women in other cities began to light up in the streets. The controversy
raged for weeks, some papers decrying this new habit, others coming to the
women's defense. A few months later, though, public smoking by women
had become a socially acceptable practice. Few people bothered to protest
it anymore.
Interpretation. In January 1929, several New York debutantes received the
same telegram from a Miss Bertha Hunt: "In the interests of equality of the
sexes . . . I and other young women will light another torch of freedom by
smoking cigarettes while strolling on Fifth Avenue Easter Sunday." The
debutantes who ended up participating met beforehand in the office where
Hunt worked as a secretary. They planned what churches to appear at, how
to link up with each other, all the details. Hunt handed out packs of Lucky
Strikes. Everything worked to perfection on the appointed day.
Little did the debutantes know, though, that the whole affair had been
masterminded by a man—Miss Hunt's boss, Edward Bernays, a public rela-
tions adviser to the American Tobacco Company, makers of Lucky Strike.
American Tobacco had been luring women into smoking with all kinds of
clever ads, but the consumption was limited by the fact that smoking in the
street was considered unladylike. The head of American Tobacco had asked
Bernays for his help and Mr. Bernays had obliged him by applying a tech-
nique that was to become his trademark: gain public attention by creating
an event that the media would cover as news. Orchestrate every detail but
make them seem spontaneous. As more people heard of this "event," it
would spark imitative behavior—in this case more women smoking in the
streets.
Bernays, a nephew of Sigmund Freud and perhaps the greatest public
relations genius of the twentieth century, understood a fundamental law of
any kind of sell. The moment the targets know you are after something—a
vote, a sale—they become resistant. But disguise your sales pitch as a news
450 
• 
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
event and not only will you bypass their resistance, you can also create a so-
cial trend that does the selling for you. To make this work, the event you set
up must stand out from all the other events that are covered by the media,
yet it cannot stand out too far or it will seem contrived. In the case of the
Easter parade, Bernays (through Bertha Hunt) chose women who would
seem elegant and proper even with their cigarettes in their hands. Yet in
breaking a social taboo, and doing so as a group, such women would create
an image so dramatic and startling that the media would be unable to pass it
up. An event that is picked up by the news has the imprimatur of reality.
It is important to give this manufactured event positive associations, as
Bernays did in creating a feeling of rebellion, of women banding together.
Associations that are patriotic, say, or subtly sexual, or spiritual—anything
pleasant and seductive—take on a life of their own. Who can resist? People
essentially persuade themselves to join the crowd without even realizing
that a sale has taken place. The feeling of active participation is vital to se-
duction. No one wants to feel left out of a growing movement.
3. In the presidential campaign of 1984, President Ronald Reagan, run-
ning for reelection, told the public, "It's morning again in America." His
presidency, he claimed, had restored American pride. The recent, successful
Olympics in Los Angeles were symbolic of the country's return to strength
and confidence. Who could possibly want to turn the clock back to 1980,
which Reagan's predecessor, Jimmy Carter, had termed a time of malaise?
Reagan's Democratic challenger, Walter Mondale, thought Americans
had had enough of the Reagan soft touch. They were ready for honesty,
and that would be Mondale's appeal. Before a nationwide television audi-
ence, Mondale declared, "Let's tell the truth. Mr. Reagan will raise taxes,
and so will I. He won't tell you. I just did." He repeated this straightfor-
ward approach on numerous occasions. By October his poll numbers had
plunged to all-time lows.
The CBS News reporter Lesley Stahl had been covering the campaign,
and as Election Day neared, she had an uneasy feeling. It wasn't so much
that Reagan had focused on emotions and moods rather than hard issues. It
was more that the media was giving him a free ride; he and his election
team, she felt, were playing the press like a fiddle. They always managed to
get him photographed in the perfect setting, looking strong and presiden-
tial. They fed the press snappy headlines along with dramatic footage of
Reagan in action. They were putting on a great show.
Stahl decided to assemble a news piece that would show the public how
Reagan used television to cover up the negative effects of his policies. The
piece began with a montage of images that his team had orchestrated over
the years: Reagan relaxing on his ranch in jeans; standing tall at the Nor-
mandy invasion tribute in France; throwing a football with his Secret Ser-
vice bodyguards; sitting in an inner-city classroom. . . . Over these images
Stahl asked, "How does Ronald Reagan use television? Brilliantly. He's
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses 
• 
451
been criticized as the rich man's president, but the TV pictures say it isn't
so. At seventy-three, Mr. Reagan could have an age problem. But the TV
pictures say it isn't so. Americans want to feel proud of their country again,
and of their president. And the TV pictures say you can. The orchestration
of television coverage absorbs the White House. Their goal? To emphasize
the president's greatest asset, which, his aides say, is his personality. They
provide pictures of him looking like a leader. Confident, with his Marlboro
man walk."
Over images of Reagan shaking hands with handicapped athletes in
wheelchairs and cutting the ribbon at a new facility for seniors, Stahl con-
tinued, "They also aim to erase the negatives. Mr. Reagan tried to counter
the memory of an unpopular issue with a carefully chosen backdrop that
actually contradicts the president's policy. Look at the handicapped Olym-
pics, or the opening ceremony of an old-age home. No hint that he tried
to cut the budgets for the disabled and for federally subsidized housing for
the elderly." On and on went the piece, showing the gap between the feel-
good images that played on the screen and the reality of Reagan's actions.
"President Reagan," Stahl concluded, "is accused of running a campaign in
which he highlights the images and hides from the issues. But there's no
evidence that the charges will hurt him because when people see the presi-
dent on television, he makes them feel good, about America, about them-
selves, and about him."
Stahl depended on the good will of the Reagan people in covering the
White House, but her piece was strongly negative, so she braced herself for
trouble. Yet a senior White House official telephoned her that evening:
"Great piece," he said. "What?" asked a stunned Stahl. "Great piece," he re-
peated. "Did you listen to what I said?" she asked. "Lesley, when you're
showing four and a half minutes of great pictures of Ronald Reagan, no
one listens to what you say. Don't you know that the pictures are overriding
your message because they conflict with your message? The public sees
those pictures and they block your message. They didn't even hear what
you said. So, in our minds, it was a four-and-a-half-minute free ad for the
Ronald Reagan campaign for reelection."
Interpretation. Most of the men who worked on communications for
Reagan had a background in marketing. They knew the importance of
telling a story crisply, sharply, and with good visuals. Each morning they
went over what the headline of the day should be, and how they could
shape this into a short visual piece, getting the president into a video op-
portunity. They paid detailed attention to the backdrop behind the presi-
dent in the Oval Office, to the way the camera framed him when he was
with other world leaders, and to having him filmed in motion, with his
confident walk. The visuals carried the message better than any words
could do. As one Reagan official said, "What are you going to believe, the
facts or your eyes?"
452 
• 
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
Free yourself from the need to communicate in the normal direct man-
ner and you will present yourself with greater opportunities for the soft
sell. Make the words you say unobtrusive, vague, alluring. And pay much
greater attention to your style, the visuals, the story they tell. Convey a
sense of movement and progress by showing yourself in motion. Express
confidence not through facts and figures but through colors and positive
imagery, appealing to the infant in everyone. Let the media cover you un-
guided and you are at their mercy. So turn the dynamic around—the press
needs drama and visuals? Provide them. It is fine to discuss issues or "truth"
as long as you package it entertainingly. Remember: images linger in the
mind long after words are forgotten. Do not preach to the public—that
never works. Learn to express your message through visuals that insinuate
positive emotions and happy feelings.
4. In 1919, the movie press agent Harry Reichenbach was asked to do ad-
vance publicity for a picture called The Virgin of Stamboul. It was the usual
romantic potboiler in an exotic locale, and normally a publicist would
mount a campaign with alluring posters and advertisements. But Harry
never operated the usual way. He had begun his career as a carnival barker,
and there the only way to get the public into your tent was to stand out
from the other barkers. So Harry dug up eight scruffy Turks whom he
found living in Manhattan, dressed them up in costumes (flowing sea-green
trousers, gold-crescented turbans) provided by the movie studio, rehearsed
them in every line and gesture, and checked them into an expensive hotel.
Word quickly spread to the newspapers (with a little help from Harry) that
a delegation of Turks had arrived in New York on a secret diplomatic
mission.
Reporters converged on the hotel. Since his appearance in New York
was clearly no longer a secret, the head of the mission, "Sheikh Ali Ben
Mohammed," invited them up to his suite. The newspapermen were im-
pressed by the Turks' colorful outfits, salaams, and rituals. The sheikh then
explained why he had come to New York. A beautiful young woman
named Sari, known as the Virgin of Stamboul, had been betrothed to the
sheikh's brother. An American soldier passing through had fallen in love
with her and had managed to steal her from her home and take her to
America. Her mother had died from grief. The sheikh had found out she
was in New York, and had come to bring her back.
Mesmerized by the sheikh's colorful language and by the romantic tale
he told, the reporters filled the papers with stories of the Virgin of Stam-
boul for the next several days. The sheikh was filmed in Central Park and
feted by the cream of New York society. Finally "Sari" was found, and the
press reported the reunion between the sheikh and the hysterical girl (an
actress with an exotic look). Soon after, The Virgin of Stamboul opened in
New York. Its story was much like the "real" events reported in the papers.
Was this a coincidence? A quickly made film version of the true story? No
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses 
• 
453
one seemed to know, but the public was too curious to care, and The Virgin
of Stamboul broke box office records.
A year later Harry was asked to publicize a film called The Forbidden
Woman. It was one of the worst movies he had ever seen. Theater owners
had no interest in showing it. Harry went to work. For eighteen days
straight he ran an ad in all of the major New York newspapers: WATCH THE
SKY ON THE NIGHT OF FEBRUARY 21ST! IF IT IS GREEN—GO THE CAPITOL IF
IT IS RED—GO THE RIVOLI IF IT IS PINK—GO TO THE STRAND IF IT IS BLUE—
GO TO THE RIALTO FOR ON FEBRUARY 21ST THE SKY WILL TELL YOU WHERE
THE BEST SHOW IN TOWN CAN BE SEEN! (The Capitol, the Rivoli, the
Strand, and the Rialto were the four big first-run movie houses on Broad-
way.) Almost everyone saw the ad and wondered what this fabulous show
was. The owner of the Capitol asked Harry if he knew anything about it,
and Harry let him in on the secret: it was all a publicity stunt for an un-
booked picture. The owner asked to see a screening of The Forbidden
Woman; through most of the film, Harry yakked about the publicity cam-
paign, distracting the man from the dullness onscreen. The theater owner
decided to show the film for a week, and so, on the evening of Febru-
ary 21, as a heavy snowstorm blanketed the city and all eyes turned to the
sky, giant rays of light poured out from the tallest buildings—a brilliant
show of green. An enormous crowd flocked to the Capitol theater. Those
who did not get in kept coming back. Somehow, with a packed house and
an excited crowd, the film did not seem quite so bad.
The following year Harry was asked to publicize a gangster picture
called Outside the Law. On high-ways across the country he set up billboards
that read, in giant letters, IF Y O U DANCE O N SUNDAY, Y O U ARE OUTSIDE T H E
LAW. On other billboards the word "dance" was replaced by "play golf" or
"play pool" and so on. On a top corner of the billboards was a shield bear-
ing the initials "PD." The public assumed this meant "police department"
(actually, it stood for Priscilla Dean, the star of the movie) and that the
police, backed by religious organizations, were prepared to enforce
decades-old blue laws prohibiting "sinful" activities on a Sunday. Suddenly
a controversy was sparked. Theater owners, golfing associations, and dance
organizations led a countercampaign against the blue laws; they put up their
own billboards, exclaiming that if you did those things on Sunday, you
were not "OUTSIDE THE LAW" and issuing a call for Americans to have some
fun in their lives. For weeks the words "Outside the Law" were everywhere
seen and everywhere on people's lips. In the midst of this the film
opened—on a Sunday—in four New York theaters simultaneously, some-
thing that had never happened before. And it ran for months throughout
the country, also on Sundays. It was one of the big hits of the year.
Interpretation. Harry Reichenbach, perhaps the greatest press agent in
movie history, never forgot the lessons he had learned as a barker. The car-
nival is full of bright lights, color, noise, and the ebb and flow of the
454 
• 
Appendix B: Soft Seduction: How to Sell Anything to the Masses
crowd. Such environments have profound effects on people. A clearheaded
person could probably tell that the magic shows are fake, the fierce animals
trained, the dangerous stunts relatively safe. But people want to be enter-
tained; it is one of their greatest needs. Surrounded by color and excite-
ment, they suspend their disbelief for a while and imagine that the magic
and danger are real. They are fascinated by what seems to be both fake and
real at the same time. Harry's publicity stunts merely re-created the carnival
on a larger scale. He pulled people in with the lure of colorful costumes, a
great story, irresistible spectacle. He held their attention with mystery, con-
troversy, whatever it took. Catching a kind of fever, as they would at the
carnival, they flocked without thinking to the films he publicized.
The lines between fiction and reality, news and entertainment are even
more blurred today than in Harry Reichenbach's time. What opportunities
that presents for soft seduction! The media is desperate for events with en-
tertainment value, inherent drama. Feed that need. The public has a weak-
ness for what seems both realistic and slightly fantastical—for real events
with a cinematic edge. Play to that weakness. Stage events the way Bernays
did, events the media can pick up as news. But here you are not starting a
social trend, you are after something more short term: to win people's at-
tention, to create a momentary stir, to lure them into your tent. Make your
events and publicity stunts plausible and somewhat realistic, but make their
colors a little brighter than usual, the characters larger than life, the drama
higher. Provide an edge of sex and danger. You are creating a confluence of
real life and fiction—the essence of any seduction.
It is not enough, however, to win people's attention: you need to hold
it long enough to hook them. This can always be done by sparking contro-
versy, the way Harry liked to stir up debates about morals. While the media
argues about the effect you are having on people's values, it is broadcasting
your name everywhere and inadvertently bestowing upon you the edge
that will make you so attractive to the public.



THE 33 STRATEGIES OF WAR
ROBERT GREENE, author of The 48 Laws of Power and The Art of
Seduction, has a degree in classical studies. He lives in Los Angeles.
JOOST ELFFERS is the producer of The 48 Laws of Power, The Art of
Seduction and a number of other bestselling books. He lives in New York.
OTHER TITLES BY ROBERT GREENE
The Art of Seduction (A Joost Elffers Production)
The 48 Laws of Power (A Joost Elffers Production)
THE 33 STRATEGIES OF
W
A
R
ROBERT GREENE
A JOOST ELFFERS PRODUCTION


This paperback edition published in 2007
First published in Great Britain in 2006 by
PROFILE BOOKS LTD
3A Exmouth House
Pine Street
London EC1R 0JH
www.profilebooks.com
First published in the United States in 2006 by
Viking Penguin, a member of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
Copyright © Robert Greene and Joost Elffers, 2006
constitute an extension of this copyright page
1 3 5 7 9 10 8 6 4 2
Printed and bound in China
Phoenix Offset
Set in Baskerville and Times Ten
Designed by Joost Elffers and Amy Hill


The moral right of the author has been asserted.
All rights reserved. Without limiting the rights under copyright reserved above, no part of this
publication may be reproduced,
stored or introduced into a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any
form or by any means (electronic, mechanical, photocopying,
recording or otherwise), without the
prior written permission of both the copyright owner and the publisher of this book.
A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
eISBN: 978-1-84765-142-6
To Napoleon, Sun-tzu, the goddess Athena, and my cat BRUTUS.
CONTENTS
PREFACE

PART I SELF-DIRECTED WARFARE

1
DECLARE WAR ON YOUR ENEMIES: THE POLARITY STRATEGY
Life is endless battle and conflict, and you cannot fight effectively unless
you can identify your enemies. Learn to smoke
out your enemies, to spot
them by the signs and patterns that reveal hostility. Then, once you have
them in your sights, inwardly
declare war. Your enemies can fill you with
purpose and direction.

2
DO NOT FIGHT THE LAST WAR: THE GUERRILLA-WAR-OF-THE-
MIND STRATEGY
What most often weighs you down and brings you misery is the past. You
must consciously wage war against the past and force
yourself to react to
the present moment. Be ruthless on yourself; do not repeat the same tired
methods. Wage guerrilla war
on your mind, allowing no static lines of
defense—make everything fluid and mobile.

3
AMIDST THE TURMOIL OF EVENTS, DO NOT LOSE YOUR
PRESENCE OF MIND:
THE COUNTERBALANCE STRATEGY
In the heat of battle, the mind tends to lose its balance. It is vital to keep
your presence of mind, maintaining your mental
powers, whatever the
circumstances. Make the mind tougher by exposing it to adversity. Learn to
detach yourself from the chaos
of the battlefield.

4
CREATE A SENSE OF URGENCY AND DESPERATION: THE DEATH-
GROUND STRATEGY
You are your own worst enemy. You waste precious time dreaming of the
future instead of engaging in the present. Cut your
ties to the past; enter
unknown territory. Place yourself on “death ground,” where your back is
against the wall and you have
to fight like hell to get out alive.


PART II ORGANIZATIONAL (TEAM) WARFARE

5
AVOID THE SNARES OF GROUPTHINK: THE COMMAND-AND-
CONTROL STRATEGY
The problem in leading any group is that people inevitably have their own
agendas. You have to create a chain of command in
which they do not feel
constrained by your influence yet follow your lead. Create a sense of
participation, but do not fall
into groupthink—the irrationality of collective
decision making.

6
SEGMENT YOUR FORCES: THE CONTROLLED-CHAOS STRATEGY
The critical elements in war are speed and adaptability—the ability to move
and make decisions faster than the enemy. Break
your forces into
independent groups that can operate on their own. Make your forces elusive
and unstoppable by infusing them
with the spirit of the campaign, giving
them a mission to accomplish, and then letting them run.

7
TRANSFORM YOUR WAR INTO A CRUSADE: MORALE
STRATEGIES
The secret to motivating people and maintaining their morale is to get them
to think less about themselves and more about
the group. Involve them in a
cause, a crusade against a hated enemy. Make them see their survival as
tied to the success of
the army as a whole.


PART III DEFENSIVE WARFARE

8
PICK YOUR BATTLES CAREFULLY: THE PERFECT-ECONOMY
STRATEGY
We all have limitations—our energies and skills will take us only so far. You
must know your limits and pick your battles
carefully. Consider the hidden
costs of a war: time lost, political goodwill squandered, an embittered
enemy bent on revenge.
Sometimes it is better to wait, to undermine your
enemies covertly rather than hitting them straight on.

9
TURN THE TABLES: THE COUNTERATTACK STRATEGY
Moving first—initiating the attack—will often put you at a disadvantage:
You are exposing your strategy and limiting your
options. Instead, discover
the power of holding back and letting the other side move first, giving you
the flexibility to
counterattack from any angle. If your opponents are
aggressive, bait them into a rash attack that will leave them in a weak
position.

10
CREATE A THREATENING PRESENCE: DETERRENCE STRATEGIES
The best way to fight off aggressors is to keep them from attacking you in
the first place. Build up a reputation: You’re
a little crazy. Fighting you is
not worth it. Uncertainty is sometimes better than overt threat: If your
opponents are never
sure what messing with you will cost, they will not
want to find out.

11
TRADE SPACE FOR TIME: THE NONENGAGEMENT STRATEGY
Retreat in the face of a strong enemy is a sign not of weakness but of
strength. By resisting the temptation to respond to
an aggressor, you buy
yourself valuable time—time to recover, to think, to gain perspective.
Sometimes you can accomplish
most by doing nothing.


PART IV OFFENSIVE WARFARE

12
LOSE BATTLES BUT WIN THE WAR: GRAND STRATEGY
Grand strategy is the art of looking beyond the battle and calculating
ahead. It requires that you focus on your ultimate
goal and plot to reach it.
Let others get caught up in the twists and turns of the battle, relishing their
little victories.
Grand strategy will bring you the ultimate reward: the last
laugh.

13
KNOW YOUR ENEMY: THE INTELLIGENCE STRATEGY
The target of your strategies should be less the army you face than the mind
of the man or woman who runs it. If you understand
how that mind works,
you have the key to deceiving and controlling it. Train yourself to read
people, picking up the signals
they unconsciously send about their
innermost thoughts and intentions. |

14
OVERWHELM RESISTANCE WITH SPEED AND SUDDENNESS: THE
BLITZKRIEG STRATEGY
In a world in which many people are indecisive and overly cautious, the use
of speed will bring you untold power. Striking
first, before your opponents
have time to think or prepare, will make them emotional, unbalanced, and
prone to error.

15
CONTROL THE DYNAMIC: FORCING STRATEGIES
People are constantly struggling to control you. The only way to get the
upper hand is to make your play for control more
intelligent and insidious.
Instead of trying to dominate the other side’s every move, work to define the
nature of the relationship
itself. Maneuver to control your opponents’
minds, pushing their emotional buttons and compelling them to make
mistakes.

16
HIT THEM WHERE IT HURTS: THE CENTER-OF-GRAVITY
STRATEGY
Everyone has a source of power on which he or she depends. When you
look at your rivals, search below the surface for that
source, the center of
gravity that holds the entire structure together. Hitting them there will inflict
disproportionate pain.
Find what the other side most cherishes and protects
—that is where you must strike.

17
DEFEAT THEM IN DETAIL: THE DIVIDE-AND-CONQUER
STRATEGY
Never be intimidated by your enemy’s appearance. Instead, look at the parts
that make up the whole. By separating the parts,
sowing dissension and
division, you can bring down even the most formidable foe. When you are
facing troubles or enemies,
turn a large problem into small, eminently
defeatable parts.

18
EXPOSE AND ATTACK YOUR OPPONENT’S SOFT FLANK: THE
TURNING STRATEGY
When you attack people directly, you stiffen their resistance and make your
task that much harder. There is a better way:
Distract your opponents’
attention to the front, then attack them from the side, where they least expect
it. Bait people into
going out on a limb, exposing their weakness, then rake
them with fire from the side.

19
ENVELOP THE ENEMY: THE ANNIHILATION STRATEGY
People will use any kind of gap in your defenses to attack you. So offer no
gaps. The secret is to envelop your opponents—create
relentless pressure on
them from all sides and close off their access to the outside world. As you
sense their weakening resolve,
crush their willpower by tightening the
noose.

20
MANEUVER THEM INTO WEAKNESS: THE RIPENING-FOR-THE-
SICKLE STRATEGY
No matter how strong you are, fighting endless battles with people is
exhausting, costly, and unimaginative. Wise strategists
prefer the art of
maneuver: Before the battle even begins, they find ways to put their
opponents in positions of such weakness
that victory is easy and quick.
Create dilemmas: Devise maneuvers that give them a choice of ways to
respond-all of them bad.

21
NEGOTIATE WHILE ADVANCING: THE DIPLOMATIC-WAR
STRATEGY
Before and during negotiations, you must keep advancing, creating
relentless pressure and compelling the other side to settle
on your terms.
The more you take, the more you can give back in meaningless concessions.
Create a reputation for being tough
and uncompromising, so that people
are back on their heels before they even meet you.

22
KNOW HOW TO END THINGS: THE EXIT STRATEGY
You are judged in this world by how well you bring things to an end. A
messy or incomplete conclusion can reverberate for
years to come. The art
of ending things well is knowing when to stop. The height of strategic
wisdom is to avoid all conflicts
and entanglements from which there are no
realistic exits. 


PART V UNCONVENTIONAL (DIRTY) WARFARE

23
WEAVE A SEAMLESS BLEND OF FACT AND FICTION:
MISPERCEPTION STRATEGIES
Since no creature can survive without the ability to see or sense what is
going on around it, make it hard for your enemies
to know what is going on
around them, including what you are doing. Feed their expectations,
manufacture a reality to match their desires, and they will fool themselves.
Control people’s perceptions of reality and you control them.

24
TAKE THE LINE OF LEAST EXPECTATION: THE ORDINARY-
EXTRAORDINARY STRATEGY
People expect your behavior to conform to known patterns and conventions.
Your task as a strategist is to upset their expectations.
First do something
ordinary and conventional to fix their image of you, then hit them with the
extraordinary. The terror is
greater for being so sudden. Sometimes the
ordinary is extraordinary because it is unexpected.

25
OCCUPY THE MORAL HIGH GROUND: THE RIGHTEOUS
STRATEGY
In a political world, the cause you are fighting for must seem more just than
the enemy’s. By questioning your opponents’
motives and making them
appear evil, you can narrow their base of support and room to maneuver.
When you yourself come under
moral attack from a clever enemy, do not
whine or get angry; fight fire with fire.

26
DENY THEM TARGETS: THE STRATEGY OF THE VOID
The feeling of emptiness or void—silence, isolation, nonengagement with
others—is for most people intolerable. Give your enemies
no target to
attack, be dangerous but elusive, then watch as they chase you into the void.
Instead of frontal battles, deliver
irritating but damaging side attacks and
pinprick bites.

27
SEEM TO WORK FOR THE INTERESTS OF OTHERS WHILE
FURTHERING YOUR OWN:
THE ALLIANCE STRATEGY
The best way to advance your cause with the minimum of effort and
bloodshed is to create a constantly shifting network of
alliances, getting
others to compensate for your deficiencies, do your dirty work, fight your
wars. At the same time, you
must work to sow dissension in the alliances of
others, weakening your enemies by isolating them.

28
GIVE YOUR RIVALS ENOUGH ROPE TO HANG THEMSELVES:
THE ONE-UPMANSHIP STRATEGY
Life’s greatest dangers often come not from external enemies but from our
supposed colleagues and friends who pretend to work
for the common
cause while scheming to sabotage us. Work to instill doubts and insecurities
in such rivals, getting them to
think too much and act defensively. Make
them hang themselves through their own self-destructive tendencies, leaving
you blameless
and clean.

29
TAKE SMALL BITES: THE FAIT ACCOMPLI STRATEGY
Overt power grabs and sharp rises to the top are dangerous, creating envy,
distrust, and suspicion. Often the best solution
is to take small bites,
swallow little territories, playing upon people’s relatively short attention
spans. Before people
realize it, you have accumulated an empire.

30
PENETRATE THEIR MINDS: COMMUNICATION STRATEGIES
Communication is a kind of war, its field of battle the resistant and
defensive minds of the people you want to influence.
The goal is to
penetrate their defenses and occupy their minds. Learn to infiltrate your
ideas behind enemy lines, sending
messages through little details, luring
people into coming to the conclusions you desire and into thinking they’ve
gotten
there by themselves.

31
DESTROY FROM WITHIN: THE INNER-FRONT STRATEGY
By infiltrating your opponents’ ranks, working from within to bring them
down, you give them nothing to see or react against—the
ultimate
advantage. To take something you want, do not fight those who have it, but
rather join them—then either slowly make
it your own or wait for the
moment to stage a coup

32
DOMINATE WHILE SEEMING TO SUBMIT: THE PASSIVE-
AGGRESSION STRATEGY
In a world where political considerations are paramount, the most effective
form of aggression is the best hidden one: aggression
behind a compliant,
even loving exterior. To follow the passive-aggression strategy you must
seem to go along with people,
offering no resistance. But actually you
dominate the situation. Just make sure you have disguised your aggression
enough
that you can deny it exists.

33
SOW UNCERTAINTY AND PANIC THROUGH ACTS OF TERROR:
THE CHAIN-REACTION STRATEGY
Terror is the ultimate way to paralyze a people’s will to resist and destroy
their ability to plan a strategic response. The
goal in a terror campaign is
not battlefield victory but causing maximum chaos and provoking the other
side into desperate
overreaction. To plot the most effective counterstrategy,
victims of terror must stay balanced. One’s rationality is the last
line of
defense.

SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
PREFACE
We live in a culture that promotes democratic values of being fair to one
and all, the importance of fitting into a group,
and knowing how to
cooperate with other people. We are taught early on in life that those who
are outwardly combative and
aggressive pay a social price: unpopularity
and isolation. These values of harmony and cooperation are perpetuated in
subtle
and not-so-subtle ways—through books on how to be successful in
life; through the pleasant, peaceful exteriors that those
who have gotten
ahead in the world present to the public; through notions of correctness that
saturate the public space. The
problem for us is that we are trained and
prepared for peace, and we are not at all prepared for what confronts us in
the
real world—war.
The life of man upon earth is a warfare.
JOB 7:1
Qui desiderat pacem, praeparet bellum (let him who wants peace prepare
for war) 
VEGETIUS, A.D. FOURTH CENTURY
This war exists on several levels. Most obviously, we have our rivals on
the other side. The world has become increasingly
competitive and nasty. In
politics, business, even the arts, we face opponents who will do almost
anything to gain an edge.
More troubling and complex, however, are the
battles we face with those who are supposedly on our side. There are those
who
outwardly play the team game, who act very friendly and agreeable,
but who sabotage us behind the scenes, use the group to
promote their own
agenda. Others, more difficult to spot, play subtle games of passive
aggression, offering help that never
comes, instilling guilt as a secret
weapon. On the surface everything seems peaceful enough, but just below
it, it is every
man and woman for him- or herself, this dynamic infecting
even families and relationships. The culture may deny this reality
and
promote a gentler picture, but we know it and feel it, in our battle scars.
It is not that we and our colleagues are ignoble creatures who fail to live
up to ideals of peace and selflessness, but that
we cannot help the way we
are. We have aggressive impulses that are impossible to ignore or repress.
In the past, individuals
could expect a group—the state, an extended family,
a company—to take care of them, but this is no longer the case, and in
this
uncaring world we have to think first and foremost of ourselves and our
interests. What we need are not impossible and
inhuman ideals of peace and
cooperation to live up to, and the confusion that brings us, but rather
practical knowledge on
how to deal with conflict and the daily battles we
face. And this knowledge is not about how to be more forceful in getting
what we want or defending ourselves but rather how to be more rational and
strategic when it comes to conflict, channeling
our aggressive impulses
instead of denying or repressing them. If there is an ideal to aim for, it
should be that of the strategic
warrior, the man or woman who manages
difficult situations and people through deft and intelligent maneuver.
[Strategy] is more than a science: it is the application of knowledge to
practical life, the development of thought capable of modifying
the original
guiding idea in the light of ever-changing situations; it is the art of acting
under the pressure of the most
difficult conditions.
HELMUTH VON MOLTKE, 1800–1891
Many psychologists and sociologists have argued that it is through
conflict that problems are often solved and real differences
reconciled. Our
successes and failures in life can be traced to how well or how badly we
deal with the inevitable conflicts
that confront us in society. The common
ways that people deal with them—trying to avoid all conflict, getting
emotional and
lashing out, turning sly and manipulative—are all
counterproductive in the long run, because they are not under conscious
and
rational control and often make the situation worse. Strategic warriors
operate much differently. They think ahead toward
their long-term goals,
decide which fights to avoid and which are inevitable, know how to control
and channel their emotions.
When forced to fight, they do so with
indirection and subtle maneuver, making their manipulations hard to trace.
In this way
they can maintain the peaceful exterior so cherished in these
political times.
This ideal of fighting rationally comes to us from organized warfare,
where the art of strategy was invented and refined.
In the beginning, war
was not at all strategic. Battles between tribes were fought in a brutal
manner, a kind of ritual of
violence in which individuals could display their
heroism. But as tribes expanded and evolved into states, it became all too
apparent that war had too many hidden costs, that waging it blindly often
led to exhaustion and self-destruction, even for
the victor. Somehow wars
had to be fought more rationally.
The word “strategy” comes from the ancient Greek word strategos,
meaning literally “the leader of the army.” Strategy in this sense was the art
of generalship, of commanding the entire war
effort, deciding what
formations to deploy, what terrain to fight on, what maneuvers to use to
gain an edge. And as this knowledge
progressed, military leaders
discovered that the more they thought and planned ahead, the more
possibilities they had for
success. Novel strategies could allow them to
defeat much larger armies, as Alexander the Great did in his victories over
the Persians. In facing savvy opponents who were also using strategy, there
developed an upward pressure: to gain an advantage,
a general had to be
even more strategic, more indirect and clever, than the other side. Over time
the arts of generalship
became steadily more sophisticated, as more
strategies were invented.
Although the word “strategy” itself is Greek in origin, the concept
appears in all cultures, in all periods. Solid principles
on how to deal with
the inevitable accidents of war, how to craft the ultimate plan, how to best
organize the army—all of
this can be found in war manuals from ancient
China to modern Europe. The counterattack, the flanking or enveloping
maneuver,
and the arts of deception are common to the armies of Genghis
Khan, Napoleon, and the Zulu king Shaka. As a whole, these principles
and
strategies indicate a kind of universal military wisdom, a set of adaptable
patterns that can increase the chances for
victory.
“Well, then, my boy, develop your strategy So that prizes in games won’t
elude your grasp. Strategy makes a better woodcutter than strength.
Strategy keeps a pilot’s ship on course When crosswinds blow it over the
wine-blue sea. And strategy wins races for charioteers. One type of driver
trusts his horses and car And swerves mindlessly this way and that, All over
the course, without reining
his horses. But a man who knows how to win
with lesser horses Keeps his eye on the post and cuts the turn close, And
from the start keeps
tension on the reins With a firm hand as he watches the
leader.”
THE ILIAD, HOMER, CIRCA NINTH CENTURY B.C.
Perhaps the greatest strategist of them all was Sun-tzu, author of the
ancient Chinese classic The Art of War. In his book, written probably the
fourth century B.C., can be found traces of almost all the strategic patterns
and principles
later developed over the course of centuries. But what
connects them, in fact what constitutes the art of war itself in Sun-tzu’s
eyes, is the ideal of winning without bloodshed. By playing on the
psychological weaknesses of the opponent, by maneuvering
him into
precarious positions, by inducing feelings of frustration and confusion, a
strategist can get the other side to break
down mentally before surrendering
physically. In this way victory can be had at a much lower cost. And the
state that wins
wars with few lives lost and resources squandered is the state
that can thrive over greater periods of time. Certainly most
wars are not
waged so rationally, but those campaigns in history that have followed this
principle (Scipio Africanus in Spain,
Napoleon at Ulm, T. E. Lawrence in
the desert campaigns of World War I) stand out above the rest and serve as
the ideal.
War is not some separate realm divorced from the rest of society. It is an
eminently human arena, full of the best and the
worst of our nature. War
also reflects trends in society. The evolution toward more unconventional,
dirtier strategies—guerrilla
warfare, terrorism—mirrors a similar evolution
in society, where almost anything goes. The strategies that succeed in war,
whether conventional or unconventional, are based on timeless psychology,
and great military failures have much to teach us
about human stupidity and
the limits of force in any arena. The strategic ideal in war—being
supremely rational and emotionally
balanced, striving to win with minimum
bloodshed and loss of resources—has infinite application and relevance to
our daily
battles.
Inculcated with the values of our times, many will argue that organized
war is inherently barbaric—a relic of man’s violent
past and something to
be overcome for good. To promote the arts of warfare in a social setting,
they will say, is to stand
in the way of progress and to encourage conflict
and dissension. Isn’t there enough of that in the world? This argument is
very seductive, but not at all reasonable. There will always be those in
society and in the world at large who are more aggressive
than we are, who
find ways to get what they want, by hook or by crook. We must be vigilant
and must know how to defend ourselves
against such types. Civilized
values are not furthered if we are forced to surrender to those who are crafty
and strong. In
fact, being pacifists in the face of such wolves is the source
of endless tragedy.
The self is the friend of a man who masters himself through the self, but for
a man without self-mastery, the self is like
an enemy at war.
THE BHAGAVAD GITA, INDIA, CIRCA A.D. FIRST CENTURY
Mahatma Gandhi, who elevated nonviolence into a great weapon for
social change, had one simple goal later on in his life:
to rid India of the
British overlords who had crippled it for so many centuries. The British
were clever rulers. Gandhi understood
that if nonviolence were to work, it
would have to be extremely strategic, demanding much thought and
planning. He went so
far as to call nonviolence a new way of waging war.
To promote any value, even peace and pacifism, you must be willing to
fight for it and to aim at results—not simply the good, warm feeling that
expressing such ideas might bring you. The moment
you aim for results,
you are in the realm of strategy. War and strategy have an inexorable logic:
if you want or desire anything,
you must be ready and able to fight for it.
Others will argue that war and strategy are primarily matters that concern
men, particularly those who are aggressive or among
the power elite. The
study of war and strategy, they will say, is a masculine, elitist, and
repressive pursuit, a way for
power to perpetuate itself. Such an argument is
dangerous nonsense. In the beginning, strategy indeed belonged to a select
few—a general, his staff, the king, a handful of courtiers. Soldiers were not
taught strategy, for that would not have helped
them on the battlefield.
Besides, it was unwise to arm one’s soldiers with the kind of practical
knowledge that could help
them to organize a mutiny or rebellion. The era
of colonialism took this principle further: the indigenous peoples of
Europe’s
colonies were conscripted into the Western armies and did much
of the police work, but even those who rose to the upper echelons
were
rigorously kept ignorant of knowledge of strategy, which was considered far
too dangerous for them to know. To maintain
strategy and the arts of war as
a branch of specialized knowledge is actually to play into the hands of the
elites and repressive
powers, who like to divide and conquer. If strategy is
the art of getting results, of putting ideas into practice, then it
should be
spread far and wide, particularly among those who have been traditionally
kept ignorant of it, including women.
In the mythologies of almost all
cultures, the great gods of war are women, including Athena of ancient
Greece. A woman’s
lack of interest in strategy and war is not biological but
social and perhaps political.
Instead of resisting the pull of strategy and the virtues of rational warfare
or imagining that it is beneath you, it is far
better to confront its necessity.
Mastering the art will only make your life more peaceful and productive in
the long run,
for you will know how to play the game and win without
violence. Ignoring it will lead to a life of endless confusion and
defeat.
The following are six fundamental ideals you should aim for in
transforming yourself into a strategic warrior in daily life.
Look at things as they are, not as your emotions color them. In strategy
you must see your emotional responses to events as a kind of disease that
must be remedied. Fear will make you
overestimate the enemy and act too
defensively. Anger and impatience will draw you into rash actions that will
cut off your
options. Overconfidence, particularly as a result of success, will
make you go too far. Love and affection will blind you
to the treacherous
maneuvers of those apparently on your side. Even the subtlest gradations of
these emotions can color the
way you look at events. The only remedy is to
be aware that the pull of emotion is inevitable, to notice it when it is
happening,
and to compensate for it. When you have success, be extra wary.
When you are angry, take no action. When you are fearful,
know you are
going to exaggerate the dangers you face. War demands the utmost in
realism, seeing things as they are. The more
you can limit or compensate
for your emotional responses, the closer you will come to this ideal.
Although a goddess of war, [Athena] gets no pleasure from battle . . . but
rather from settling disputes, and upholding the law by pacific means. She
bears no arms in time of peace and, if ever
she needs any, will usually
borrow a set from Zeus. Her mercy is great. . . . Yet, once engaged in battle,
she never loses
the day, even against Ares himself, being better grounded in
tactics and strategy than he; and wise captains always approach
her for
advice.
THE GREEK MYTHS VOL. 1, ROBERT GRAVES, 1955
Judge people by their actions. The brilliance of warfare is that no amount
of eloquence or talk can explain away a failure on the battlefield. A general
has led his troops to defeat, lives have been wasted, and that is how history
will judge him. You must strive to apply this
ruthless standard in your daily
life, judging people by the results of their actions, the deeds that can be seen
and measured,
the maneuvers they have used to gain power. What people
say about themselves does not matter; people will say anything. Look
at
what they have done; deeds do not lie. You must also apply this logic to
yourself. In looking back at a defeat, you must
identify the things you could
have done differently. It is your own bad strategies, not the unfair opponent,
that are to blame
for your failures. You are responsible for the good and bad
in your life. As a corollary to this, look at everything other
people do as a
strategic maneuver, an attempt to gain victory. People who accuse you of
being unfair, for example, who try
to make you feel guilty, who talk about
justice and morality, are trying to gain an advantage on the chessboard.
Depend on your own arms. In the search for success in life, people tend to
rely on things that seem simple and easy or that have worked before. This
could mean accumulating wealth, resources, a large number of allies, or the
latest technology and the advantage it brings.
This is being materialistic and
mechanical. But true strategy is psychological—a matter of intelligence, not
material force.
Everything in life can be taken away from you and generally
will be at some point. Your wealth vanishes, the latest gadgetry
suddenly
becomes passé, your allies desert you. But if your mind is armed with the
art of war, there is no power that can
take that away. In the middle of a
crisis, your mind will find its way to the right solution. Having superior
strategies at
your fingertips will give your maneuvers irresistible force. As
Sun-tzu says, “Being unconquerable lies with yourself.”
Worship Athena, not Ares. In the mythology of ancient Greece, the
cleverest immortal of them all was the goddess Metis. To prevent her from
outwitting
and destroying him, Zeus married her, then swallowed her
whole, hoping to incorporate her wisdom in the process. But Metis
was
pregnant with Zeus’s child, the goddess Athena, who was subsequently
born from his forehead. As befitting her lineage,
she was blessed with the
craftiness of Metis and the warrior mentality of Zeus. She was deemed by
the Greeks to be the goddess
of strategic warfare, her favorite mortal and
acolyte being the crafty Odysseus. Ares was the god of war in its direct and
brutal form. The Greeks despised Ares and worshipped Athena, who always
fought with the utmost intelligence and subtlety.
Your interest in war is not
the violence, the brutality, the waste of lives and resources, but the
rationality and pragmatism
it forces on us and the ideal of winning without
bloodshed. The Ares figures of the world are actually quite stupid and
easily
misled. Using the wisdom of Athena, your goal is to turn the violence
and aggression of such types against them, making their
brutality the cause
of their downfall. Like Athena, you are always one step ahead, making your
moves more indirect. Your goal
is to blend philosophy and war, wisdom and
battle, into an unbeatable blend.
And Athena, whose eyes were as grey as owls: “Diomedes, son of Tydeus . .
. You don’t have to fear Ares or any other Of the immortals. Look who is
here beside you. Drive your horses directly at Ares And when you’re in
range, strike. Don’t be in awe of Ares. He’s nothing but A shifty lout . . .” . .
. And when Diomedes thrust next, She drove his spear home to the pit Of
Ares’ belly, where the kilt-piece covered it.
. . . [Ares] quickly scaled the
heights of Olympus, Sat down sulking beside Cronion Zeus, Showed him the
immortal blood oozing From his
wound, and whined these winged words:
“Father Zeus, doesn’t it infuriate you To see this violence? We gods Get the
worst of it from each other Whenever we try to help out men . . .” And Zeus,
from under thunderhead brows: “Shifty lout. Don’t sit here by me and
whine. You’re the most loathsome god on Olympus. You actually like
fighting and war. You take after your hardheaded mother, Hera. I can barely
control her either. . . . Be that as it may, I cannot tolerate you’re being in
pain . . .” And he called Paieon to doctor his wound . . . Then back to the
palace of great Zeus Came Argive Hera and Athena the Protector, Having
stopped brutal Ares from butchering
men.
THE ILIAD, HOMER, CIRCA NINTH CENTURY B.C.
Elevate yourself above the battlefield. In war, strategy is the art of
commanding the entire military operation. Tactics, on the other hand, is the
skill of forming
up the army for battle itself and dealing with the immediate
needs of the battlefield. Most of us in life are tacticians,
not strategists. We
become so enmeshed in the conflicts we face that we can think only of how
to get what we want in the battle
we are currently facing. To think
strategically is difficult and unnatural. You may imagine you are being
strategic, but in
all likelihood you are merely being tactical. To have the
power that only strategy can bring, you must be able to elevate
yourself
above the battlefield, to focus on your long-term objectives, to craft an
entire campaign, to get out of the reactive
mode that so many battles in life
lock you into. Keeping your overall goals in mind, it becomes much easier
to decide when
to fight and when to walk away. That makes the tactical
decisions of daily life much simpler and more rational. Tactical people
are
heavy and stuck in the ground; strategists are light on their feet and can see
far and wide.
Spiritualize your warfare. Every day you face battles—that is the reality
for all creatures in their struggle to survive. But the greatest battle of
all is
with yourself—your weaknesses, your emotions, your lack of resolution in
seeing things through to the end. You must
declare unceasing war on
yourself. As a warrior in life, you welcome combat and conflict as ways to
prove yourself, to better
your skills, to gain courage, confidence, and
experience. Instead of repressing your doubts and fears, you must face them
down, do battle with them. You want more chal-xx lenges, and you invite
more war. You are forging the warrior’s spirit, and only constant practice
will lead you there.
The 33 Strategies of War is a distillation of the timeless wisdom contained
in the lessons and principles of warfare. The book is designed to arm you
with practical knowledge that will give you endless options and advantages
in dealing with the elusive warriors that attack
you in daily battle.
Each chapter is a strategy aimed at solving a particular problem that you
will often encounter. Such problems include fighting
with an unmotivated
army behind you; wasting energy by battling on too many fronts; feeling
overwhelmed by friction, the discrepancy
between plans and reality; getting
into situations you cannot get out of. You can read the chapters that apply to
the particular
problem of the moment. Better still, you can read all of the
strategies, absorb them, allowing them to become part of your
mental
arsenal. Even when you are trying to avoid a war, not fight one, many of
these strategies are worth knowing for defensive
purposes and for making
yourself aware of what the other side might be up to. In any event, they are
not intended as doctrine
or formulas to be repeated but as aids to judgment
in the heat of battle, seeds that will take root in you and help you think
for
yourself, developing the latent strategist within.
Against war it can be said: it makes the victor stupid, the defeated
malicious. In favour of war: through producing these
two effects it
barbarizes and therefore makes more natural; it is the winter or hibernation
time of culture, mankind emerges
from it stronger for good and evil.
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, 1844–1900
The strategies themselves are culled from the writings and practices of
the greatest generals in history (Alexander the Great,
Hannibal, Genghis
Khan, Napoleon Bonaparte, Shaka Zulu, William Techumseh Sherman,
Erwin Rommel, Vo Nguyen Giap) as well as
the greatest strategists (Sun-
tzu, Miyamoto Musashi, Carl von Clausewitz, Ardant du Picq, T. E.
Lawrence, Colonel John Boyd).
They range from the basic strategies of
classical warfare to the dirty, unconventional strategies of modern times.
The book
is divided into five parts: self-directed war (how to prepare your
mind and spirit for battle); organizational war (how to
structure and
motivate your army); defensive war; offensive war; and unconventional
(dirty) war. Each chapter is illustrated
with historical examples, not only
from warfare itself but from politics (Margaret Thatcher), culture (Alfred
Hitchcock),
sports (Muhammad Ali), business (John D. Rockefeller),
showing the intimate connection between the military and the social.
These
strategies can be applied to struggles of every scale: organized warfare,
business battles, the politics of a group,
even personal relationships.
Without war human beings stagnate in comfort and affluence and lose the
capacity for great thoughts and feelings, they become
cynical and subside
into barbarism.
FYODOR DOSTOYEVSKY, 1821–1881
Finally, strategy is an art that requires not only a different way of
thinking but an entirely different approach to life
itself. Too often there is a
chasm between our ideas and knowledge on the one hand and our actual
experience on the other.
We absorb trivia and information that takes up
mental space but gets us nowhere. We read books that divert us but have
little
relevance to our daily lives. We have lofty ideas that we do not put
into practice. We also have many rich experiences that
we do not analyze
enough, that do not inspire us with ideas, whose lessons we ignore.
Strategy requires a constant contact
between the two realms. It is practical
knowledge of the highest form. Events in life mean nothing if you do not
reflect on
them in a deep way, and ideas from books are pointless if they
have no application to life as you live it. In strategy all
of life is a game that
you are playing. This game is exciting but also requires deep and serious
attention. The stakes are
so high. What you know must translate into action,
and action must translate into knowledge. In this way strategy becomes
a
lifelong challenge and the source of constant pleasure in surmounting
difficulties and solving problems.
Nature has made up her mind that what cannot defend itself shall not be
defended.
RALPH WALDO EMERSON, 1803–1882
In this world, where the game is played with loaded dice, a man must have
a temper of iron, with armor proof to the blows
o fate, and weapons to
make his way against men. Life is one long battle; we have to fight at every
step; and Voltaire very rightly says that if we succeed, it is at the point
of
the sword, and that we die with the weapon in our hand.
—Arthur Schopenhauer, Counsels and Maxims, 1851
PART
I
SELF-DIRECTED
WARFARE
War, or any kind of conflict, is waged and won through strategy. Think of
strategy as a series of lines and arrows aimed at
a goal: at getting you to a
certain point in the world, at helping you to attack a problem in your path,
at figuring out how
to encircle and destroy your enemy. Before directing
these arrows at your enemies, however, you must first direct them at
yourself.
Your mind is the starting point of all war and all strategy. A mind that is
easily overwhelmed by emotion, that is rooted
in the past instead of the
present, that cannot see the world with clarity and urgency, will create
strategies that will always
miss the mark.
To become a true strategist, you must take three steps. First, become
aware of the weakness and illness that can take hold
of the mind, warping
its strategic powers. Second, declare a kind of war on yourself to make
yourself move forward. Third,
wage ruthless and continual battle on the
enemies within you by applying certain strategies.
The following four chapters are designed to make you aware of the
disorders that are probably flourishing in your mind right
now and to arm
you with specific strategies for eliminating them. These chapters are arrows
to aim at yourself. Once you have
absorbed them through thought and
practice, they will serve as a self-corrective device in all your future battles,
freeing
the grand strategist within you.
1
DECLARE WAR
ON YOUR ENEMIES
THE POLARITY STRATEGY
Life is endless battle and conflict, and you cannot fight
effectively unless you can identify your enemies. People are
subtle
and evasive, disguising their intentions, pretending to be
on your side. You need clarity. Learn to smoke out your
enemies,
to spot them by the signs and patterns that reveal
hostility. Then, once you have them in your sights, inwardly
declare war.
As the opposite poles of a magnet create motion,
your enemies—your opposites—can fill you with purpose and
direction. As people
who stand in your way, who represent what
you loathe, people to react against, they are a source of energy.
Do not be naïve:
with some enemies there can be no
compromise, no middle ground.
[Then Xenophon] got up, and first called together the under-officers of
Proxenos. When they were collected he said: “Gentlemen, I cannot sleep
and I don’t think you can; and I can’t lie here when I see what a plight we
are in. It is clear
that the enemy did not show us open war until they
thought they had everything well prepared; and no-one among us takes the
pains to make the best possible resistance. “Yet if we give way, and fall into
the king’s power, what do we expect our fate will be? When his own half-
brother was dead, the man cut off his head and cut off his hand and stuck
them up on a pole. We have no-one
to plead for us, and we marched here to
make the king a slave or to kill him if we could, and what do you think our
fate will
be? Would he not go to all extremes of torture to make the whole
world afraid of making war on him? Why, we must do anything
to keep out
of his power! While the truce lasted, I never ceased pitying ourselves, I
never ceased congratulating the king
and his army. What a vast country I
saw, how large, what endless provisions, what crowds of servants, how
many cattle and sheep, what gold,
what raiment! But when I thought of
these our soldiers—we had no share in all these good things unless we
bought them, and few had anything left to buy with; and to procure anything
without buying was debarred
by our oaths. While I reasoned like this, I
sometimes feared the truce more than the war now. “However, now they
have broken the truce, there is an end both to their insolence and to our
suspicion. There lie all these
good things before us, prizes for whichever
side prove the better men; the gods are the judges of the contest, and they
will
be with us, naturally. . . . “When you have appointed as many
commanders as are wanted, assemble all the other soldiers and encourage
them; that will be
just what they want now. Perhaps you have noticed
yourselves how crestfallen they were when they came into camp, how
crestfallen
they went on guard; in such a state I don’t know what you could
do with them. . . . But if someone could turn their minds from wondering
what will happen to them, and make them wonder what they could do, they
will be much more cheerful. You know, I am sure, that not numbers or
strength brings victory in war; but whichever army goes
into battle stronger
in soul, their enemies generally cannot withstand them.”
ANABASIS: THE MARCH UP COUNTRY, XENOPHON, 430?–355? B.C.
THE INNER ENEMY
In the spring of 401 B.C., Xenophon, a thirty-year-old country gentleman
who lived outside Athens, received an intriguing
invitation: a friend was
recruiting Greek soldiers to fight as mercenaries for Cyrus, brother of the
Persian king Ataxerxes,
and asked him to go along. The request was
somewhat unusual: the Greeks and the Persians had long been bitter
enemies. Some
eighty years earlier, in fact, Persia had tried to conquer
Greece. But the Greeks, renowned fighters, had begun to offer their
services
to the highest bidder, and within the Persian Empire there were rebellious
cities that Cyrus wanted to punish. Greek
mercenaries would be the perfect
reinforcements in his large army.
Xenophon was not a soldier. In fact, he had led a coddled life, raising
dogs and horses, traveling into Athens to talk philosophy
with his good
friend Socrates, living off his inheritance. He wanted adventure, though,
and here he had a chance to meet the
great Cyrus, learn war, see Persia.
Perhaps when it was all over, he would write a book. He would go not as a
mercenary (he
was too wealthy for that) but as a philosopher and historian.
After consulting the oracle at Delphi, he accepted the invitation.
Some 10,000 Greek soldiers joined Cyrus’s punitive expedition. The
mercenaries were a motley crew from all over Greece, there
for the money
and the adventure. They had a good time of it for a while, but a few months
into the job, after leading them
deep into Persia, Cyrus admitted his true
purpose: he was marching on Babylon, mounting a civil war to unseat his
brother
and make himself king. Unhappy to be deceived, the Greeks argued
and complained, but Cyrus offered them more money, and that
quieted
them.
The armies of Cyrus and Ataxerxes met on the plains of Cunaxa, not far
from Babylon. Early in the battle, Cyrus was killed,
putting a quick end to
the war. Now the Greeks’ position was suddenly precarious: having fought
on the wrong side of a civil
war, they were far from home and surrounded
by hostile Persians. They were soon told, however, that Ataxerxes had no
quarrel
with them. His only desire was that they leave Persia as quickly as
possible. He even sent them an envoy, the Persian commander
Tissaphernes, to provision them and escort them back to Greece. And so,
guided by Tissaphernes and the Persian army, the mercenaries
began the
long trek home—some fifteen hundred miles.
A few days into the march, the Greeks had new fears: their supplies from
the Persians were insufficient, and the route that
Tissaphernes had chosen
for them was problematic. Could they trust these Persians? They started to
argue among themselves.
The Greek commander Clearchus expressed his soldiers’ concerns to
Tissaphernes, who was sympathetic: Clearchus should bring
his captains to
a meeting at a neutral site, the Greeks would voice their grievances, and the
two sides would come to an understanding.
Clearchus agreed and appeared
the next day with his officers at the appointed time and place—where,
however, a large contingent
of Persians surrounded and arrested them. They
were beheaded that same day.
One man managed to escape and warn the Greeks of the Persian
treachery. That evening the Greek camp was a desolate place.
Some men
argued and accused; others slumped drunk to the ground. A few considered
flight, but with their leaders dead, they
felt doomed.
That night Xenophon, who had stayed mostly on the sidelines during the
expedition, had a dream: a lightning bolt from Zeus
set fire to his father’s
house. He woke up in a sweat. It suddenly struck him: death was staring the
Greeks in the face, yet
they lay around moaning, despairing, arguing. The
problem was in their heads. Fighting for money rather than for a purpose
or
cause, unable to distinguish between friend and foe, they had gotten lost.
The barrier between them and home was not rivers
or mountains or the
Persian army but their own muddled state of mind. Xenophon didn’t want
to die in this disgraceful way.
He was no military man, but he knew
philosophy and the way men think, and he believed that if the Greeks
concentrated on the
enemies who wanted to kill them, they would become
alert and creative. If they focused on the vile treachery of the Persians,
they
would grow angry, and their anger would motivate them. They had to stop
being confused mercenaries and go back to being
Greeks, the polar opposite
of the faithless Persians. What they needed was clarity and direction.
Xenophon decided to be Zeus’s lightning bolt, waking the men up and
illuminating their way. He called a meeting of all the
surviving officers and
stated his plan: We will declare war without parley on the Persians—no
more thoughts of bargaining
or debate. We will waste no more time on
argument or accusation among ourselves; every ounce of our energy will be
spent on
the Persians. We will be as inventive and inspired as our ancestors
at Marathon, who fought off a vastly larger Persian army.
We will burn our
wagons, live off the land, move fast. We will not for one second lay down
our arms or forget the dangers
around us. It is us or them, life or death,
good or evil. Should any man try to confuse us with clever talk or with
vague
ideas of appeasement, we will declare him too stupid and cowardly to
be on our side and we will drive him away. Let the Persians
make us
merciless. We must be consumed with one idea: getting home alive.
The officers knew that Xenophon was right. The next day a Persian
officer came to see them, offering to act as an ambassador
between them
and Ataxerxes; following Xenophon’s counsel, he was quickly and rudely
driven away. It was now war and nothing
else.
Roused to action, the Greeks elected leaders, Xenophon among them, and
began the march home. Forced to depend on their wits,
they quickly learned
to adapt to the terrain, to avoid battle, to move at night. They successfully
eluded the Persians, beating
them to a key mountain pass and moving
through it before they could be caught. Although many enemy tribes still
lay between
them and Greece, the dreaded Persian army was now behind
them. It took several years, but almost all of them returned to Greece
alive.
Political thought and political instinct prove themselves theoretically and
practically in the ability to distinguish friend
and enemy. The high points of
politics are simultaneously the moments in which the enemy is, in concrete
clarity, recognized
as the enemy.
CARL SCHMITT, 1888–1985
Interpretation
Life is battle and struggle, and you will constantly find yourself facing bad
situations, destructive relationships, dangerous
engagements. How you
confront these difficulties will determine your fate. As Xenophon said, your
obstacles are not rivers
or mountains or other people; your obstacle is
yourself. If you feel lost and confused, if you lose your sense of direction,
if
you cannot tell the difference between friend and foe, you have only
yourself to blame.
Think of yourself as always about to go into battle. Everything depends
on your frame of mind and on how you look at the world.
A shift of
perspective can transform you from a passive and confused mercenary into
a motivated and creative fighter.
We are defined by our relationship to other people. As children we
develop an identity by differentiating ourselves from others,
even to the
point of pushing them away, rejecting them, rebelling. The more clearly you
recognize who you do not want to be, then, the clearer your sense of
identity and purpose will be. Without a sense of that polarity, without an
enemy
to react against, you are as lost as the Greek mercenaries. Duped by
other people’s treachery, you hesitate at the fatal moment
and descend into
whining and argument.
Focus on an enemy. It can be someone who blocks your path or sabotages
you, whether subtly or obviously; it can be someone
who has hurt you or
someone who has fought you unfairly; it can be a value or an idea that you
loathe and that you see in
an individual or group. It can be an abstraction:
stupidity, smugness, vulgar materialism. Do not listen to people who say
that the distinction between friend and enemy is primitive and passé. They
are just disguising their fear of conflict behind
a front of false warmth. They
are trying to push you off course, to infect you with the vagueness that
inflicts them. Once
you feel clear and motivated, you will have space for
true friendship and true compromise. Your enemy is the polar star that
guides you. Given that direction, you can enter battle.
He that is not with me is against me.
—Luke 11:23
THE OUTER ENEMY
In the early 1970s, the British political system had settled into a
comfortable pattern: the Labour Party would win an election,
and then, the
next time around, the Conservatives would win. Back and forth the power
went, all fairly genteel and civilized.
In fact, the two parties had come to
resemble one another. But when the Conservatives lost in 1974, some of
them had had enough.
Wanting to shake things up, they proposed Margaret
Thatcher as their leader. The party was divided that year, and Thatcher
took
advantage of the split and won the nomination.
I am by nature warlike. To attack is among my instincts. To be able to be an
enemy, to be an enemy—that presupposes a strong nature, it is in any
event
a condition of every strong nature. It needs resistances, consequently it
seeks resistances. . . . The strength of one who attacks has in the opposition
he needs a kind of gauge; every growth reveals itself in the seeking
out of a
powerful opponent—or problem: for a philosopher who is warlike also
challenges problems to a duel. The undertaking
is to master, not any
resistances that happen to present themselves, but those against which one
has to bring all one’s strength, suppleness
and mastery of weapons—to
master equal opponents.
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, 1844–1900
No one had ever seen a politician quite like Thatcher. A woman in a
world run by men, she was also proudly middle class—the
daughter of a
grocer—in the traditional party of the aristocracy. Her clothes were prim,
more like a housewife’s than a politician’s.
She had not been a player in the
Conservative Party; in fact, she was on its right-wing fringes. Most striking
of all was
her style: where other politicians were smooth and conciliatory,
she confronted her opponents, attacking them directly. She
had an appetite
for battle.
Most politicians saw Thatcher’s election as a fluke and didn’t expect her
to last. And in her first few years leading the
party, when Labour was in
power, she did little to change their opinion. She railed against the socialist
system, which in
her mind had choked all initiative and was largely
responsible for the decline of the British economy. She criticized the
Soviet
Union at a time of détente. Then, in the winter of 1978–79, several public-
sector unions decided to strike. Thatcher
went on the warpath, linking the
strikes to the Labour Party and Prime Minister James Callaghan. This was
bold, divisive talk,
good for making the evening news—but not for winning
elections. You had to be gentle with the voters, reassure them, not frighten
them. At least that was the conventional wisdom.
In 1979 the Labour Party called a general election. Thatcher kept on the
attack, categorizing the election as a crusade against
socialism and as Great
Britain’s last chance to modernize. Callaghan was the epitome of the
genteel politician, but Thatcher
got under his skin. He had nothing but
disdain for this housewife-turned-politician, and he returned her fire: he
agreed that
the election was a watershed, for if Thatcher won, she would
send the economy into shock. The strategy seemed partly to work;
Thatcher
scared many voters, and the polls that tracked personal popularity showed
that her numbers had fallen well below
Callaghan’s.
At the same time, though, her rhetoric, and Callaghan’s response to it,
polarized the electorate, which could finally see
a sharp difference between
the parties. Dividing the public into left and right, she charged into the
breach, sucking in attention
and attracting the undecided. She won a sizable
victory.
Thatcher had bowled over the voters, but now, as prime minister, she
would have to moderate her tone, heal the wounds—according
to the polls,
at any rate, that was what the public wanted. But Thatcher as usual did the
opposite, enacting budget cuts that
went even deeper than she had proposed
during the campaign. As her policies played out, the economy did indeed go
into shock,
as Callaghan had said it would, and unemployment soared. Men
in her own party, many of whom had by that point been resenting
her
treatment of them for years, began publicly to question her abilities. These
men, whom she called the “wets,” were the
most respected members of the
Conservative Party, and they were in a panic: she was leading the country
into an economic disaster
that they were afraid they would pay for with
their careers. Thatcher’s response was to purge them from her cabinet. She
seemed
bent on pushing everyone away; her legion of enemies was
growing, her poll numbers slipping still lower. Surely the next election
would be her last.
[Salvador Dalí] had no time for those who did not agree with his
principles, and took the war into the enemy camp by writing
insulting
letters to many of the friends he had made in the Residencia, calling them
pigs. He happily compared himself to
a clever bull avoiding the cowboys
and generally had a great deal of fun stirring up and scandalizing almost
every Catalan
intellectual worthy of the name. Dalí was beginning to burn
his bridges with the zeal of an arsonist. . . . “We [Dalí and the filmmaker
Luis Buñuel] had resolved to send a poison pen letter to one of the great
celebrities of Spain,” Dalí
later told his biographer Alain Bosquet. “Our
goal was pure subversion. . . . Both of us were strongly influenced by
Nietzsche. . . . We hit upon two names: Manuel de Falla, the composer, and
Juan Ramón
Jiménez, the poet. We drew straws and Jiménez won. . . . So
we composed a frenzied and nasty letter of incomparable violence
and
addressed it to Juan Ramón Jiménez It read: ‘Our Distinguished Friend:
We believe it is our duty to inform you— disinterestedly—that your work is
deeply repugnant to
us because of its immorality, its hysteria, its arbitrary
quality. . . .’ It caused Jiménez great pain. . . .”
THE PERSISTENCE OF MEMORY: A BIOGRAPHY OF DALÍ,
MEREDITH ETHERINGTON-SMITH, 1992
Then, in 1982, on the other side of the Atlantic, the military junta that
ruled Argentina, needing a cause to distract the
country from its many
problems, invaded the Falkland Islands, a British possession to which,
however, Argentina had a historical
claim. The officers of the junta felt
certain that the British would abandon these islands, barren and remote.
But Thatcher did not hesitate: despite the distance—eight thousand miles
—she sent a naval task force to the Falklands. Labour
leaders attacked her
for this pointless and costly war. Many in her own party were terrified; if
the attempt to retake the
islands failed, the party would be ruined. Thatcher
was more alone than ever. But much of the public now saw her qualities,
which had seemed so irritating, in a new light: her obstinacy became
courage, nobility. Compared to the dithering, pantywaisted,
careerist men
around her, Thatcher seemed resolute and confident.
The British successfully won back the Falklands, and Thatcher stood
taller than ever. Suddenly the country’s economic and
social problems were
forgotten. Thatcher now dominated the scene, and in the next two elections
she crushed Labour.
Interpretation
Margaret Thatcher came to power as an outsider: a middle-class woman, a
right-wing radical. The first instinct of most outsiders
who attain power is
to become insiders—life on the outside is hard—but in doing so they lose
their identity, their difference,
the thing that makes them stand out in the
public eye. If Thatcher had become like the men around her, she would
simply have
been replaced by yet another man. Her instinct was to stay an
outsider. In fact, she pushed being an outsider as far as it
could go: she set
herself up as one woman against an army of men.
At every step of the way, to give her the contrast she needed, Thatcher
marked out an opponent: the socialists, the wets,
the Argentineans. These
enemies helped to define her image as determined, powerful, self-
sacrificing. Thatcher was not seduced
by popularity, which is ephemeral
and superficial. Pundits might obsess over popularity numbers, but in the
mind of the voter—which,
for a politician, is the field of battle—a
dominating presence has more pull than does likability. Let some of the
public
hate you; you cannot please everyone. Your enemies, those you stand
sharply against, will help you to forge a support base
that will not desert
you. Do not crowd into the center, where everyone else is; there is no room
to fight in a crowd. Polarize
people, drive some of them away, and create a
space for battle.
Everything in life conspires to push you into the center, and not just
politically. The center is the realm of compromise.
Getting along with other
people is an important skill to have, but it comes with a danger: by always
seeking the path of least
resistance, the path of conciliation, you forget who
you are, and you sink into the center with everyone else. Instead see
yourself as a fighter, an outsider surrounded by enemies. Constant battle
will keep you strong and alert. It will help to
define what you believe in,
both for yourself and for others. Do not worry about antagonizing people;
without antagonism there
is no battle, and without battle, there is no chance
of victory. Do not be lured by the need to be liked: better to be respected,
even feared. Victory over your enemies will bring you a more lasting
popularity.
The opposition of a member to an associate is no purely negative social
factor, if only because such opposition is often the
only means for making
life with actually unbearable people at least possible. If we did not even
have the power and the right
to rebel against tyranny, arbitrariness,
moodiness, tactlessness, we could not bear to have any relation to people
from whose
characters we thus suffer. We would feel pushed to take
desperate steps—and these, indeed, would end the relation but do not,
perhaps, constitute “conflict.” Not only because of the fact that . . .
oppression usually increases if it is suffered calmly
and without protest, but
also because opposition gives us inner satisfaction, distraction, relief . . .
Our opposition makes
us feel that we are not completely victims of the
circumstances.
GEORG SIMMEL, 1858–1918
Don’t depend on the enemy not coming; depend rather on being ready for
him.
—Sun-tzu, The Art of War (fourth century B.C.)
KEYS TO WARFARE
We live in an era in which people are seldom directly hostile. The rules of
engagement—social, political, military—have changed,
and so must your
notion of the enemy. An up-front enemy is rare now and is actually a
blessing. People hardly ever attack
you openly anymore, showing their
intentions, their desire to destroy you; instead they are political and indirect.
Although
the world is more competitive than ever, outward aggression is
discouraged, so people have learned to go underground, to attack
unpredictably and craftily. Many use friendship as a way to mask
aggressive desires: they come close to you to do more harm.
(A friend
knows best how to hurt you.) Or, without actually being friends, they offer
assistance and alliance: they may seem
supportive, but in the end they’re
advancing their own interests at your expense. Then there are those who
master moral warfare,
playing the victim, making you feel guilty for
something unspecified you’ve done. The battlefield is full of these warriors,
slippery, evasive, and clever.
Understand: the word “enemy”—from the Latin inimicus, “not a
friend”—has been demonized and politicized. Your first task as a strategist
is to widen your concept of the enemy,
to include in that group those who
are working against you, thwarting you, even in subtle ways. (Sometimes
indifference and
neglect are better weapons than aggression, because you
can’t see the hostility they hide.) Without getting paranoid, you
need to
realize that there are people who wish you ill and operate indirectly.
Identify them and you’ll suddenly have room
to maneuver. You can stand
back and wait and see or you can take action, whether aggressive or just
evasive, to avoid the
worst. You can even work to turn this enemy into a
friend. But whatever you do, do not be the naïve victim. Do not find
yourself
constantly retreating, reacting to your enemies’ maneuvers. Arm
yourself with prudence, and never completely lay down your
arms, not even
for friends.
As one travels up any one of the large rivers [of Borneo], one meets with
tribes that are successively more warlike. In the coast regions are peaceful
communities which never fight
save in self-defense, and then with but poor
success, whereas in the central regions, where the rivers take their rise, are
a number of extremely warlike tribes whose raids have been a constant
source of terror to the communities settled in the lower
reaches of the
rivers. . . . It might be supposed that the peaceful coast people would be
found to be superior in moral qualities
to their more warlike neighbors, but
the contrary is the case. In almost all respects the advantage lies with the
warlike tribes. Their houses are better built, larger, and cleaner; their
domestic morality is superior; they are physically stronger, are braver, and
physically and mentally more active and in general
are more trustworthy.
But, above all, their social organization is firmer and more efficient
because their respect for and obedience to their chiefs
and their loyalty to
their community are much greater; each man identifies himself with the
whole community and accepts and
loyally performs the social duties laid
upon him.
WILLIAM MCDOUGALL, 1871–1938
People are usually good at hiding their hostility, but often they
unconsciously give off signals showing that all is not what
it seems. One of
the closest friends and advisers of the Chinese Communist Party leader Mao
Tsetung was Lin Biao, a high-ranking
member of the Politburo and possible
successor to the chairman. In the late 1960s and early ’70s, though, Mao
detected a change
in Lin: he had become effusively friendly. Everyone
praised Mao, but Lin’s praise was embarrassingly fervent. To Mao this
meant that something was wrong. He watched Lin closely and decided that
the man was plotting a takeover, or at the very least
positioning himself for
the top spot. And Mao was right: Lin was plotting busily. The point is not to
mistrust all friendly
gestures but to notice them. Register any change in the
emotional temperature: unusual chumminess, a new desire to exchange
confidences, excessive praise of you to third parties, the desire for an
alliance that may make more sense for the other person
than for you. Trust
your instincts: if someone’s behavior seems suspicious, it probably is. It
may turn out to be benign,
but in the meantime it is best to be on your
guard.
You can sit back and read the signs or you can actively work to uncover
your enemies—beat the grass to startle the snakes,
as the Chinese say. In the
Bible we read of David’s suspicion that his father-in-law, King Saul,
secretly wanted him dead.
How could David find out? He confided his
suspicion to Saul’s son Jonathan, his close friend. Jonathan refused to
believe
it, so David suggested a test. He was expected at court for a feast.
He would not go; Jonathan would attend and pass along David’s excuse,
which would be adequate but not urgent. Sure enough,
the excuse enraged
Saul, who exclaimed, “Send at once and fetch him unto me—he deserves to
die!”
David’s test succeeded because it was ambiguous. His excuse for missing
the feast could be read in more than one way: if Saul
meant well toward
David, he would have seen his son-in-law’s absence as no more than selfish
at worst, but because he secretly
hated David, he saw it as effrontery, and it
pushed him over the edge. Follow David’s example: say or do something
that can
be read in more than one way, that may be superficially polite but
that could also indicate a slight coolness on your part
or be seen as a subtle
insult. A friend may wonder but will let it pass.
The secret enemy, though, will react with anger. Any strong emotion and
you will know that there’s something boiling under
the surface.
Often the best way to get people to reveal themselves is to provoke
tension and argument. The Hollywood producer Harry Cohn,
president of
Universal Pictures, frequently used this strategy to ferret out the real
position of people in the studio who
refused to show what side they were
on: he would suddenly attack their work or take an extreme position, even
an offensive
one, in an argument. His provoked directors and writers would
drop their usual caution and show their real beliefs.
Understand: people tend to be vague and slippery because it is safer than
outwardly committing to something. If you are the
boss, they will mimic
your ideas. Their agreement is often pure courtiership. Get them emotional;
people are usually more
sincere when they argue. If you pick an argument
with someone and he keeps on mimicking your ideas, you may be dealing
with
a chameleon, a particularly dangerous type. Beware of people who
hide behind a façade of vague abstractions and impartiality:
no one is
impartial. A sharply worded question, an opinion designed to offend, will
make them react and take sides.
Man exists only in so far as he is opposed.
GEORG HEGEL, 1770–1831
Sometimes it is better to take a less direct approach with your potential
enemies—to be as subtle and conniving as they are.
In 1519, Hernán Cortés
arrived in Mexico with his band of adventurers. Among these five hundred
men were some whose loyalty
was dubious. Throughout the expedition,
whenever any of Cortés’s soldiers did something he saw as suspicious, he
never got
angry or accusatory. Instead he pretended to go along with them,
accepting and approving what they had done. Thinking Cortés
weak, or
thinking he was on their side, they would take another step. Now he had
what he wanted: a clear sign, to himself
and others, that they were traitors.
Now he could isolate and destroy them. Adopt the method of Cortés if
friends or followers
whom you suspect of ulterior motives suggest
something subtly hostile, or against your interests, or simply odd, avoid the
temptation to react, to say no, to get angry, or even to ask questions. Go
along, or seem to turn a blind eye: your enemies
will soon go further,
showing more of their hand. Now you have them in sight, and you can
attack.
An enemy is often large and hard to pinpoint—an organization, or a
person hidden behind some complicated network. What you
want to do is
take aim at one part of the group—a leader, a spokesman, a key member of
the inner circle. That is how the activist
Saul Alinsky tackled corporations
and bureaucracies. In his 1960s campaign to desegregate Chicago’s public-
school system,
he focused on the superintendent of schools, knowing full
well that this man would try to shift the blame upward. By taking
repeated
hits at the superintendent, he was able to publicize his struggle, and it
became impossible for the man to hide.
Eventually those behind him had to
come to his aid, exposing themselves in the process. Like Alinsky, never
aim at a vague,
abstract enemy. It is hard to drum up the emotions to fight
such a bloodless battle, which in any case leaves your enemy invisible.
Personalize the fight, eyeball to eyeball.
Danger is everywhere. There are always hostile people and destructive
relationships. The only way to break out of a negative
dynamic is to
confront it. Repressing your anger, avoiding the person threatening you,
always looking to conciliate—these
common strategies spell ruin.
Avoidance of conflict becomes a habit, and you lose the taste for battle.
Feeling guilty is
pointless; it is not your fault you have enemies. Feeling
wronged or victimized is equally futile. In both cases you are looking
inward, concentrating on yourself and your feelings. Instead of internalizing
a bad situation, externalize it and face your
enemy. It is the only way out.
The frequent hearing of my mistress reading the bible—for she often read
aloud when her husband was absent— soon awakened
my curiosity in
respect to this mystery of reading, and roused in me the desire to learn.
Having no fear of my kind mistress
before my eyes, (she had given me no
reason to fear,) I frankly asked her to teach me to read; and without
hesitation, the
dear woman began the task, and very soon, by her
assistance, I was master of the alphabet, and could spell words of three
or
four letters . . .Master Hugh was amazed at the simplicity of his spouse,
and, probably for the first time, he unfolded to her the true philosophy
of
slavery, and the peculiar rules necessary to be observed by masters and
mistresses, in the management of their human chattels.
Mr.Auld promptly
forbade the continuance of her [reading] instruction; telling her, in the first
place, that the thing itself was unlawful; that it was also unsafe, and could
only
lead to mischief. . . .Mrs. Auld evidently felt the force of his remarks;
and, like an obedient wife, began to shape her course in the direction
indicated by her husband. The effect of his words, on me, was neither slight
nor transitory. His iron sentences—cold and harsh—sunk deep into my
heart, and stirred up not only my feelings into a sort of rebellion, but
awakened within me a slumbering
train of vital thought. It was a new and
special revelation, dispelling a painful mystery, against which my youthful
understanding
had struggled, and struggled in vain, to wit: the white man’s
power to perpetuate the enslavement of the black man. “Very
well,” thought
I; “knowledge unfits a child to be a slave.” I instinctively assented to the
proposition; and from that moment I understood
the direct pathway from
slavery to freedom. This was just what I needed; and got it at a time, and
from a source, whence I
least expected it. . . . Wise as Mr. Auld was, he
evidently underrated my comprehension, and had little idea of the use to
which I was capable of putting the impressive lesson he was giving to his
wife. . . . That which he most loved I most hated;
and the very determination
which he expressed to keep me in ignorance, only rendered me the more
resolute in seeking intelligence.
MY BONDAGE AND MY FREEDOM, FREDERICK DOUGLASS, 1818–
1895
The child psychologist Jean Piaget saw conflict as a critical part of
mental development. Through battles with peers and then
parents, children
learn to adapt to the world and develop strategies for dealing with problems.
Those children who seek to
avoid conflict at all cost, or those who have
overprotective parents, end up handicapped socially and mentally. The same
is
true of adults: it is through your battles with others that you learn what
works, what doesn’t, and how to protect yourself.
Instead of shrinking from
the idea of having enemies, then, embrace it. Conflict is therapeutic.
Enemies bring many gifts. For one thing, they motivate you and focus
your beliefs. The artist Salvador Dalí found early on
that there were many
qualities he could not stand in people: conformity, romanticism, piety. At
every stage of his life, he
found someone he thought embodied these anti-
ideals—an enemy to vent on. First it was the poet Federico García Lorca,
who
wrote romantic poetry; then it was André Breton, the heavy-handed
leader of the surrealist movement. Having such enemies to
rebel against
made Dalí feel confident and inspired.
Enemies also give you a standard by which to judge yourself, both
personally and socially. The samurai of Japan had no gauge
of their
excellence unless they fought the best swordsmen; it took Joe Frazier to
make Muhammad Ali a truly great fighter.
A tough opponent will bring out
the best in you. And the bigger the opponent, the greater your reward, even
in defeat. It
is better to lose to a worthy opponent than to squash some
harmless foe. You will gain sympathy and respect, building support
for your
next fight.
Being attacked is a sign that you are important enough to be a target. You
should relish the attention and the chance to prove
yourself. We all have
aggressive impulses that we are forced to repress; an enemy supplies you
with an outlet for these drives.
At last you have someone on whom to
unleash your aggression without feeling guilty.
Leaders have always found it useful to have an enemy at their gates in
times of trouble, distracting the public from their
difficulties. In using your
enemies to rally your troops, polarize them as far as possible: they will fight
the more fiercely
when they feel a little hatred. So exaggerate the
differences between you and the enemy—draw the lines clearly. Xenophon
made
no effort to be fair; he did not say that the Persians weren’t really
such a bad lot and had done much to advance civilization.
He called them
barbarians, the antithesis of the Greeks. He described their recent treachery
and said they were an evil culture
that could find no favor with the gods.
And so it is with you: victory is your goal, not fairness and balance. Use the
rhetoric
of war to heighten the stakes and stimulate the spirit.
What you want in warfare is room to maneuver. Tight corners spell death.
Having enemies gives you options. You can play them
off against each
other, make one a friend as a way of attacking the other, on and on. Without
enemies you will not know how
or where to maneuver, and you will lose a
sense of your limits, of how far you can go. Early on, Julius Caesar
identified
Pompey as his enemy. Measuring his actions and calculating
carefully, he did only those things that left him in a solid position
in relation
to Pompey. When war finally broke out between the two men, Caesar was
at his best. But once he defeated Pompey
and had no more such rivals, he
lost all sense of proportion—in fact, he fancied himself a god. His defeat of
Pompey was his
own undoing. Your enemies force on you a sense of
realism and humility.
Remember: there are always people out there who are more aggressive,
more devious, more ruthless than you are, and it is inevitable
that some of
them will cross your path. You will have a tendency to want to conciliate
and compromise with them. The reason
is that such types are often brilliant
deceivers who see the strategic value in charm or in seeming to allow you
plenty of
space, but actually their desires have no limit, and they are simply
trying to disarm you. With some people you have to harden
yourself, to
recognize that there is no middle ground, no hope of conciliation. For your
opponent your desire to compromise
is a weapon to use against you. Know
these dangerous enemies by their past: look for quick power grabs, sudden
rises in fortune,
previous acts of treachery. Once you suspect you are
dealing with a Napoleon, do not lay down your arms or entrust them to
someone else. You are the last line of your own defense.
Image:
The Earth. The enemy is the ground beneath your feet. It has a gravity that
holds you in place, a force of resistance. Root
yourself deep in this earth to
gain firmness and strength. Without an enemy to walk upon, to trample,
you lose your bearings
and all sense of proportion.
Authority: If you count on safety and do not think of danger, if
you do not know enough to be wary when enemies arrive, this
is called
a sparrow nesting on a tent, a fish swimming in a
cauldron—they won’t last the day. —Chuko Liang ( A.D. 181–
234 )
REVERSAL
Always keep the search for and use of enemies under control. It is clarity
you want, not paranoia. It is the downfall of many
tyrants to see an enemy
in everyone. They lose their grip on reality and become hopelessly
embroiled in the emotions their
paranoia churns up. By keeping an eye on
possible enemies, you are simply being prudent and cautious. Keep your
suspicions
to yourself, so that if you’re wrong, no one will know. Also,
beware of polarizing people so completely that you cannot back
off.
Margaret Thatcher, usually brilliant at the polarizing game, eventually lost
control of it: she created too many enemies
and kept repeating the same
tactic, even in situations that called for retreat. Franklin Delano Roosevelt
was a master polarizer,
always looking to draw a line between himself and
his enemies. Once he had made that line clear enough, though, he backed
off, which made him look like a conciliator, a man of peace who
occasionally went to war. Even if that impression was false,
it was the
height of wisdom to create it.
2
DO NOT FIGHT THE LAST WAR
THE UERRILLA-WAR-OF-THE-MIND
STRATEGY
What most often weighs you down and brings you misery is the
past, in the form of unnecessary attachments, repetitions of
tired
formulas, and the memory of old victories and defeats. You must
consciously wage war against the past and force yourself
to
react to the present moment. Be ruthless on yourself; do not
repeat the same tired methods. Sometimes you must force
yourself to strike out in new directions, even if they involve risk.
What you may lose in comfort
and security, you will gain in
surprise, making it harder for your enemies to tell what you will
do. Wage guerrilla war on
your mind, allowing no static lines of
defense, no exposed citadels—make everything fluid and
mobile.
Theory cannot equip the mind with formulas for solving problems, nor can
it mark the narrow path on which the sole solution
is supposed to lie by
planting a hedge of principles on either side. But it can give the mind
insight into the great mass
of phenomena and of their relationships, then
leave it free to rise into the higher realms of action. There the mind can use
its innate talents to capacity, combining them all so as to seize on what is
right and true as though this were a single idea
formed by their
concentrated pressure— as though it were a response to the immediate
challenge rather than a product of thought.
ON WAR, CARL VON CLAUSEWITZ, 1780–1831
THE LAST WAR
No one has risen to power faster than Napoleon Bonaparte (1769–1821). In
1793 he went from captain in the French revolutionary
army to brigadier
general. In 1796 he became the leader of the French force in Italy fighting
the Austrians, whom he crushed
that year and again three years later. He
became first consul of France in 1801, emperor in 1804. In 1805 he
humiliated the
Austrian and Russian armies at the Battle of Austerlitz.
For many, Napoleon was more than a great general; he was a genius, a
god of war. Not everyone was impressed, though: there
were Prussian
generals who thought he had merely been lucky. Where Napoleon was rash
and aggressive, they believed, his opponents
had been timid and weak. If he
ever faced the Prussians, he would be revealed as a great fake.
Among these Prussian generals was Friedrich Ludwig, prince of
Hohenlohe-Ingelfingen (1746–1818). Hohenlohe came from one of
Germany’s oldest aristocratic families, one with an illustrious military
record. He had begun his career young, serving under
Frederick the Great
(1712–86) himself, the man who had single-handedly made Prussia a great
power. Hohenlohe had risen through
the ranks, becoming a general at fifty
—young by Prussian standards.
To Hohenlohe success in war depended on organization, discipline, and
the use of superior strategies developed by trained
military minds. The
Prussians exemplified all of these virtues. Prussian soldiers drilled
relentlessly until they could perform
elaborate maneuvers as precisely as a
machine. Prussian generals intensely studied the victories of Frederick the
Great; war
for them was a mathematical affair, the application of timeless
principles. To the generals Napoleon was a Corsican hothead
leading an
unruly citizens’ army. Superior in knowledge and skill, they would
outstrategize him. The French would panic and
crumble in the face of the
disciplined Prussians; the Napoleonic myth would lie in ruins, and Europe
could return to its old
ways.
In August 1806, Hohenlohe and his fellow generals finally got what they
wanted: King Friedrich Wilhelm III of Prussia, tired
of Napoleon’s broken
promises, decided to declare war on him in six weeks. In the meantime he
asked his generals to come up
with a plan to crush the French.
Hohenlohe was ecstatic. This campaign would be the climax of his
career. He had been thinking for years about how to beat
Napoleon, and he
presented his plan at the generals’ first strategy session: precise marches
would place the army at the perfect
angle from which to attack the French
as they advanced through southern Prussia. An attack in oblique formation
—Frederick
the Great’s favorite tactic—would deliver a devastating blow.
The other generals, all in their sixties and seventies, presented
their own
plans, but these too were merely variants on the tactics of Frederick the
Great. Discussion turned into argument;
several weeks went by. Finally the
king had to step in and create a compromise strategy that would satisfy all
of his generals.
He [Baron Antoine-Henri de Jomini]— often quite arbitrarily— presses [the
deeds of Napoleon] into a system which he foists on Napoleon, and, in
doing so, completely fails to see what, above all, really constitutes the
greatness of this captain—namely, the reckless boldness of his operations,
where, scoffing at all theory, he always tried
to do what suited each
occasion best. 
FRIEDRICH VON BERNHARDI, 1849–1930
A feeling of exuberance swept the country, which would soon relive the
glory years of Frederick the Great. The generals realized
that Napoleon
knew about their plans—he had excellent spies—but the Prussians had a
head start, and once their war machine
started to move, nothing could stop
it.
On October 5, a few days before the king was to declare war, disturbing
news reached the generals. A reconnaissance mission
revealed that
divisions of Napoleon’s army, which they had believed was dispersed, had
marched east, merged, and was massing
deep in southern Prussia. The
captain who had led the scouting mission reported that the French soldiers
were marching with
packs on their backs: where the Prussians used slow-
moving wagons to provision their troops, the French carried their own
supplies and moved with astonishing speed and mobility.
Before the generals had time to adjust their plans, Napoleon’s army
suddenly wheeled north, heading straight for Berlin, the
heart of Prussia.
The generals argued and dithered, moving their troops here and there, trying
to decide where to attack.
A mood of panic set in. Finally the king ordered a
retreat: the troops would reassemble to the north and attack Napoleon’s
flank as he advanced toward Berlin. Hohenlohe was in charge of the rear
guard, protecting the Prussians’ retreat.
On October 14, near the town of Jena, Napoleon caught up with Ho-
henlohe, who finally faced the battle he had wanted so desperately.
The
numbers on both sides were equal, but while the French were an unruly
force, fighting pell-mell and on the run, Hohenlohe
kept his troops in tight
order, orchestrating them like a corps de ballet. The fighting went back and
forth until finally
the French captured the village of Vierzehn-heiligen.
Hohenlohe ordered his troops to retake the village. In a ritual dating back
to Frederick the Great, a drum major beat out
a cadence and the Prussian
soldiers, their colors flying, reformed their positions in perfect parade order,
preparing to advance.
They were in an open plain, though, and Napoleon’s
men were behind garden walls and on the house roofs. The Prussians fell
like ninepins to the French marksmen. Confused, Hohenlohe ordered his
soldiers to halt and change formation. The drums beat
again, the Prussians
marched with magnificent precision, always a sight to behold—but the
French kept shooting, decimating
the Prussian line.
Never had Hohenlohe seen such an army. The French soldiers were like
demons. Unlike his disciplined soldiers, they moved on
their own, yet there
was method to their madness. Suddenly, as if from nowhere, they rushed
forward on both sides, threatening
to surround the Prussians. The prince
ordered a retreat. The Battle of Jena was over.
Like a house of cards, the Prussians quickly crumbled, one fortress
falling after another. The king fled east. In a matter
of days, virtually
nothing remained of the once mighty Prussian army.
THE BAT AND THE HOUSE-FERRETS
A bat fell to the ground and was caught by a house-ferret. Realizing that she
was on the point of being killed, she begged
for her life. The house-ferret
said to her that she couldn’t let her go, for ferrets were supposed to be
natural enemies to all birds.
The bat replied that she herself was not a bird,
but a mouse. She managed to extricate herself from her danger by this
means. Eventually, falling a second time, the bat was caught by another
house-ferret. Again she pleaded to the ferret not to eat
her. The second
ferret declared that she absolutely detested all mice. But the bat positively
affirmed that she was not a
mouse but a bat. And so she was released again.
And that was how she saved herself from death twice by a mere change of
name. This fable shows that it is not always necessary to confine ourselves
to the same tactics. But, on the contrary, if we are
adaptable to
circumstances we can better escape danger.
FABLES, AESOP, SIXTH CENTURY B.C.
Interpretation
The reality facing the Prussians in 1806 was simple: they had fallen fifty
years behind the times. Their generals were old,
and instead of responding
to present circumstances, they were repeating formulas that had worked in
the past. Their army moved
slowly, and their soldiers were automatons on
parade. The Prussian generals had many signs to warn them of disaster:
their
army had not performed well in its recent engagements, a number of
Prussian officers had preached reform, and, last but not
least, they had had
ten years to study Napoleon—his innovative strategies and the speed and
fluidity with which his armies
converged on the enemy. Reality was staring
them in the face, yet they chose to ignore it. Indeed, they told themselves
that
Napoleon was the one who was doomed.
You might find the Prussian army just an interesting historical example,
but in fact you are likely marching in the same direction
yourself. What
limits individuals as well as nations is the inability to confront reality, to see
things for what they are.
As we grow older, we become more rooted in the
past. Habit takes over. Something that has worked for us before becomes a
doctrine,
a shell to protect us from reality. Repetition replaces creativity. We
rarely realize we’re doing this, because it is almost
impossible for us to see
it happening in our own minds. Then suddenly a young Napoleon crosses
our path, a person who does
not respect tradition, who fights in a new way.
Only then do we see that our ways of thinking and responding have fallen
behind
the times.
Never take it for granted that your past successes will continue into the
future. Actually, your past successes are your biggest
obstacle: every battle,
every war, is different, and you cannot assume that what worked before will
work today. You must cut
yourself loose from the past and open your eyes
to the present. Your tendency to fight the last war may lead to your final
war.
When in 1806 the Prussian generals . . . plunged into the open jaws of
disaster by using Frederick the Great’s oblique order
of battle, it was not
just a case of a style that had outlived its usefulness but the most extreme
poverty of the imagination
to which routine has ever led. The result was
that the Prussian army under Hohenlohe was ruined more completely than
any army
has ever been ruined on the battlefield.
—Carl von Clausewitz, ON WAR (1780–1831)
THE PRESENT WAR
In 1605, Miyamoto Musashi, a samurai who had made a name for himself
as a swordsman at the young age of twenty-one, was challenged
to a duel.
The challenger, a young man named Matashichiro, came from the Yoshioka
family, a clan itself renowned for swordsmanship.
Earlier that year Musashi
had defeated Matashichiro’s father, Genzaemon, in a duel. Days later he had
killed Genzaemon’s younger
brother in another duel. The Yoshioka family
wanted revenge.
I never read any treatises on strategy. . . . When we fight, we do not take any
books with us.
MAO TSE-TUNG, 1893–1976
Musashi’s friends smelled a trap in Matashichiro’s challenge and offered
to accompany him to the duel, but Musashi went alone.
In his earlier fights
with the Yoshiokas, he had angered them by showing up hours late; this
time, though, he came early and
hid in the trees. Matashichiro arrived with
a small army. Musashi would “arrive way behind schedule as usual,” one of
them
said, “but that trick won’t work with us anymore!” Confident in their
ambush, Matashichiro’s men lay down and hid in the grass.
Suddenly
Musashi leaped out from behind his tree and shouted, “I’ve been waiting
long enough. Draw your sword!” In one swift
stroke, he killed
Matashichiro, then took a position at an angle to the other men. All of them
jumped to their feet, but they
were caught off guard and startled, and
instead of surrounding him, they stood in a broken line. Musashi simply ran
down the
line, killing the dazed men one after another in a matter of
seconds.
Musashi’s victory sealed his reputation as one of Japan’s greatest
swordsmen. He now roamed the country looking for suitable
challenges. In
one town he heard of an undefeated warrior named Baiken whose weapons
were a sickle and a long chain with a
steel ball at the end of it. Musashi
wanted to see these weapons in action, but Baiken refused: the only way he
could see
them work, Baiken said, was by fighting a duel.
REFRESHING THE MIND When you and your opponent are engaged in
combat which is dragging on with no end in sight, it is crucial that you
should
come up with a completely different technique. By refreshing your
mind and techniques as you continue to fight your opponent,
you will find
an appropriate rhythm-timing with which to defeat him. Whenever you and
your opponent become stagnant, you must immediately employ a different
method of dealing with him in order
to overcome him.
THE BOOK OF FIVE RINGS, MIYAMOTO MUSASHI, 1584–1645
Once again Musashi’s friends chose the safe route: they urged him to
walk away. No one had come close to defeating Baiken,
whose weapons
were unbeatable: swinging his ball in the air to build up momentum, he
would force his victim backward with
a relentless charge, then hurl the ball
at the man’s face. His opponent would have to fend off the ball and chain,
and while
his sword arm was occupied, in that brief instant Baiken would
slash him with the sickle across his neck.
Ignoring the warnings of his friends, Musashi challenged Baiken and
showed up at the man’s tent with two swords, one long,
one short. Baiken
had never seen someone fight with two swords. Also, instead of letting
Baiken charge him, Musashi charged
first, pushing his foe back on his
heels. Baiken hesitated to throw the ball, for Musashi could parry it with
one sword and
strike him with the other. As he looked for an opening,
Musashi suddenly knocked him off balance with a blow of the short
sword
and then, in a split second, followed with a thrust of the long one, stabbing
him through and killing the once undefeated
master Baiken.
A few years later, Musashi heard about a great samurai named Sasaki
Ganryu, who fought with a very long sword—a startlingly
beautiful
weapon, which seemed possessed of some warlike spirit. This fight would
be Musashi’s ultimate test. Ganryu accepted
his challenge; the duel would
take place on a little island near the samurai’s home.
It is a disease to be obsessed by the thought of winning. It is also a disease
to be obsessed by the thought of employing
your swordsmanship. So it is to
be obsessed by the thought of using everything you have learned, and to be
obsessed by the
thought of attacking. It is also a disease to be obsessed and
stuck with the thought of ridding yourself of any of these diseases.
A disease
here is an obsessed mind that dwells on one thing. Because all these
diseases are in your mind, you must get rid of them to put your mind in
order.
TAKUAN, JAPAN, 1573–1645
On the morning of the duel, the island was packed. A fight between such
warriors was unprecedented. Ganryu arrived on time,
but Musashi was late,
very late. An hour went by, then two; Ganryu was furious. Finally a boat
was spotted approaching the
island. Its passenger was lying down, half
asleep, it seemed, whittling at a long wooden oar. It was Musashi. He
seemed lost
in thought, staring into the clouds. When the boat came to
shore, he tied a dirty towel around his head and jumped out of
the boat,
brandishing the long oar—longer than Ganryu’s famous sword. This strange
man had come to the biggest fight of his
life with an oar for a sword and a
towel for a headband.
Ganryu called out angrily, “Are you so frightened of me that you have
broken your promise to be here by eight?” Musashi said
nothing but
stepped closer. Ganryu drew his magnificent sword and threw the sheath
onto the sand. Musashi smiled: “Sasaki,
you have just sealed your doom.”
“Me? Defeated? Impossible!” “What victor on earth,” replied Musashi,
“would abandon his sheath
to the sea?” This enigmatic remark only made
Ganryu angrier.
Then Musashi charged, aiming his sharpened oar straight for his enemy’s
eyes. Ganryu quickly raised his sword and struck at
Musashi’s head but
missed, only cutting the towel headband in two. He had never missed
before. In almost the same instant,
Musashi brought down his wooden
sword, knocking Ganryu off his feet. The spectators gasped. As Ganryu
struggled up, Musashi
killed him with a blow to the head. Then, after
bowing politely to the men officiating over the duel, he got back into the
boat and left as calmly as he had arrived.
From that moment on, Musashi was considered a swordsman without
peer.
Anyone can plan a campaign, but few are capable of waging war, because
only a true military genius can handle the developments
and circumstances.
NAPOLEON BONAPARTE, 1769–1821
Interpretation
Miyamoto Musashi, author of The Book of Five Rings, won all his duels for
one reason: in each instance he adapted his strategy to his opponent and to
the circumstances of the
moment. With Matashichiro he decided it was time
to arrive early, which he hadn’t done in his previous fights. Victory against
superior numbers depended on surprise, so he leaped up when his
opponents lay down; then, once he had killed their leader,
he set himself at
an angle that invited them to charge at him instead of surrounding him,
which would have been much more
dangerous for him. With Baiken it was
simply a matter of using two swords and then crowding his space, giving
him no time
to react intelligently to this novelty. With Ganryu he set out to
infuriate and humiliate his haughty opponent—the wooden
sword, the
nonchalant attitude, the dirty-towel headband, the enigmatic remark, the
charge at the eyes.
Musashi’s opponents depended on brilliant technique, flashy swords, and
unorthodox weapons. That is the same as fighting the
last war: instead of
responding to the moment, they relied on training, technology, and what
had worked before. Musashi, who
had grasped the essence of strategy when
he was still very young, turned their rigidity into their downfall. His first
thought
was of the gambit that would take this particular opponent most by
surprise. Then he would anchor himself in the moment: having
set his
opponent off balance with something unexpected, he would watch carefully,
then respond with another action, usually
improvised, that would turn mere
disequilibrium into defeat and death.
Thunder and wind: the image of DURATION. Thus the superior man stands
firm And does not change his direction. Thunder rolls, and the wind blows;
both are examples of extreme mobility and so are seemingly the very
opposite of duration,
but the laws governing their appearance and
subsidence, their coming and going, endure. In the same way the
independence of
the superior man is not based on rigidity and immobility of
character. He always keeps abreast of the time and changes with
it. What
endures is the unswerving directive, the inner law of his being, which
determines all his actions.
THE I CHING, CHINA, CIRCA EIGHTH CENTURY B.C.
In preparing yourself for war, you must rid yourself of myths and
misconceptions. Strategy is not a question of learning a
series of moves or
ideas to follow like a recipe; victory has no magic formula. Ideas are merely
nutrients for the soil: they
lie in your brain as possibilities, so that in the
heat of the moment they can inspire a direction, an appropriate and creative
response. Let go of all fetishes—books, techniques, formulas, flashy
weapons—and learn to become your own strategist.
Thus one’s victories in battle cannot be repeated—they take their form in
response to inexhaustibly changing circumstances.
—Sun-tzu (fourth century B.C.)
KEYS TO WARFARE
In looking back on an unpleasant or disagreeable experience, the thought
inevitably occurs to us: if only we had said or done
x instead of y, if only
we could do it over. Many a general has lost his head in the heat of battle
and then, looking back, has thought
of the one tactic, the one maneuver, that
would have changed it all. Even Prince Hohenlohe, years later, could see
how he
had botched the retaking of Vierzehnheiligen. The problem, though,
is not that we think of the solution only when it is too
late. The problem is
that we imagine that knowledge is what was lacking: if only we had known
more, if only we had thought
it through more thoroughly. That is precisely
the wrong approach. What makes us go astray in the first place is that we
are
unattuned to the present moment, insensitive to the circumstances. We
are listening to our own thoughts, reacting to things
that happened in the
past, applying theories and ideas that we digested long ago but that have
nothing to do with our predicament
in the present. More books, theories,
and thinking only make the problem worse.
My policy is to have no policy.
ABRAHAM LINCOLN, 1809–1865
Understand: the greatest generals, the most creative strategists, stand out
not because they have more knowledge but because
they are able, when
necessary, to drop their preconceived notions and focus intensely on the
present moment. That is how creativity
is sparked and opportunities are
seized. Knowledge, experience, and theory have limitations: no amount of
thinking in advance
can prepare you for the chaos of life, for the infinite
possibilities of the moment. The great philosopher of war Carl von
Clausewitz called this “friction”: the difference between our plans and what
actually happens. Since friction is inevitable,
our minds have to be capable
of keeping up with change and adapting to the unexpected. The better we
can adapt our thoughts
to changing circumstances, the more realistic our
responses to them will be. The more we lose ourselves in predigested
theories
and past experiences, the more inappropriate and delusional our
response.
If you put an empty gourd on the water and touch it, it will slip to one side.
No matter how you try, it won’t stay in one
spot. The mind of someone who
has reached the ultimate state does not stay with anything, even for a
second. It is like an
empty gourd on the water that is pushed around.
TAKUAN, JAPAN, 1573–1645
It can be valuable to analyze what went wrong in the past, but it is far
more important to develop the capacity to think in
the moment. In that way
you will make far fewer mistakes to analyze.
Think of the mind as a river: the faster it flows, the better it keeps up with
the present and responds to change. The faster
it flows, also the more it
refreshes itself and the greater its energy. Obsessional thoughts, past
experiences (whether traumas
or successes), and preconceived notions are
like boulders or mud in this river, settling and hardening there and damming
it
up. The river stops moving; stagnation sets in. You must wage constant
war on this tendency in the mind.
The first step is simply to be aware of the process and of the need to fight
it. The second is to adopt a few tactics that
might help you to restore the
mind’s natural flow.

Reexamine all your cherished beliefs and principles. When Napoleon
was asked what principles of war he followed, he replied that he followed
none. His genius was his ability
to respond to circumstances, to make the
most of what he was given—he was the supreme opportunist. Your only
principle, similarly,
should be to have no principles. To believe that strategy
has inexorable laws or timeless rules is to take up a rigid, static
position that
will be your undoing. Of course the study of history and theory can broaden
your vision of the world, but you
have to combat theory’s tendency to
harden into dogma. Be brutal with the past, with tradition, with the old
ways of doing
things. Declare war on sacred cows and voices of convention
in your own head.
Our education is often a problem. During World War II, the British
fighting the Germans in the deserts of North Africa were
well trained in
tank warfare; you might say they were indoctrinated with theories about it.
Later in the campaign, they were
joined by American troops who were
much less educated in these tactics. Soon, though, the Americans began to
fight in a way
that was equal if not superior to the British style; they
adapted to the mobility of this new kind of desert combat. According
to
Field Marshal Erwin Rommel himself, the leader of the German army in
North Africa, “The Americans . . . profited far more
than the British from
their experience in Africa, thus confirming the axiom that education is
easier than reeducation.”
What Rommel meant was that education tends to burn precepts into the
mind that are hard to shake. In the midst of combat,
the trained mind may
fall a step behind—focusing more on learned rules than on the changing
circumstances of battle. When
you are faced with a new situation, it is often
best to imagine that you know nothing and that you need to start learning
all
over again. Clearing your head of everything you thought you knew, even
your most cherished ideas, will give you the mental
space to be educated by
your present experience—the best school of all. You will develop your own
strategic muscles instead
of depending on other people’s theories and
books.
Defeat is bitter. Bitter to the common soldier, but trebly bitter to his general.
The soldier may comfort himself with the
thought that, whatever the result,
he has done his duty faithfully and steadfastly, but the commander has
failed in his duty
if he has not won victory— for that is his duty. He has no
other comparable to it. He will go over in his mind the events
of the
campaign. “Here,” he will think, “I went wrong; here I took counsel of my
fears when I should have been bold; there I should have waited
to gather
strength, not struck piecemeal; at such a moment I failed to grasp
opportunity when it was presented to me.” He
will remember the soldiers
whom he sent into the attack that failed and who did not come back. He will
recall the look in
the eyes of men who trusted him. “I have failed them,” he
will say to himself, “and failed my country!” He will see himself
for what
he is—a defeated general. In a dark hour he will turn in upon himself and
question the very foundations of his leadership
and manhood. And then he
must stop! For if he is ever to command in battle again, he must shake off
these regrets, and stamp on them, as they claw at his will
and his self-
confidence. He must beat off these attacks he delivers against himself, and
cast out the doubts born of failure. Forget them, and remember only the
lessons to be learned from defeat—
they are more than from victory.
DEFEAT INTO VICTORY, WILLIAM SLIM, 1897–1970
Erase the memory of the last war. The last war you fought is a danger,
even if you won it. It is fresh in your mind. If you were victorious, you will
tend
to repeat the strategies you just used, for success makes us lazy and
complacent; if you lost, you may be skittish and indecisive.
Do not think
about the last war; you do not have the distance or the detachment. Instead
do whatever you can to blot it from
your mind. During the Vietnam War, the
great North Vietnamese general Vo Nguyen Giap had a simple rule of
thumb: after a successful
campaign, he would convince himself that it had
actually been a failure. As a result he never got drunk on his success, and
he
never repeated the same strategy in the next battle. Rather he had to think
through each situation anew.
Ted Williams, perhaps baseball’s greatest pure hitter, made a point of
always trying to forget his last at-bat. Whether he’d
gotten a home run or a
strikeout, he put it behind him. No two at-bats are the same, even against
the same pitcher, and Williams
wanted an open mind. He would not wait for
the next at-bat to start forgetting: the minute he got back to the dugout, he
started
focusing on what was happening in the game taking place. Attention
to the details of the present is by far the best way to
crowd out the past and
forget the last war.
Keep the mind moving. When we were children, our minds never stopped.
We were open to new experiences and absorbed as much of them as
possible.
We learned fast, because the world around us excited us. When we
felt frustrated or upset, we would find some creative way
to get what we
wanted and then quickly forget the problem as something new crossed our
path.
All the greatest strategists—Alexander the Great, Napoleon, Musashi—
were childlike in this respect. Sometimes, in fact, they
even acted like
children. The reason is simple: superior strategists see things as they are.
They are highly sensitive to
dangers and opportunities. Nothing stays the
same in life, and keeping up with circumstances as they change requires a
great
deal of mental fluidity. Great strategists do not act according to
preconceived ideas; they respond to the moment, like children.
Their minds
are always moving, and they are always excited and curious. They quickly
forget the past—the present is much too
interesting.
The Greek thinker Aristotle thought that life was defined by movement.
What does not move is dead. What has speed and mobility
has more
possibilities, more life. We all start off with the mobile mind of a Napoleon,
but as we get older, we tend to become
more like the Prussians. You may
think that what you’d like to recapture from your youth is your looks, your
physical fitness,
your simple pleasures, but what you really need is the
fluidity of mind you once possessed. Whenever you find your thoughts
revolving around a particular subject or idea—an obsession, a resentment—
force them past it. Distract yourself with something
else. Like a child, find
something new to be absorbed by, something worthy of concentrated
attention. Do not waste time on
things you cannot change or influence. Just
keep moving.
Absorb the spirit of the times. Throughout the history of warfare, there
have been classic battles in which the past has confronted the future in a
hopeless
mismatch. It happened in the seventh century, when the Persians
and Byzantines confronted the invincible armies of Islam,
with their new
form of desert fighting; or in the first half of the thirteenth century, when
the Mongols used relentless mobility
to overwhelm the heavy armies of the
Russians and Europeans; or in 1806, when Napoleon crushed the Prussians
at Jena. In each
case the conquering army developed a way of fighting that
maximized a new form of technology or a new social order.
You can reproduce this effect on a smaller scale by attuning yourself to
the spirit of the times. Developing antennae for
the trends that have yet to
crest takes work and study, as well as the flexibility to adapt to those trends.
As you get older,
it is best to periodically alter your style. In the golden age
of Hollywood, most actresses had very short careers. But Joan
Crawford
fought the studio system and managed to have a remarkably long career by
constantly changing her style, going from
siren to noir heroine to cult
queen. Instead of staying sentimentally attached to some fashion of days
gone by, she was able
to sense a rising trend and go with it. By constantly
adapting and changing your style, you will avoid the pitfalls of your
previous wars. Just when people feel they know you, you will change.
Reverse course. The great Russian novelist Fyodor Dostoyevsky suffered
from epilepsy. Just before a seizure, he would experience a moment
of
intense ecstasy, which he described as a feeling of being suddenly flooded
with reality, a momentary vision of the world
exactly as it is. Later he
would find himself getting depressed, as this vision was crowded out by the
habits and routines
of daily life. During these depressions, wanting to feel
that closeness to reality again, he would go to the nearest casino
and gamble
away all his money. There reality would overwhelm him; comfort and
routine would be gone, stale patterns broken.
Having to rethink everything,
he would get his creative energy back. This was the closest he could
deliberately come to the
sense of ecstasy he got through epilepsy.
Dostoyevsky’s method was a little extreme, but sometimes you have to
shake yourself up, break free from the hold of the past.
This can take the
form of reversing your course, doing the opposite of what you would
normally do in any given situation,
putting yourself in some unusual
circumstance, or literally starting over. In those situations the mind has to
deal with a
new reality, and it snaps to life. The change may be alarming,
but it is also refreshing—even exhilarating.
Relationships often develop a certain tiresome predictability. You do what
you usually do, other people respond the way they
usually do, and around it
goes. If you reverse course, act in a novel manner, you alter the entire
dynamic. Do this every
so often to break up the relationship’s stale patterns
and open it to new possibilities.
To know that one is in a certain condition, in a certain state, is already a
process of liberation; but a man who is not aware
of his condition, of his
struggle, tries to be something other than he is, which brings about habit.
So, then, let us keep
in mind that we want to examine what is, to observe
and be aware of exactly what is the actual, without giving it any slant,
without giving it an interpretation. It needs an extraordinarily astute mind,
an extraordinarily pliable heart, to be aware
of and to follow what is;
because what is is constantly moving, constantly undergoing a
transformation, and if the mind is
tethered to belief, to knowledge, it ceases
to pursue, it ceases to follow the swift movement of what is. What is is not
static,
surely—it is constantly moving, as you will see if you observe it very
closely. To follow it, you need a very swift mind and a pliable heart—which
are denied when the mind is static, fixed in a belief,
in a prejudice, in an
identification; and a mind and heart that are dry cannot follow easily,
swiftly, that which is.
JIDDU KRISHNAMURTI, 1895–1986
Think of your mind as an army. Armies must adapt to the complexity and
chaos of modern war by becoming more fluid and maneuverable.
The
ultimate extension of this evolution is guerrilla warfare, which exploits
chaos by making disorder and unpredictability
a strategy. The guerrilla
army never stops to defend a particular place or town; it wins by always
moving, staying one step
ahead. By following no set pattern, it gives the
enemy no target. The guerrilla army never repeats the same tactic. It
responds
to the situation, the moment, the terrain where it happens to find
itself. There is no front, no concrete line of communication
or supply, no
slow-moving wagon. The guerrilla army is pure mobility.
That is the model for your new way of thinking. Apply no tactic rigidly;
do not let your mind settle into static positions,
defending any particular
place or idea, repeating the same lifeless maneuvers. Attack problems from
new angles, adapting to
the landscape and to what you’re given. By staying
in constant motion you show your enemies no target to aim at. You exploit
the chaos of the world instead of succumbing to it.
Image: Water.
Adapting its shape to wherever it moves in the stream, pushing rocks out
of its way, smoothing boulders, it never stops, is
never the same. The faster
it moves the clearer it gets.
Authority: Some of our generals failed because they worked out
everything by rule. They knew what Frederick did at one place,
and Napoleon at another. They were always thinking about
what Napoleon would do. . . . I don’t underrate the value of
military
knowledge, but if men make war in slavish observance
to rules, they will fail. . . .
War is progressive. —Ulysses S. Grant (1822–85)
REVERSAL
There is never any value in fighting the last war. But while you’re
eliminating that pernicious tendency, you must imagine
that your enemy is
trying to do the same—trying to learn from and adapt to the present. Some
of history’s worst military disasters
have come not out of fighting the last
war but out of assuming that that’s what your opponent will do. When
Saddam Hussein
of Iraq invaded Kuwait in 1990, he thought the United
States had yet to recover from “Vietnam syndrome”—the fear of casualties
and loss that had been so traumatic during the Vietnam period—and that it
would either avoid war altogether or would fight
in the same way it had,
trying to win the fight from the air instead of on the ground. He did not
realize that the American
military was ready for a new kind of war.
Remember: the loser in any battle may be too traumatized to fight again but
may
also learn from the experience and move on. Err on the side of caution;
be ready. Never let your enemy surprise you in war.
3
AMIDST THE TURMOIL
OF EVENTS, DO NOT LOSE
YOUR PRESENCE OF MIND
THE COUNTERBALANCE
STRATEGY
In the heat of battle, the mind tends to lose its balance. Too
many things confront you at the same time—unexpected
setbacks,
doubts and criticisms from your own allies. There’s a
danger of responding emotionally, with fear, depression, or
frustration. It is vital to keep your presence of mind,
maintaining your mental powers whatever the circumstances.
You must actively resist the emotional pull of the moment—
staying decisive, confident, and aggressive no matter what hits
you. Make the mind tougher by exposing it to adversity. Learn
to detach yourself from the chaos of the battlefield. Let others
lose their heads; your presence of mind will steer you clear of
their influence and keep you on course.
[Presence of mind] must play a great role in war, the domain of the
unexpected, since it is nothing but an increased capacity of dealing with
the
unexpected. We admire presence of mind in an apt repartee, as we admire
quick thinking in the face of danger. . . . The
expression “presence of mind”
precisely conveys the speed and immediacy of the help provided by the
intellect.
ON WAR, CARL VON CLAUSEWITZ, 1780–1831
THE HYPERAGGRESSIVE TACTIC
Vice Admiral Lord Horatio Nelson (1758–1805) had been through it all. He
had lost his right eye in the siege of Calvi and
his right arm in the Battle of
Tenerife. He had defeated the Spanish at Cape St. Vincent in 1797 and had
thwarted Napoleon’s
Egyptian campaign by defeating his navy at the Battle
of the Nile the following year. But none of his tribulations and triumphs
prepared him for the problems he faced from his own colleagues in the
British navy as they prepared to go to war against Denmark
in February
1801.
Nelson, England’s most glorious war hero, was the obvious choice to lead
the fleet. Instead the Admiralty chose Sir Hyde Parker,
with Nelson his
second-in-command. This war was a delicate business; it was intended to
force the disobedient Danes to comply
with a British-led embargo on the
shipping of military goods to France. The fiery Nelson was prone to lose his
cool. He hated
Napoleon, and if he went too far against the Danes, he would
produce a diplomatic fiasco. Sir Hyde was an older, more stable,
even-
tempered man who would do the job and nothing more.
Nelson swallowed his pride and took the assignment, but he saw trouble
ahead. He knew that time was of the essence: the faster
the navy sailed, the
less chance the Danes would have to build up their defenses. The ships
were ready to sail, but Parker’s
motto was “Everything in good order.” It
wasn’t his style to hurry. Nelson hated his casualness and burned for action:
he
reviewed intelligence reports, studied maps, and came up with a detailed
plan for fighting the Danes. He wrote to Parker urging
him to seize the
initiative. Parker ignored him.
More life may trickle out of men through thought than through a gaping
wound.
THOMAS HARDY, 1840–1928
At last, on March 11, the British fleet set sail. Instead of heading for
Copenhagen, however, Parker anchored well to the
north of the city’s
harbor and called a meeting of his captains. According to intelligence
reports, he explained, the Danes
had prepared elaborate defenses for
Copenhagen. Boats anchored in the harbor, forts to the north and south, and
mobile artillery
batteries could blast the British out of the water. How to
fight this artillery without terrible losses? Also, pilots who
knew the waters
around Copenhagen reported that they were treacherous, places of sandbars
and tricky winds. Navigating these
dangers under bombardment would be
harrowing. With all of these difficulties, perhaps it was best to wait for the
Danes to
leave harbor and then fight them in open sea.
Nelson struggled to control himself. Finally he let loose, pacing the room,
the stub of his lost arm jerking as he spoke.
No war, he said, had ever been
won by waiting. The Danish defenses looked formidable “to those who are
children at war,” but
he had worked out a strategy weeks earlier: he would
attack from the south, the easier approach, while Parker and a reserve
force
would stay to the city’s north. Nelson would use his mobility to take out the
Danish guns. He had studied the maps:
sandbars were no threat. As for the
wind, aggressive action was more important than fretting over wind.
Nelson’s speech energized Parker’s captains. He was by far their most
successful leader, and his confidence was catching.
Even Sir Hyde was
impressed, and the plan was approved.
So Grant was alone; his most trusted subordinates besought him to change
his plans, while his superiors were astounded at
his temerity and strove to
interfere. Soldiers of reputation and civilians in high places condemned, in
advance, a campaign that seemed to them as hopeless as
it was
unprecedented. If he failed, the country would concur with the Government
and the Generals. Grant knew all this, and
appreciated his danger, but was
as invulnerable to the apprehensions of ambition as to the entreaties of
friendship, or the
anxieties even of patriotism. That quiet confidence in
himself which never forsook him, and which amounted indeed almost to
a
feeling of fate, was uninterrupted. Having once determined in a matter that
required irreversible decision, he never reversed, nor even misgave, but was
steadily
loyal to himself and his plans. This absolute and implicit faith was,
however, as far as possible from conceit or enthusiasm;
it was simply a
consciousness or conviction, rather, which brought the very strength it
believed in; which was itself strength,
and which inspired others with a trust
in him, because he was able thus to trust himself.
MILITARY HISTORY OF ULYSSES S. GRANT, ADAM BADEAU, 1868
The next morning Nelson’s line of ships advanced on Copenhagen, and
the battle began. The Danish guns, firing on the British
at close range, took
a fierce toll. Nelson paced the deck of his flagship, HMS Elephant, urging
his men on. He was in an excited, almost ecstatic state. A shot through the
mainmast nearly hit him: “It is warm
work, and this day may be the last to
any of us at any moment,” he told a colonel, a little shaken up by the blast,
“but mark
you, I would not be elsewhere for thousands.”
Parker followed the battle from his position to the north. He now
regretted agreeing to Nelson’s plan; he was responsible
for the campaign,
and a defeat here could ruin his career. After four hours of back-and-forth
bombardment, he had seen enough:
the fleet had taken a beating and had
gained no advantage. Nelson never knew when to quit. Parker decided it
was time to hoist
signal flag 39, the order to withdraw. The first ships to see
it were to acknowledge it and pass the signal on down the line.
Once
acknowledged there was nothing else to do but retreat. The battle was over.
On board the Elephant, a lieutenant told Nelson about the signal. The
vice-admiral ignored it. Continuing to pound the Danish defenses, he
eventually
called to an officer, “Is number sixteen still hoisted?” Number 16
was his own flag; it meant “Engage the enemy more closely.”
The officer
confirmed that the flag was still flying. “Mind you keep it so,” Nelson told
him. A few minutes later, Parker’s
signal still flapping in the breeze, Nelson
turned to his flag captain: “You know, Foley, I have only one eye—I have a
right
to be blind sometimes.” And raising his telescope to his blind eye, he
calmly remarked, “I really do not see the signal.”
Torn between obeying Parker and obeying Nelson, the fleet captains
chose Nelson. They would risk their careers along with
his. But soon the
Danish defenses started to crack; some of the ships anchored in the harbor
surrendered, and the firing of
the guns began to slow. Less than an hour
after Parker’s signal to stop the battle, the Danes surrendered.
The next day Parker perfunctorily congratulated Nelson on the victory.
He did not mention his subordinate’s disobedience.
He was hoping the
whole affair, including his own lack of courage, would be quietly forgotten.
Interpretation
When the Admiralty put its faith in Sir Hyde, it made a classical military
error: it entrusted the waging of a war to a man
who was careful and
methodical. Such men may seem calm, even strong, in times of peace, but
their self-control often hides
weakness: the reason they think things through
so carefully is that they are terrified of making a mistake and of what that
might mean for them and their career. This doesn’t come out until they are
tested in battle: suddenly they cannot make a decision.
They see problems
everywhere and defeat in the smallest setback. They hang back not out of
patience but out of fear. Often
these moments of hesitation spell their doom.
There was once a man who may be called the “generalissimo” of robbers
and who went by the name of Haka-madare. He had a strong
mind and a
powerful build. He was swift of foot, quick with his hands, wise in thinking
and plotting. Altogether there was no one who could compare with him. His
business was to rob people of their possessions when they were
off guard.
Once, around the tenth month of a year, he needed clothing and decided to
get hold of some. He went to prospective spots
and walked about, looking.
About midnight when people had gone to sleep and were quiet, under a
somewhat blurry moon he saw a man dressed in abundant
clothes
sauntering about on a boulevard. The man, with his trouser-skirt tucked up
with strings perhaps and in a formal hunting robe which gently covered his
body,
was playing the flute, alone, apparently in no hurry to go to any
particular place. Wow, here’s a fellow who’s shown up just to give me his
clothes, Hakamadare thought. Normally he would have gleefully run up and
beaten his quarry down and robbed him of his clothes. But this time,
unaccountably,
he felt something fearsome about the man, so he followed
him for a couple of hundred yards. The man himself didn’t seem to think,
Somebody’s following me. On the contrary, he continued to play the flute
with what appeared to be greater calm.Give him a try, Hakamadare said to
himself, and ran up close to the man, making as much clatter as he could
with his feet.
The man, however, looked not the least disturbed. He simply
turned to look, still playing the flute. It wasn’t possible to
jump on him.
Hakamadare ran off.Hakamadare tried similar approaches a number of
times, but the man remained utterly unperturbed. Hakamadare realized he
was dealing with an unusual fellow. When they had covered about a
thousand yards, though, Hakamadare
decided he couldn’t continue like this,
drew his sword, and ran up to him. This time the man stopped playing the
flute and,
turning, said, “What in the world are you doing?” Hakamadare
couldn’t have been struck with greater fear even if a demon or a god had
run up to attack him when he was walking
alone. For some unaccountable
reason he lost both heart and courage. Overcome with deathly fear and
despite himself, he fell
on his knees and hands.“What are you doing?” the
man repeated. Hakamadare felt he couldn’t escape even if he tried. “I’m
trying to rob you,” he blurted out. “My name is Hakamadare.” “I’ve heard
there’s a man about with that name, yes. A dangerous, unusual fellow, I’m
told,” the man said. Then he simply said to Hakamadare, “Come with me,”
and continued on his way, playing the flute again. Terrified that he was
dealing with no ordinary human being, and as if possessed by a demon or a
god, Haka-madare followed
the man, completely mystified. Eventually the
man walked into a gate behind which was a large house. He stepped inside
from
the verandah after removing his shoes. While Haka-madare was
thinking, He must be the master of the house, the man came back
and
summoned him. As he gave him a robe made of thick cotton cloth, he said,
“If you need something like this in the future,
just come and tell me. If you
jump on somebody who doesn’t know your intentions, you may get hurt.”
Afterward it occurred to Hakamadare that the house belonged to Governor
of Settsu Fujiwara no Yasumasa. Later, when he was arrested, he is known
to have observed, “He was such an unusually weird, terrifying man!”
Yasumasa was not a warrior by family tradition because he was a son of
Munetada. Yet he was not the least inferior to anyone who was a warrior by
family tradition. He had a strong mind, was quick with his
hands, and had
tremendous strength. He was also subtle in thinking and plotting. So even
the imperial court did not feel insecure
in employing him in the way of the
warrior. As a result, the whole world greatly feared him and was
intimidated by him.
LEGENDS OF THE SAMU-RAI, HIROAKI SATO, 1995
Lord Nelson operated according to the opposite principle. Slight of build,
with a delicate constitution, he compensated for
his physical weakness with
fierce determination. He forced himself to be more resolute than anyone
around him. The moment
he entered battle, he ratcheted up his aggressive
impulses. Where other sea lords worried about casualties, the wind, changes
in the enemy’s formation, he concentrated on his plan. Before battle no one
strategized or studied his opponent more thoroughly.
(That knowledge
helped Nelson to sense when the enemy was ready to crumble.) But once
the engagement began, hesitation and
carefulness were dropped.
Presence of mind is a kind of counterbalance to mental weakness, to our
tendency to get emotional and lose perspective in
the heat of battle. Our
greatest weakness is losing heart, doubting ourselves, becoming
unnecessarily cautious. Being more
careful is not what we need; that is just
a screen for our fear of conflict and of making a mistake. What we need is
double
the resolve—an intensification of confidence. That will serve as a
counterbalance.
In moments of turmoil and trouble, you must force yourself to be more
determined. Call up the aggressive energy you need to
overcome caution
and inertia. Any mistakes you make, you can rectify with more energetic
action still. Save your carefulness
for the hours of preparation, but once the
fighting begins, empty your mind of doubts. Ignore those who quail at any
setback
and call for retreat. Find joy in attack mode. Momentum will carry
you through.
The senses make a more vivid impression on the mind than systematic
thought. . . . Even the man who planned the operation
and now sees it
being carried out may well lose confidence in his earlier judgment. . . .
War has a way of masking the stage
with scenery crudely daubed with
fearsome apparitions. Once this is cleared away, and the horizon becomes
unobstructed, developments
will confirm his earlier convictions— this is
one of the great chasms between planning and execution.
—Carl von Clausewitz, ON WAR (1780–1831)
THE DETACHED-BUDDHA TACTIC
Watching the movie director Alfred Hitchcock (1899–1980) at work on a
film set was often quite a surprise to those seeing
it for the first time. Most
filmmakers are wound-up balls of energy, yelling at the crew and barking
out orders, but Hitchcock
would sit in his chair, sometimes dozing, or at
least with his eyes half closed. On the set of Strangers on a Train, made in
1951, the actor Farley Granger thought Hitchcock’s behavior meant he was
angry or upset and asked him if anything
was wrong. “Oh,” Hitchcock
replied sleepily, “I’m so bored.” The crew’s complaints, an actor’s tantrums
—nothing fazed him;
he would just yawn, shift in his chair, and ignore the
problem. “Hitchcock . . . didn’t seem to direct us at all,” said the
actress
Margaret Lockwood. “He was a dozing, nodding Buddha with an enigmatic
smile on his face.”
It was hard for Hitchcock’s colleagues to understand how a man doing
such stressful work could stay so calm and detached.
Some thought it was
part of his character—that there was something inherently cold-blooded
about him. Others thought it a
gimmick, a put-on. Few suspected the truth:
before the filmmaking had even begun, Hitchcock would have prepared for
it with
such intense attention to detail that nothing could go wrong. He was
completely in control; no temperamental actress, no panicky
art director, no
meddling producer could upset him or interfere with his plans. Feeling such
absolute security in what he
had set up, he could afford to lie back and fall
asleep.
Hitchcock’s process began with a storyline, whether from a novel or an
idea of his own. As if he had a movie projector in
his head, he would begin
to visualize the film. Next, he would start meeting with a writer, who would
soon realize that this
job was unlike any other. Instead of taking some
producer’s half-baked idea and turning it into a screenplay, the writer was
simply there to put on paper the dream trapped in Hitchcock’s mind. He or
she would add flesh and bones to the characters
and would of course write
the dialog, but not much else. When Hitchcock sat down with the writer
Samuel Taylor for the first
script meeting on the movie Vertigo (1958), his
descriptions of several scenes were so vivid, so intense, that the experiences
seemed almost to have been real,
or maybe something he had dreamed. This
completeness of vision foreclosed creative conflict. As Taylor soon
realized, although
he was writing the script, it would remain a Hitchcock
creation.
Once the screenplay was finished, Hitchcock would transform it into an
elaborate shooting script. Blocking, camera positions,
lighting, and set
dimensions were spelled out in detailed notes. Most directors leave
themselves some latitude, shooting scenes
from several angles, for example,
to give the film editor options to work with later on. Not Hitchcock: he
essentially edited
the entire film in the shooting script. He knew exactly
what he wanted and wrote it down. If a producer or actor tried to
add or
change a scene, Hitchcock was outwardly pleasant—he could afford to
pretend to listen—but inside he was totally unmoved.
Nothing was left to chance. For the building of the sets (quite elaborate in
a movie like Rear Window), Hitchcock would present the production
designer with precise blueprints, floor plans, incredibly detailed lists of
props.
He supervised every aspect of set construction. He was particularly
attentive to the clothes of his leading actresses: according
to Edith Head,
costumer on many Hitchcock movies, including Dial M for Murder in 1954,
“There was a reason for every color, every style, and he was absolutely
certain about everything he settled on.
For one scene he saw [Grace Kelly]
in pale green, for another in white chiffon, for another in gold. He was
really putting
a dream together in the studio.” When the actress Kim Novak
refused to wear a gray suit in Vertigo because she felt it made her look
washed out, Hitchcock told her he wanted her to look like a woman of
mystery who had just
stepped out of the San Francisco fog. How could she
argue with that? She wore the suit.
Hitchcock’s actors found working with him strange yet pleasant. Some of
Hollywood’s best—Joseph Cotten, Grace Kelly, Cary
Grant, Ingrid
Bergman—said that he was the easiest director to work for: his nonchalance
was catching, and since his films
were so carefully staged as not to depend
on the actor’s performance in any particular scene, they could relax.
Everything
went like clockwork. As James Stewart told the cast of The Man
Who Knew Too Much (1956), “We’re in the hands of an expert here. You
can lean on him. Just do everything he tells you and the whole thing will
be
okay.”
As Hitchcock sat calmly on the set, apparently half asleep, the cast and
crew could see only the small part each one played.
They had no idea how
everything fit into his vision. When Taylor saw Vertigo for the first time, it
was like seeing another man’s dream. The film neatly duplicated the vision
Hitchcock had expressed
to him many months before.
Interpretation
The first film Hitchcock directed was The Pleasure Garden, a silent he
made in 1925. The production went wrong in every conceivable way.
Hitchcock hated chaos and disorder; unexpected
events, panicky crew
members, and any loss of control made him miserable. From that point on,
he decided, he would treat filmmaking
like a military operation. He would
give his producers, actors, and crew no room to mess up what he wanted to
create. He taught
himself every aspect of film production: set design,
lighting, the technicalities of cameras and lenses, editing, sound. He
ran
every stage of the film’s making. No shadow could fall between the
planning and the execution.
Establishing control in advance the way Hitchcock did might not seem
like presence of mind, but it actually takes that quality
to its zenith. It
means entering battle (in Hitchcock’s case a film shoot) feeling calm and
ready. Setbacks may come, but
you will have foreseen them and thought of
alternatives, and you are ready to respond. Your mind will never go blank
when
it is that well prepared. When your colleagues barrage you with
doubts, anxious questions, and slipshod ideas, you may nod
and pretend to
listen, but really you’re ignoring them—you’ve outthought them in
advance. And your relaxed manner will prove
contagious to other people,
making them easier to manage in turn.
It is easy to be overwhelmed by everything that faces you in battle, where
so many people are asking or telling you what to
do. So many vital matters
press in on you that you can lose sight of your goals and plans; suddenly
you can’t see the forest
for the trees. Understand: presence of mind is the
ability to detach yourself from all that, to see the whole battlefield,
the
whole picture, with clarity. All great generals have this quality. And what
gives you that mental distance is preparation,
mastering the details
beforehand. Let people think your Buddha-like detachment comes from
some mysterious source. The less
they understand you the better.
For the love of God, pull yourself together and do not look at things so
darkly: the first step backward makes a poor impression
in the army, the
second step is dangerous, and the third becomes fatal.
—Frederick the Great (1712–86), letter to a general
KEYS TO WARFARE
We humans like to see ourselves as rational creatures. We imagine that what
separates us from animals is the ability to think
and reason. But that is only
partly true: what distinguishes us from animals just as much is our capacity
to laugh, to cry,
to feel a range of emotions. We are in fact emotional
creatures as well as rational ones, and although we like to think we
govern
our actions through reason and thought, what most often dictates our
behavior is the emotion we feel in the moment.
We maintain the illusion that we are rational through the routine of our
daily affairs, which helps us to keep things calm
and apparently controlled.
Our minds seem rather strong when we’re following our routines. But place
any of us in an adverse
situation and our rationality vanishes; we react to
pressure by growing fearful, impatient, confused. Such moments reveal
us
for the emotional creatures we are: under attack, whether by a known
enemy or unpredictably by a colleague, our response
is dominated by
feelings of anger, sadness, betrayal. Only with great effort can we reason
our way through these periods and
respond rationally—and our rationality
rarely lasts past the next attack.
Understand: your mind is weaker than your emotions. But you become
aware of this weakness only in moments of adversity—precisely
the time
when you need strength. What best equips you to cope with the heat of
battle is neither more knowledge nor more intellect.
What makes your mind
stronger, and more able to control your emotions, is internal discipline and
toughness.
No one can teach you this skill; you cannot learn it by reading about it.
Like any discipline, it can come only through practice,
experience, even a
little suffering. The first step in building up presence of mind is to see the
need for it—to want it badly
enough to be willing to work for it. Historical
figures who stand out for their presence of mind—Alexander the Great,
Ulysses
S. Grant, Winston Churchill—acquired it through adversity,
through trial and error. They were in positions of responsibility
in which
they had to develop this quality or sink. Although these men may have been
blessed with an unusual amount of personal
fortitude, they had to work hard
to strengthen this into presence of mind.
The ideas that follow are based on their experience and hard-won
victories. Think of these ideas as exercises, ways to toughen
your mind,
each a kind of counterbalance to emotion’s overpowering pull.
The first quality of a General-in-Chief is to have a cool head which receives
exact impressions of things, which never gets
heated, which never allows
itself to be dazzled, or intoxicated, by good or bad news. The successive
simultaneous sensations
which he receives in the course of a day must be
classified, and must occupy the correct places they merit to fill, because
common sense and reason are the results of the comparison of a number of
sensations each equally well considered. There are
certain men who, on
account of their moral and physical constitution, paint mental pictures out
of everything: however exalted
be their reason, their will, their courage,
and whatever good qualities they may possess, nature has not fitted them to
command
armies, nor to direct great operations of war.
NAPOLEON BONAPARTE, 1769–1821
Expose yourself to conflict. George S. Patton came from one of America’s
most distinguished military families—his ancestors included generals and
colonels
who had fought and died in the American Revolution and the Civil
War. Raised on stories of their heroism, he followed in their
footsteps and
chose a career in the military. But Patton was also a sensitive young man,
and he had one deep fear: that in
battle he would turn coward and disgrace
the family name.
Patton had his first real taste of battle in 1918, at the age of thirty-two,
during the Allied offensive on the Argonne during
World War I. He
commanded a tank division. At one point during the battle, Patton managed
to lead some American infantrymen
to a position on a hilltop overlooking a
key strategic town, but German fire forced them to take cover. Soon it
became clear
that they were trapped: if they retreated, they would come
under fire from positions on the sides of the hill; if they advanced,
they
would run right into a battery of German machine guns. If they were all to
die, as it seemed to Patton, better to die
advancing. At the moment he was
to lead the troops in the charge, however, Patton was stricken by intense
fear. His body trembled,
and his legs turned to jelly. In a confirmation of his
deepest fears, he had lost his nerve.
At that instant, looking into the clouds beyond the German batteries,
Patton had a vision: he saw his illustrious military
ancestors, all in their
uniforms, staring sternly down at him. They seemed to be inviting him to
join their company—the company
of dead war heroes. Paradoxically, the
sight of these men had a calming effect on the young Patton: calling for
volunteers
to follow him, he yelled, “It is time for another Patton to die!”
The strength had returned to his legs; he stood up and charged
toward the
German guns. Seconds later he fell, hit in the thigh. But he survived the
battle.
From that moment on, even after he became a general, Patton made a
point of visiting the front lines, exposing himself needlessly
to danger. He
tested himself again and again. His vision of his ancestors remained a
constant stimulus—a challenge to his
honor. Each time it became easier to
face down his fears. It seemed to his fellow generals, and to his own men,
that no one
had more presence of mind than Patton. They did not know how
much of his strength was an effort of will.
The story of Patton teaches us two things. First, it is better to confront
your fears, let them come to the surface, than
to ignore them or tamp them
down. Fear is the most destructive emotion for presence of mind, but it
thrives on the unknown,
which lets our imaginations run wild. By
deliberately putting yourself in situations where you have to face fear, you
familiarize
yourself with it and your anxiety grows less acute. The sensation
of overcoming a deep-rooted fear in turn gives you confidence
and presence
of mind. The more conflicts and difficult situations you put yourself
through, the more battle-tested your mind
will be.
Second, Patton’s experience demonstrates the motivating power of a
sense of honor and dignity. In giving in to fear, in losing
your presence of
mind, you disgrace not only yourself, your self-image, and your reputation
but your company, your family,
your group. You bring down the communal
spirit. Being a leader of even the smallest group gives you something to live
up to:
people are watching you, judging you, depending on you. To lose
your composure would make it hard for you to live with yourself.
There was a fox who had never seen a lion. But one day he happened to
meet one of these beasts face to face. On this first
occasion he was so
terrified that he felt he would die of fear. He encountered him again, and
this time he was also frightened,
but not so much as the first time. But on
the third occasion when he saw him, he actually plucked up the courage to
approach him and began to chat.
This fable shows that familiarity soothes our fears.
FABLES, AESOP, SIXTH CENTURY B.C.
Be self-reliant. There is nothing worse than feeling dependent on other
people. Dependency makes you vulnerable to all kinds of emotions—
betrayal, disappointment, frustration—that play havoc with your mental
balance.
Early in the American Civil War, General Ulysses S. Grant, eventual
commander in chief of the Northern armies, felt his authority
slipping. His
subordinates would pass along inaccurate information on the terrain he was
marching through; his captains would
fail to follow through on his orders;
his generals were criticizing his plans. Grant was stoical by nature, but his
diminished
control over his troops led to a diminished control over himself
and drove him to drink.
Grant had learned his lesson by the time of the Vicksburg campaign, in
1862–63. He rode the terrain himself, studying it firsthand.
He
reviewedintelligence reports himself. He honed the precision of his orders,
making it harder for his captains to flout
them. And once he hadmade a
decision, he would ignore his fellow generals’ doubts and trusthis
convictions. To get things
done, he came to rely on himself. Hisfeelings of
helplessness dissolved, and with them all of the attendantemotions that had
ruined his presence of mind.
Being self-reliant is critical. To make yourself less dependent on others
and so-called experts, you need to expand your repertoire
of skills. And you
need to feel more confident in your own judgment. Understand: we tend to
overestimate other people’s abilities—after
all, they’re trying hard to make
it look as if they knew what they were doing—and we tend to underestimate
our own. You must
compensate for this by trusting yourself more and others
less.
It is important to remember, though, that being self-reliant does not mean
burdening yourself with petty details. You must
be able to distinguish
between small matters that are best left to others and larger issues that
require your attention and
care.
In the words of the ancients, one should make his decisions within the space
of seven breaths. Lord Takanobu said, “If discrimination
is long, it will
spoil.” Lord Naoshige said, “When matters are done leisurely, seven out of
ten will turn out badly. A warrior is a person who does
things quickly.”
When your mind is going hither and thither, discrimination will never be
brought to a conclusion. With an intense, fresh and
unde-laying spirit, one
will make his judgments within the space of seven breaths. It is a matter of
being determined and
having the spirit to break right through to the other
side.
HAGAKURE: THE BOOK OF THE SAMURAI, YAMAMOTO
TSUNETOMO, 1659–1720
Suffer fools gladly. John Churchill, the Duke of Marlborough, is one of
history’s most successful generals. A genius of tactics and strategy,
he had
tremendous presence of mind. In the early eighteenth century, Churchill
was often the leader of an alliance of English,
Dutch, and German armies
against the mighty forces of France. His fellow generals were timid,
indecisive, narrow-minded men.
They balked at the duke’s bold plans, saw
dangers everywhere, were discouraged at the slightest setback, and
promoted their
own country’s interests at the expense of the alliance. They
had no vision, no patience: they were fools.
On a famous occasion during the civil war, Caesar tripped when
disembarking from a ship on the shores of Africa and fell flat
on his face.
With his talent for improvisation, he spread out his arms and embraced the
earth as a symbol of conquest. By
quick thinking he turned a terrible omen
of failure into one of victory.
CICERO: THE LIFE AND TIMES OF ROME’S GREATEST POLITICIAN,
ANTHONY EVERITT, 2001
The duke, an experienced and subtle courtier, never confronted his
colleagues directly; he did not force his opinions on them.
Instead he treated
them like children, indulging them in their fears while cutting them out of
his plans. Occasionally he
threw them a bone, doing some minor thing they
had suggested or pretending to worry about a danger they had imagined.
But
he never let himself get angry or frustrated; that would have ruined his
presence of mind, undermining his ability to lead
the campaign. He forced
himself to stay patient and cheerful. He knew how to suffer fools gladly.
Understand: you cannot be everywhere or fight everyone. Your time and
energy are limited, and you must learn how to preserve
them. Exhaustion
and frustration can ruin your presence of mind. The world is full of fools—
people who cannot wait to get
results, who change with the wind, who can’t
see past their noses. You encounter them everywhere: the indecisive boss,
the
rash colleague, the hysterical subordinate. When working alongside
fools, do not fight them. Instead think of them the way
you think of
children, or pets, not important enough to affect your mental balance.
Detach yourself emotionally. And while
you’re inwardly laughing at their
foolishness, indulge them in one of their more harmless ideas. The ability to
stay cheerful
in the face of fools is an important skill.
We mean the ability to keep one’s head at times of exceptional stress and
violent emotion. . . . But it might be closer to the truth to assume that the
faculty known as self-control—the gift of keeping calm even under
the
greatest stress—is rooted in temperament. It is itself an emotion which
serves to balance the passionate feelings in strong
characters without
destroying them, and it is this balance alone that assures the dominance of
the intellect. The counterweight
we mean is simply the sense of human
dignity, the noblest pride and deepest need of all: the urge to act rationally
at all times. Therefore we would argue that a strong character is one that
will not be unbalanced
by the most powerful emotions.
ON WAR, CARL VON CLAUSEWITZ, 1780–1831
Crowd out feelings of panic by focusing on simple tasks. Lord Ya-
manouchi, an aristocrat of eighteenth-century Japan, once asked his tea
master to accompany him on a visit to Edo
(later Tokyo), where he was to
stay for a while. He wanted to show off to his fellow courtiers his
retainer’s skill in the
rituals of the tea ceremony. Now, the tea master knew
everything there was to know about the tea ceremony, but little else;
he
was a peaceful man. He dressed, however, like a samurai, as his high
position required.
One day, as the tea master was walking in the big city, he was accosted
by a samurai who challenged him to a duel. The tea
master was not a
swordsman and tried to explain this to the samurai, but the man refused to
listen. To turn the challenge
down would disgrace both the tea master’s
family and Lord Yamanouchi. He had to accept, though that meant certain
death. And
accept he did, requesting only that the duel be put off to the next
day. His wish was granted.
In panic, the tea master hurried to the nearest fencing school. If he were
to die, he wanted to learn how to die honorably.
To see the fencing master
ordinarily required letters of introduction, but the tea master was so
insistent, and so clearly
terrified, that at last he was given an interview. The
fencing master listened to his story.
However, he perceived now that it did not greatly matter what kind of
soldiers he was going to fight, so long as they fought,
which fact no one
disputed. There was a more serious problem. He lay in his bunk pondering
upon it. He tried to mathematically prove to himself that he would not run
from a battle. .
. . A little panic-fear grew in his mind. As his imagination
went forward to a fight, he saw hideous possibilities. He contemplated
the
lurking menaces of the future, and failed in an effort to see himself standing
stoutly in the midst of them. He recalled
his visions of broken-bladed glory,
but in the shadow of the impending tumult he suspected them to be
impossible pictures. He sprang from the bunk and began to pace nervously
to and fro. “Good Lord, what’s th’ matter with me?” he said aloud. He felt
that in this crisis his laws of life were useless. Whatever he had learned of
himself was here of no avail. He was an unknown quantity. He saw that he
would again be obliged to experiment as he had in early youth. He must
accumulate
information of himself, and meanwhile he resolved to remain
close upon his guard lest those qualities of which he knew nothing
should
everlastingly disgrace him. “Good Lord!” he repeated in dismay. . . . For
days he made ceaseless calculations, but they were all wondrously
unsatisfactory. He found that he could establish nothing.
He finally
concluded that the only way to prove himself was to go into the blaze, and
then figuratively to watch his legs
to discover their merits and faults. He
reluctantly admitted that he could not sit still and with a mental slate and
pencil
derive an answer. To gain it, he must have blaze, blood, and danger,
even as a chemist requires this, that, and the other.
So he fretted for an
opportunity. 
THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE, STEPHEN CRANE, 1871–1900
The swordsman was sympathetic: he would teach the poor visitor the art
of dying, but first he wanted to be served some tea.
The tea master
proceeded to perform the ritual, his manner calm, his concentration perfect.
Finally the fencing master yelled
out in excitement, “No need for you to
learn the art of death! The state of mind you’re in now is enough for you to
face any
samurai. When you see your challenger, imagine you’re about to
serve tea to a guest. Take off your coat, fold it up carefully,
and lay your fan
on it just as you do at work.” This ritual completed, the tea master was to
raise his sword in the same alert
spirit. Then he would be ready to die.
The tea master agreed to do as his teacher said. The next day he went to
meet the samurai, who could not help but notice the
completely calm and
dignified expression on his opponent’s face as he took off his coat. Perhaps,
the samurai thought, this
fumbling tea master is actually a skilled
swordsman. He bowed, begged pardon for his behavior the day before, and
hurried
away.
When circumstances scare us, our imagination tends to take over, filling
our minds with endless anxieties. You need to gain
control of your
imagination, something easier said than done. Often the best way to calm
down and give yourself such control
is to force the mind to concentrate on
something relatively simple—a calming ritual, a repetitive task that you are
good at.
You are creating the kind of composure you naturally have when
your mind is absorbed in a problem. A focused mind has no room
for
anxiety or for the effects of an overactive imagination. Once you have
regained your mental balance, you can then face
the problem at hand. At the
first sign of any kind of fear, practice this technique until it becomes a habit.
Being able to
control your imagination at intense moments is a crucial skill.
Unintimidate yourself. Intimidation will always threaten your presence of
mind. And it is a hard feeling to combat.
During World War II, the composer Dmitry Shostakovich and several of
his colleagues were called into a meeting with the Russian
ruler Joseph
Stalin, who had commissioned them to write a new national anthem.
Meetings with Stalin were terrifying; one misstep
could lead you into a very
dark alley. He would stare you down until you felt your throat tighten. And,
as meetings with Stalin
often did, this one took a bad turn: the ruler began
to criticize one of the composers for his poor arrangement of his anthem.
Scared silly, the man admitted he had used an arranger who had done a bad
job. Here he was digging several graves: Clearly
the poor arranger could be
called to task. The composer was responsible for the hire, and he, too, could
pay for the mistake.
And what of the other composers, including
Shostakovich? Stalin could be relentless once he smelled fear.
Shostakovich had heard enough: it was foolish, he said, to blame the
arranger, who was mostly following orders. He then subtly
redirected the
conversation to a different subject—whether a composer should do his own
orchestrations. What did Stalin think
on the matter? Always eager to prove
his expertise, Stalin swallowed the bait. The dangerous moment passed.
Shostakovich maintained his presence of mind in several ways. First,
instead of letting Stalin intimidate him, he forced himself
to see the man as
he was: short, fat, ugly, unimaginative. The dictator’s famous piercing gaze
was just a trick, a sign of
his own insecurity. Second, Shostakovich faced up
to Stalin, talking to him normally and straightforwardly. By his actions
and
tone of voice, the composer showed that he was not intimidated. Stalin fed
off fear. If, without being aggressive or brazen,
you showed no fear, he
would generally leave you alone.
The key to staying unintimidated is to convince yourself that the person
you’re facing is a mere mortal, no different from
you—which is in fact the
truth. See the person, not the myth. Imagine him or her as a child, as
someone riddled with insecurities.
Cutting the other person down to size
will help you to keep your mental balance.
Develop your Fingerspitzengefühl (fingertip feel). Presence of mind
depends not only on your mind’s ability to come to your aid in difficult
situations but also on the speed
with which this happens. Waiting until the
next day to think of the right action to take does you no good at all. “Speed”
here means responding to circumstances with rapidity and making
lightning-quick decisions. This power is often read as a kind
of intuition,
what the Germans call “Fingerspitzengefühl” (fingertip feel). Erwin
Rommel, who led the German tank campaign in North Africa during World
War II, had great fingertip
feel. He could sense when the Allies would
attack and from what direction. In choosing a line of advance, he had an
uncanny
feel for his enemy’s weakness; at the start of a battle, he could
intuit his enemy’s strategy before it unfolded.
To Rommel’s men their general seemed to have a genius for war, and he
did possess a quicker mind than most. But Rommel also
did things to
enhance his quickness, things that reinforced his feel for battle. First, he
devoured information about the
enemy—from details about its weaponry to
the psychological traits of the opposing general. Second, he made himself
an expert
in tank technology, so that he could get the most out of his
equipment. Third, he not only memorized maps of the North African
desert
but would fly over it, at great risk, to get a bird’s-eye view of the battlefield.
Finally, he personalized his relationship
with his men. He always had a
sense of their morale and knew exactly what he could expect from them.
Rommel didn’t just study his men, his tanks, the terrain, and the enemy—
he got inside their skin, understood the spirit that
animated them, what
made them tick. Having felt his way into these things, in battle he entered a
state of mind in which he
did not have to think consciously of the situation.
The totality of what was going on was in his blood, at his fingertips.
He had
Fingerspitzengefühl
Whether or not you have the mind of a Rommel, there are things you can
do to help you respond faster and bring out that intuitive
feel that all
animals possess. Deep knowledge of the terrain will let you process
information faster than your enemy, a tremendous
advantage. Getting a feel
for the spirit of men and material, thinking your way into them instead of
looking at them from
outside, will help to put you in a different frame of
mind, less conscious and forced, more unconscious and intuitive. Get
your
mind into the habit of making lightning-quick decisions, trusting your
fingertip feel. Your mind will advance in a kind
of mental blitzkrieg,
moving past your opponents before they realize what has hit them.
Finally, do not think of presence of mind as a quality useful only in periods
of adversity, something to switch on and off
as you need it. Cultivate it as
an everyday condition. Confidence, fearlessness, and self-reliance are as
crucial in times
of peace as in times of war. Franklin Delano Roosevelt
showed his tremendous mental toughness and grace under pressure not
only
during the crises of the Depression and World War II but in everyday
situations—in his dealings with his family, his
cabinet, his own polio-
racked body. The better you get at the game of war, the more your warrior
frame of mind will do for
you in daily life. When a crisis does come, your
mind will already be calm and prepared. Once presence of mind becomes a
habit,
it will never abandon you.
Image:
The Wind. The rush of unexpected events, and the doubts and criticisms of
those around you, are like a fierce wind at sea.
It can come from any point
of the compass, and there is no place to go to escape from it, no way to
predict when and in what
direction it will strike. To change direction with
each gust of wind will only throw you out to sea. Good pilots do not waste
time worrying about what they cannot control. They concentrate on
themselves, the skill and steadiness of their hand, the
course they have
plotted, and their determination to reach port, come what may.
The man with centre has calm, unprejudiced judgment. He knows what is
important, what unimportant. He meets realilty serenely
and with
detachment keeping his sense of proportion. The Hara no aru hito [man with
centre] faces life calmly, is tranquil, ready for anything. . . . Nothing upsets
him. If suddenly fire breaks out and people begin to shout in wild confusion
[he] does the right thing immediately and quietly, he ascertains the
direction of the wind, rescues what is most important, fetches
water, and
behaves unhesitatingly in the way the emergency demands. The Hara no nai
hito is the opposite of all this. The Hara no nai hito applies to the man
without calm judgment. He lacks the measure which should be second
nature. Therefore he reacts haphazardly and subectively, arbitrarily and
capriciously.
He cannot distinguish between important and unimportant,
essential and unessential. His judgment is not based upon facts but
on
temporary conditions and rests on subjective foundations, such as moods,
whims, “nerves.” The Hara no nai hito is easily startled, is nervous, not
because he is particularly sensitive but because he lacks that inner axis
which would
prevent his being thrown off centre and which would enable
him to deal with situations realistically. . . . Hara [centre, belly] is only in
slight measure innate. It is above all the result of persistent self-training
and discipline, in fact the fruit
of responsible, individual development. That
is what the Japanese means when he speaks of the Hara no dekita hito, the
man who has accomplished or finished his belly, that is, himself: for he is
mature. If this development does not take
place, we have the Hara no dekita
inai hito, someone who has not developed, who has remained immature,
who is too young in the psychological sense. The Japanese also say Hara no
dekita inai hito wa hito no ue ni tatsu koto ga dekinai: the man who has not
finished his belly cannot stand above others (is not fit for leadership).
HARA: THE VITAL CENTRE, KARLFRIED GRAF VON DÜRCKHEIM,
1962
Authority: A great part of courage is the courage of having
done the thing before.
—Ralph Waldo Emerson (1803–82)
REVERSAL
It is never good to lose your presence of mind, but you can use those
moments when it is under threat to know how to act in
the future. You must
find a way to put yourself in the thick of battle, then watch yourself in
action. Look for your own weaknesses,
and think about how to compensate
for them. People who have never lost their presence of mind are actually in
danger: someday
they will be taken by surprise, and the fall will be harsh.
All great generals, from Julius Caesar to Patton, have at some
point lost
their nerve and then have been the stronger for winning it back. The more
you have lost your balance, the more
you will know about how to right
yourself.
You do not want to lose your presence of mind in key situations, but it is
a wise course to find a way to make your enemies
lose theirs. Take what
throws you off balance and impose it on them. Make them act before they
are ready. Surprise them—nothing
is more unsettling than the unexpected
need to act. Find their weakness, what makes them emotional, and give
them a double
dose of it. The more emotional you can make them, the
farther you will push them off course.
4
CREATE A
SENSE OF URGENCY
AND DESPERATION
THE DEATH-GROUND
STRATEGY
You are your own worst enemy. You waste precious time
dreaming of the future instead of engaging in the present. Since
nothing seems urgent to you, you are only half involved in what
you do. The only way to change is through action and
outside
pressure. Put yourself in situations where you have too much at
stake to waste time or resources— if you cannot afford to lose,
you won’t. Cut your ties to the past; enter unknown territory
where you must depend on your
wits and energy to see you
through. Place yourself on “death ground,” where your back is
against the wall and you have to
fight like hell to get out alive.
Cortés ran all that aground with the ten ships. Cuba, to be sure, was still
there, in the blue sea, with its farms, its cows and
its tame Indians; but the
way to Cuba was no longer through sunny blue waves, rocked in soft
idleness, oblivious of danger
and endeavor; it was through Moteçuçuma’s
court, which had to be conquered by ruse, by force, or by both; through a
sea of warlike Indians who ate their prisoners
and donned their skins as
trophies; at the stroke of their chief’s masterly hand, the five hundred men
had lost that flow
of vital memories and hopes which linked up their souls
with their mother-island; at one stroke, their backs had been withered
and
had lost all sense of life. Hence forward, for them, all life was ahead,
towards those forbidding peaks which rose gigantically on the horizon as if
to bar all access to what was now not merely their ambition, but their only
possible aim—Mexico, mysterious and powerful behind
the conflicting
tribes.
HERNÁN CORTÉS: CONQUEROR OF MEXICO, SALVADOR DE
MADARIAGA, 1942
THE NO-RETURN TACTIC
In 1504 an ambitious nineteen-year-old Spaniard named Hernán Cortés
gave up his studies in law and sailed for his country’s
colonies in the New
World. Stopping first in Santo Domingo (the island today comprising Haiti
and the Dominican Republic),
then in Cuba, he soon heard about a land to
the west called Mexico—an empire teeming with gold and dominated by
the Aztecs,
with their magnificent highland capital of Tenochtitlán. From
then on, Cortés had just one thought: someday he would conquer
and settle
the land of Mexico.
Over the next ten years, Cortés slowly rose through the ranks, eventually
becoming secretary to the Spanish governor of Cuba
and then the king’s
treasurer for the island. In his own mind, though, he was merely biding his
time. He waited patiently
while Spain sent other men to Mexico, many of
them never to return.
Finally, in 1518, the governor of Cuba, Diego de Velázquez, made Cortés
the leader of an expedition to discover what had happened
to these earlier
explorers, find gold, and lay the groundwork for the country’s conquest.
Velázquez wanted to make that future
conquest himself, however, so for this
expedition he wanted a man he could control, and he soon developed doubts
about Cortés—the
man was clever, perhaps too much so. Word reached
Cortés that the governor was having second thoughts about sending him to
Mexico. Deciding to give Velázquez no time to nurse his misgivings, he
managed to slip out of Cuba in the middle of the night
with eleven ships.
He would explain himself to the governor later.
The expedition landed on Mexico’s east coast in March 1519. Over the
next few months, Cortés put his plans to work—founding
the town of
Veracruz, forging alliances with local tribes who hated the Aztecs, and
making initial contact with the Aztec
emperor, whose capital lay some 250
miles to the west. But one problem plagued the conquistador: among the
500 soldiers who
had sailed with him from Cuba were a handful who had
been placed there by Velázquez to act as spies and make trouble for him
if
he exceeded his authority. These Velázquez loyalists accused Cortés of
mismanaging the gold that he was collecting, and
when it became clear that
he intended to conquer Mexico, they spread rumors that he was insane—an
all-too-convincing accusation
to make about a man planning to lead 500
men against half a million Aztecs, fierce warriors known to eat their
prisoners’
flesh and wear the skins as trophies. A rational man would take
the gold they had, return to Cuba, and come back later with
an army. Why
stay in this forbidding land, with its diseases and its lack of creature
comforts, when they were so heavily
outnumbered? Why not sail for Cuba,
back home where their farms, their wives, and the good life awaited them?
Cortés did what he could with these troublemakers, bribing some,
keeping a close eye on others. Meanwhile he worked to build
a strong
enough rapport with the rest of his men that the grumblers could do no
harm. All seemed well until the night of July
30, when Cortés was awoken
by a Spanish sailor who, begging for mercy, confessed that he had joined in
a plot to steal a ship
and return that very evening to Cuba, where the
conspirators would tell about Cortés’s goal of conquering Mexico on his
own.
Meditation on inevitable death should be performed daily. Every day when
one’s body and mind are at peace, one should meditate upon being ripped
apart by arrows, rifles, spears and
swords, being carried away by surging
waves, being thrown into the midst of a great fire, bring struck by lightning,
being
shaken to death by a great earthquake, falling from thousand-foot
cliffs, dying of disease or committing seppuku at the death
of one’s master.
And every day without fail one should consider himself as dead.
HAGAKURE: THE BOOK OF THE SAMURAI, YAMAMOTO
TSUNETOMO, 1659–1720
Cortés sensed that this was the decisive moment of the expedition. He
could easily squash the conspiracy, but there would
be others. His men were
a rough lot, and their minds were on gold, Cuba, their families—anything
but fighting the Aztecs.
He could not conquer an empire with men so
divided and untrustworthy, but how to fill them with the energy and focus
for the
immense task he faced? Thinking this through, he decided to take
swift action. He seized the conspirators and had the two
ringleaders hanged.
Next, he bribed his pilots to bore holes in all of the ships and then announce
that worms had eaten through
the boards of the vessels, making them
unseaworthy.
Pretending to be upset at the news, Cortés ordered what was salvageable
from the ships to be taken ashore and then the hulls
to be sunk. The pilots
complied, but not enough holes had been bored, and only five of the ships
went down. The story of the
worms was plausible enough, and the soldiers
accepted the news of the five ships with equanimity. But when a few days
later
more ships were run aground and only one was left afloat, it was clear
to them that Cortés had arranged the whole thing. When
he called a
meeting, their mood was mutinous and murderous.
This was no time for subtlety. Cortés addressed his men: he was
responsible for the disaster, he admitted; he had ordered
it done, but now
there was no turning back. They could hang him, but they were surrounded
by hostile Indians and had no ships;
divided and leaderless, they would
perish. The only alternative was to follow him to Tenochtitlán. Only by
conquering the
Aztecs, by becoming lords of Mexico, could they get back
to Cuba alive. To reach Tenochtitlán they would have to fight with
utter
intensity. They would have to be unified; any dissension would lead to
defeat and a terrible death. The situation was
desperate, but if the men
fought desperately in turn, Cortés guaranteed that he would lead them to
victory. Since the army
was so small in number, the glory and riches would
be all the greater. Any cowards not up to the challenge could sail the
one
remaining ship home.
There is something in war that drives so deeply into you that death ceases
to be the enemy, merely another participant in
a game you don’t wish to
end.
PHANTOM OVER VIETNAM, JOHN TROTTI, USMC, 1984
No one accepted the offer, and the last ship was run aground. Over the
next months, Cortés kept his army away from Veracruz
and the coast. Their
attention was focused on Tenochtitlán, the heart of the Aztec empire. The
grumbling, the self-interest,
and the greed all disappeared. Understanding
the danger of their situation, the conquistadors fought ruthlessly. Some two
years after the destruction of the Spanish ships, and with the help of their
Indian allies, Cortés army laid siege to Tenochtitlán
and conquered the
Aztec empire.
“You don’t have time for this display, you fool,” he said in a severe tone.
“This, whatever you’re doing now, may be your
last act on earth. It may
very well be your last battle. There is no power which could guarantee that
you are going to live
one more minute. . . .” “. . . Acts have power,” he said,
“Especially when the person acting knows that those acts are his last battle.
There is a strange consuming happiness
in acting with the full knowledge
that whatever one is doing may very well be one’s last act on earth. I
recommend that you
reconsider your life and bring your acts into that light.
. . . Focus your attention on the link between you and your death, without
remorse or sadness or worrying. Focus your attention on the fact you don’t
have time and let your acts flow accordingly. Let each of your acts be your
last battle on earth. Only under those conditions will your acts have their
rightful power.
Otherwise they will be, for as long as you live, the acts of a
timid man.” “Is it so terrible to be a timid man?” “No. It isn’t if you are
going to be immortal, but if you are going to die there is not time for
timidity, simply because
timidity makes you cling to something that exists
only in your thoughts. It soothes you while everything is at a lull, but then
the awesome, mysterious world will open its mouth for you, as it will open
for every
one of us, and then you will realize that your sure ways were not
sure at all. Being timid prevents us from examining and
exploiting our lot as
men.”
JOURNEY TO IXTLAN: THE LESSONS OF DON JUAN, CARLOS
CASTANEDA, 1972
Interpretation
On the night of the conspiracy, Cortés had to think fast. What was the root
of the problem he faced? It was not Velázquez’s
spies, or the hostile Aztecs,
or the incredible odds against him. The root of the problem was his own
men and the ships in
the harbor. His soldiers were divided in heart and
mind. They were thinking about the wrong things—their wives, their
dreams
of gold, their plans for the future. And in the backs of their minds
there was always an escape route: if this conquest business
went badly, they
could go home. Those ships in the harbor were more than just
transportation; they represented Cuba, the freedom
to leave, the ability to
send for reinforcements—so many possibilities.
For the soldiers the ships were a crutch, something to fall back on if
things got ugly. Once Cortés had identified the problem,
the solution was
simple: destroy the ships. By putting his men in a desperate place, he would
make them fight with utmost
intensity.
A sense of urgency comes from a powerful connection to the present.
Instead of dreaming of rescue or hoping for a better future,
you have to face
the issue at hand. Fail and you perish. People who involve themselves
completely in the immediate problem
are intimidating; because they are
focusing so intensely, they seem more powerful than they are. Their sense
of urgency multiplies
their strength and gives them momentum. Instead of
five hundred men, Cortés suddenly had the weight of a much larger army
at
his back.
Like Cortés you must locate the root of your problem. It is not the people
around you; it is yourself, and the spirit with
which you face the world. In
the back of your mind, you keep an escape route, a crutch, something to
turn to if things go
bad. Maybe it is some wealthy relative you can count on
to buy your way out; maybe it is some grand opportunity on the horizon,
the
endless vistas of time that seem to be before you; maybe it is a familiar job
or a comfortable relationship that is always
there if you fail. Just as Cortés’s
men saw their ships as insurance, you may see this fallback as a blessing—
but in fact
it is a curse. It divides you. Because you think you have options,
you never involve yourself deeply enough in one thing to
do it thoroughly,
and you never quite get what you want. Sometimes you need to run your
ships aground, burn them, and leave
yourself just one option: succeed or go
down. Make the burning of your ships as real as possible—get rid of your
safety net.
Sometimes you have to become a little desperate to get
anywhere.
The ancient commanders of armies, who well knew the powerful influence
of necessity, and how it inspired the soldiers with
the most desperate
courage, neglected nothing to subject their men to such a pressure.
— Niccolò Machiavelli (1469–1527)
THE DEATH-AT-YOUR-HEELS TACTIC
In 1845 the writer Fyodor Dostoyevsky, then twenty-four, shook the
Russian literary world with the publication of his first
novel, Poor Folk. He
became the toast of St. Petersburg society. But something about his early
fame seemed empty to him. He drifted into the
fringes of left-wing politics,
attending meetings of various socialist and radical groups. One of these
groups centered on
the charismatic Mikhail Petrashevsky.
Three years later, in 1848, revolution broke out all across Europe.
Inspired by what was happening in the West, Russian radical
groups like
Petrashevsky’s talked of following suit. But agents of Czar Nicholas I had
infiltrated many of these groups, and
reports were written about the wild
things being discussed at Petrashevsky’s house, including talk of inciting
peasant revolts.
Dostoyevsky was fervent about freeing the serfs, and on
April 23, 1849, he and twenty-three other members of the Petrashevsky
group were arrested.
After eight months of languishing in jail, the prisoners were awakened
one cold morning and told that today they would finally
hear their
sentences. A few months’ exile was the usual punishment for their crime;
soon, they thought, their ordeal would
be over.
They were bundled into carriages and driven through the icy streets of St.
Petersburg. Emerging from the carriages into Semyonovsky
Square, they
were greeted by a priest; behind him they could see rows of soldiers and,
behind the soldiers, thousands of spectators.
They were led toward a
scaffold covered in black cloth at the center of the square. In front of the
scaffold were three posts,
and to the side was a line of carts laden with
coffins.
Lord Naoshige said, “The Way of the Samurai is in desperateness. Ten men
or more cannot kill such a man. Common sense will not accomplish great
things. Simply become insane and desperate.” 
HAGAKURE: THE BOOK OF THE SAMURAI, YAMAMOTO
TSUNETOMO, 1659–1720
Dostoyevsky could not believe what he saw. “It’s not possible that they
mean to execute us,” he whispered to his neighbor.
They were marched to
the scaffold and placed in two lines. It was an unbelievably cold day, and
the prisoners were wearing
the light clothes they’d been arrested in back in
April. A drumroll sounded. An officer came forward to read their sentences:
“All of the accused are guilty as charged of intending to overthrow the
national order, and are therefore condemned to death
before a firing squad.”
The prisoners were too stunned to speak.
As the officer read out the individual charges and sentences, Dos-
toyevsky found himself staring at the golden spire of a
nearby church and at
the sunlight bouncing off it. The gleams of light disappeared as a cloud
passed overhead, and the thought
occurred to him that he was about to pass
into darkness just as quickly, and forever. Suddenly he had another thought:
If
I do not die, if I am not killed, my life will suddenly seem endless, a
whole eternity, each minute a century. I will take account of everything that
passes—I will not waste a second of life again.
The prisoners were given hooded shirts. The priest came forward to read
them their last rites and hear their confessions.
They said good-bye to one
another. The first three to be shot were tied to the posts, and the hoods were
pulled over their
faces. Dostoyevsky stood in the front, in the next group to
go. The soldiers raised their rifles, took aim—and suddenly a
carriage came
galloping into the square. A man got out with an envelope. At the last
second, the czar had commuted their death
sentences.
It had long been known, of course, that a man who, through disciplined
training, had relinquished any desire or hope for survival
and had only one
goal—the destruction of his enemy— could be a redoubtable opponent and
a truly formidable fighter who neither
asked nor offered any quarter once
his weapon had been unsheathed. In this way, a seemingly ordinary man
who, by the force
of circumstances rather than by profession, had been
placed in the position of having to make a desperate choice, could prove
dangerous, even to a skilled fencing master. One famous episode, for
example, concerns a teacher of swordsmanship who was
asked by a
superior to surrender a servant guilty of an offense punishable by death.
This teacher, wishing to test a theory
of his concerning the power of that
condition we would call “desperation,” challenged the doomed man to a
duel. Knowing full
well the irrevocability of his sentence, the servant was
beyond caring one way or the other, and the ensuing duel proved that
even
a skilled fencer and teacher of the art could find himself in great difficulty
when confronted by a man who, because
of his acceptance of imminent
death, could go to the limit (and even beyond) in his strategy, without a
single hesitation or distracting consideration. The servant, in fact, fought
like a man possessed,
forcing his master to retreat until his back was almost
to the wall. At last the teacher had to cut him down in a final effort,
wherein
the master’s own desperation brought about the fullest coordination of his
courage, skill, and determination.
SECRETS OF THE SAMURAI, OSCAR RATTI AND ADELE
WESTBROOK, 1973
Later that morning, Dostoyevsky was told his new sentence: four years
hard labor in Siberia, to be followed by a stint in
the army. Barely affected,
he wrote that day to his brother, “When I look back at the past and think of
all the time I squandered
in error and idleness, . . . then my heart bleeds.
Life is a gift . . . every minute could have been an eternity of happiness!
If
youth only knew! Now my life will change; now I will be reborn.”
A few days later, ten-pound shackles were put on Dostoyevsky’s arms
and legs—they would stay there for the length of his prison
term— and he
was carted off to Siberia. For the next four years, he endured the most
abysmal prison conditions. Granted no
writing privileges, he wrote novels
in his head, memorized them. Finally, in 1857, still serving the army period
of his sentence,
he was allowed to start publishing his work. Where before
he would torture himself over a page, spend half a day idling it
away in
thought, now he wrote and wrote. Friends would see him walking the
streets of St. Petersburg mumbling bits of dialogue
to himself, lost in his
characters and plots. His new motto was “Try to get as much done as
possible in the shortest time.”
Some pitied Dostoyevsky his time in prison. That made him angry; he
was grateful for the experience and felt no bitterness.
But for that December
day in 1849, he felt, he would have wasted his life. Right up until his death,
in 1881, he continued
writing at a frantic pace, churning out novel after
novel—Crime and Punishment, The Possessed, The Brothers Karamazov—
as if each one were his last.
Interpretation
Czar Nicholas had decided to sentence the Petrashevsky radicals to hard
labor soon after their arrest. But he wanted to teach
them a harsher lesson as
well, so he dreamed up the cruel theater of the death sentence, with its
careful details—the priest,
the hoods, the coffins, the last-second pardon.
This, he thought, would really humble and humiliate them. In fact, some of
the prisoners were driven insane by the events of that day. But the effect on
Dostoyevsky was different: he had been afflicted
for years with a sense of
wandering, of feeling lost, of not knowing what to do with his time. An
extremely sensitive man,
that day he literally felt his own death deep in his
bones. And he experienced his “pardon” as a rebirth.
The effect was permanent. For the rest of his life, Dostoyevsky would
consciously bring himself back to that day, remembering
his pledge never
to waste another moment. Or, if he felt he had grown too comfortable and
complacent, he would go to a casino
and gamble away all his money.
Poverty and debt were for him a kind of symbolic death, throwing him back
on the possible nothingness
of his life. In either case he would have to
write, and not the way other novelists wrote—as if it were a pleasant little
artistic career, with all its attendant delights of salons, lectures, and other
frills. Dostoyevsky wrote as if his life were
at stake, with an intense feeling
of urgency and seriousness.
Death is impossible for us to fathom: it is so immense, so frightening,
that we will do almost anything to avoid thinking
about it. Society is
organized to make death invisible, to keep it several steps removed. That
distance may seem necessary
for our comfort, but it comes with a terrible
price: the illusion of limitless time, and a consequent lack of seriousness
about daily life. We are running away from the one reality that faces us all.
As a warrior in life, you must turn this dynamic around: make the thought
of death something not to escape but to embrace.
Your days are numbered.
Will you pass them half awake and halfhearted or will you live with a sense
of urgency? Cruel theaters
staged by a czar are unnecessary; death will
come to you without them. Imagine it pressing in on you, leaving you no
escape—for
there is no escape. Feeling death at your heels will make all
your actions more certain, more forceful. This could be your last throw
of
the dice: make it count.
While knowing that we will die someday, we think that all the others will
die before us and that we will be the last to go.
Death seems a long way
off. Is this not shallow thinking? It is worthless and is only a joke within a
dream. . . . Insofar as death is always at one’s
door, one should make
sufficient effort and act quickly.
—Hagakure: The Book of the Samurai, Yamamoto Tsunetomo (1659–
1720)
KEYS TO WARFARE
Quite often we feel somewhat lost in our actions. We could do this or that—
we have many options, but none of them seem quite
necessary. Our
freedom is a burden—what do we do today, where do we go? Our daily
patterns and routines help us to avoid feeling
directionless, but there is
always the niggling thought that we could accomplish so much more. We
waste so much time. Upon
occasion all of us have felt a sense of urgency.
Most often it is imposed from outside: we fall behind in our work, we
inadvertently
take on more than we can handle, responsibility for something
is thrust into our hands. Now everything changes; no more freedom.
We
have to do this, we have to fix that. The surprise is always how much more
spirited and more alive this makes us feel;
now everything we do seems
necessary. But eventually we go back to our normal patterns. And when that
sense of urgency goes,
we really do not know how to get it back.
Leaders of armies have thought about this subject since armies existed:
how can soldiers be motivated, be made more aggressive,
more desperate?
Some generals have relied on fiery oratory, and those particularly good at it
have had some success. But over
two thousand years ago, the Chinese
strategist Sun-tzu came to believe that listening to speeches, no matter how
rousing,
was too passive an experience to have an enduring effect. Instead
Sun-tzu talked of a “death ground”—a place where an army
is backed up
against some geographical feature like a mountain, a river, or a forest and
has no escape route. Without a way
to retreat, Sun-tzu argued, an army
fights with double or triple the spirit it would have on open terrain, because
death is
viscerally present. Sun-tzu advocated deliberately stationing
soldiers on death ground to give them the desperate edge that
makes men
fight like the devil. That is what Cortés did in Mexico, and it is the only
sure way to create a real fire in the
belly. The world is ruled by necessity:
People change their behavior only if they have to. They will feel urgency
only if
their lives depend on it.
Taking advantage of the opportunity, they began to question Han Hsin.
“According to The Art of War, when one fights he should keep the hills to
his right or rear, and bodies of water in front of him or to the left,” they
said. “Yet today you ordered us on the contrary to draw up ranks with our
backs to the river, saying ‘We shall defeat Chao
and feast together!’ We
were opposed to the idea, and yet it has ended in victory. What sort of
strategy is this?” “This is in The Art of War too,” replied Han Hsin. “It is
just that you have failed to notice it! Does it not say in The Art of War:
‘Drive them into a fatal position and they will come out alive; place them in
a hopeless spot and they will survive’? Moreover,
I did not have at my
disposal troops that I had trained and led from past times, but was forced,
as the saying goes, to round
up men from the market place and use them to
fight with. Under such circumstances, if I had not placed them in a
desperate
situation where each man was obliged to fight for his own life,
but had allowed them to remain in a safe place, they would
have all run
away. Then what good would they have been to me?” “Indeed!” his
generals exclaimed in admiration.“ We would never have thought of that.”
RECORDS OF THE HISTORIAN, SZUMA CHIEN, CIRCA 145 B.C.–
CIRCA 86 B.C.
Death ground is a psychological phenomenon that goes well beyond the
battlefield: it is any set of circumstances in which
you feel enclosed and
without options. There is very real pressure at your back, and you cannot
retreat. Time is running out.
Failure—a form of psychic death— is staring
you in the face. You must act or suffer the consequences.
Understand: we are creatures who are intimately tied to our environment
—we respond viscerally to our circumstances and to
the people around us.
If our situation is easy and relaxed, if people are friendly and warm, our
natural tension unwinds.
We may even grow bored and tired; our
environment is failing to challenge us, although we may not realize it. But
put yourself
in a high-stakes situation—a psychological death ground—and
the dynamic changes. Your body responds to danger with a surge
of energy;
your mind focuses. Urgency is forced on you; you are compelled to waste
no more time.
The trick is to use this effect deliberately from time to time, to practice it
on yourself as a kind of wake-up call. The
following five actions are
designed to put you on a psychological death ground. Reading and thinking
about them won’t work;
you must put them into effect. They are forms of
pressure to apply to yourself. Depending on whether you want a low-
intensity
jolt for regular use or a real shock, you can turn the level up or
down. The scale is up to you.
Stake everything on a single throw. In 1937 the twenty-eight-year-old
Lyndon B. Johnson—at the time the Texas director of the National Youth
Administration—faced
a dilemma. The Texas congressman James
Buchanan had suddenly died. Since loyal Texan voters tended to return
incumbents to
office, a Texan congressional seat generally came available
only every ten or twenty years—and Johnson wanted to be in Congress
by
the time he was thirty; he did not have ten years to wait. But he was very
young and was virtually unknown in Buchanan’s
old district, the tenth. He
would be facing political heavyweights whom voters would heavily favor.
Why try something that
seemed doomed to failure? Not only would the race
be a waste of money, but the humiliation, if Johnson lost badly, could derail
his long-term ambitions.
Johnson considered all this—then decided to run. Over the next few
weeks, he campaigned intensely, visiting the district’s
every backwater
village and town, shaking the poorest farmer’s hand, sitting in drugstores to
meet people who had never come
close to talking to a candidate before. He
pulled every trick in the book—old-style rallies and barbecues, newfangled
radio
ads. He worked night and day—and hard. By the time the race was
over, Johnson was in a hospital, being treated for exhaustion
and
appendicitis. But, in one of the great upsets in American political history, he
had won.
By staking his future on one throw, Johnson put himself in a death-
ground situation. His body and spirit responded with the
energy he needed.
Often we try too many things at one time, thinking that one of them will
bring us success—but in these situations
our minds are diffused, our efforts
halfhearted. It is better to take on one daunting challenge, even one that
others think
foolish. Our future is at stake; we cannot afford to lose. So we
don’t.
Unlimited possibilities are not suited to man; if they existed, his life would
only dissolve in the boundless. To become strong,
a man’s life needs the
limitations ordained by duty and voluntarily accepted. The individual
attains significance as a free
spirit only by surrounding himself with these
limitations and by determining for himself what his duty is.
THE I CHING, CHINA, CIRCA EIGHTH CENTURY B.C.
Act before you are ready. In 49 B.C. a group of Roman senators, allied with
Pompey and fearing the growing power of Julius
Caesar, ordered the great
general to disband his army or be considered a traitor to the Republic.
When Caesar received this
decree, he was in southern Gaul (modern-day
France) with only five thousand men; the rest of his legions were far to the
north,
where he had been campaigning. He had no intention of obeying the
decree—that would have been suicide—but it would be weeks
before the
bulk of his army could join him. Unwilling to wait, Caesar told his captains,
“Let the die be cast,” and he and
his five thousand men crossed the
Rubicon, the river marking the border between Gaul and Italy. Leading
troops onto Italian
soil meant war with Rome. Now there was no turning
back; it was fight or die. Caesar was compelled to concentrate his forces,
to
not waste a single man, to act with speed, and to be as creative as possible.
He marched on Rome. By seizing the initiative,
he frightened the senators,
forcing Pompey to flee.
Death is nothing, but to live defeated is to die every day.
NAPOLEON BONAPARTE, 1769–1821
We often wait too long to act, particularly when we face no outside
pressure. It is sometimes better to act before you think
you are ready— to
force the issue and cross the Rubicon. Not only will you take your
opponents by surprise, you will also
have to make the most of your
resources. You have committed yourself and cannot turn back. Under
pressure your creativity
will flourish. Do this often and you will develop
your ability to think and act fast.
When danger is greatest.—It is rare to break one’s leg when in the course of
life one is toiling upwards— it happens much
more often when one starts to
take things easy and to choose the easy paths.
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, 1844–1900
Enter new waters. The Hollywood studio MGM had been good to Joan
Crawford: it had discovered her, made her a star, crafted her image. By the
early 1940s, though, Crawford had had enough. It was all too comfortable;
MGM kept casting her in the same kinds of roles,
none of them a challenge.
So, in 1943, Crawford did the unthinkable and asked out of her contract.
Be absolute for death; either death or life Shall thereby be the sweeter.
Reason thus with life: If I do lose thee, I do lose a thing That none but fools
would keep: a breath thou art, Servile to all the skyey influences,
That dost
this habituation, where thou keep’st, Hourly afflict: merely, thou art death’s
fool; For him thou labour’st by thy
flight to shun And yet runn’st toward him
still. Thou art not noble; For all the accommodations that thou bear’st Are
nursed by baseness. Thou’rt by no means valiant; For
thou dost fear the
soft and tender fork Of a poor worm. Thy best of rest is sleep, And that thou
oft provokest; yet grossly fear’st Thy death, which is no more.
MEASURE FOR MEASURE, WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE, 1564–1616
The consequences for Crawford could have been terrible; to challenge the
studio system was considered highly unwise. Indeed,
when she then signed
up with Warner Brothers, predictably enough she was offered the same
mediocre sorts of scripts. She turned
them down. On the verge of being
fired, she finally found the part she had been looking for: the title role in
Mildred Pierce, which, however, she was not offered. Setting to work on the
director, Michael Curtiz, she managed to change his mind and
land the role.
She gave the performance of her life, won her only Best Actress Oscar, and
resurrected her career.
In leaving MGM, Crawford was taking a big chance. If she failed to
succeed at Warner Brothers, and quickly, her career would
be over. But
Crawford thrived on risk. When she was challenged, when she felt on edge,
she burst with energy and was at her
best. Like Crawford, you sometimes
have to force yourself onto death ground—leaving stale relationships and
comfortable situations
behind, cutting your ties to the past. If you give
yourself no way out, you will have to make your new endeavor work.
Leaving
the past for unknown terrain is like a death—and feeling this
finality will snap you back to life.
Make it “you against the world.” Compared to sports like football,
baseball is slow and has few outlets for aggression. This was a problem for
the hitter
Ted Williams, who played best when he was angry—when he felt
that it was him against the world. Creating this mood on the
field was
difficult for Williams, but early on, he discovered a secret weapon: the
press. He got into the habit of insulting
sportswriters, whether just by
refusing to cooperate with them or by verbally abusing them. The reporters
returned the favor,
writing scathing articles on his character, questioning his
talent, trumpeting the slightest drop in his batting average.
It was when
Williams was hammered by the press, though, that he played best. He
would go on a hitting tear, as if to prove
them wrong. In 1957, when he
carried on a yearlong feud with the papers, he played perhaps his greatest
season and won the
batting title at what for a baseball player is the
advanced age of forty. As one journalist wrote, “Hate seems to activate
his
reflexes like adrenaline stimulates the heart. Animosity is his fuel!”
For Williams the animosity of the press and, with the press, of the public,
was a kind of constant pressure that he could
read, hear, and feel. They
hated him, they doubted him, they wanted to see him fail; he would show
them. And he did. A fighting
spirit needs a little edge, some anger and
hatred to fuel it. So do not sit back and wait for people to get aggressive;
irritate
and infuriate them deliberately. Feeling cornered by a multitude of
people who dislike you, you will fight like hell. Hatred
is a powerful
emotion. Remember: in any battle you are putting your name and reputation
on the line; your enemies will relish
your failure. Use that pressure to make
yourself fight harder.
O gentlemen, the time of life is short! To spend that shortness basely were
too long, If life did ride upon a dial’s point, Still ending at the arrival of an
hour. An if we live, we live to tread on kings; If die, brave death, when
princes die with us!
KING HENRY IV, PART I, WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE, 1564–1616
Keep yourself restless and unsatisfied. Napoleon had many qualities that
made him perhaps history’s greatest general, but
the one that raised him to
the heights and kept him there was his boundless energy. During campaigns
he worked eighteen to
twenty-hour days. If necessary, he would go without
sleep for several days, yet sleeplessness rarely reduced his capacities.
He
would work in the bath, at the theater, during a dinner party. Keeping his
eye on every detail of the war, he would ride
endless miles on horseback
without tiring or complaining.
Certainly Napoleon had extraordinary endurance, but there was more to it
than that: he never let himself rest, was never satisfied.
In 1796, in his first
real position of command, he led the French to a remarkable victory in Italy,
then immediately went
on another campaign, this time in Egypt. There,
unhappy with the way the war was going and with a lack of political power
that he felt was cutting into his control over military affairs, he returned to
France and conspired to become first consul.
This achieved, he immediately
set out on his second Italian campaign. And on he went, immersing himself
in new wars, new challenges,
that required him to call on his limitless
energy. If he did not meet the crisis, he would perish.
When we are tired, it is often because we are bored. When no real
challenge faces us, a mental and physical lethargy sets
in. “Sometimes
death only comes from a lack of energy,” Napoleon once said, and lack of
energy comes from a lack of challenges,
comes when we have taken on less
than we are capable of. Take a risk and your body and mind will respond
with a rush of energy.
Make risk a constant practice; never let yourself settle
down. Soon living on death ground will become a kind of addiction—you
won’t be able to do without it. When soldiers survive a brush with death,
they often feel an exhilaration that they want to
have again. Life has more
meaning in the face of death. The risks you keep taking, the challenges you
keep overcoming, are
like symbolic deaths that sharpen your appreciation
of life.
Image:
Fire. By itself it has no force; it depends on its environment. Give it air,
dry timber, a wind to fan the flames, and it
gains a terrifying momentum,
growing hotter, feeding off itself, consuming everything in its path. Never
leave such power
to chance.
Authority: When you will survive if you fight quickly and
perish if you do not, this is called [death] ground. . . . Put them
in a spot where they have no place to go, and they will die
before fleeing. If they are to die there, what can they not do?
Warriors exert their full strength. When warriors are in great
danger, then they have no fear. When there is nowhere to go,
they are firm, when they are deeply involved, they stick to it. If
they have no choice, they will fight.
—The Art of War, Sun-tzu (fourth century B.C.)
REVERSAL
If the feeling of having nothing to lose can propel you forward, it can do the
same for others. You must avoid any conflict
with people in this position.
Maybe they are living in terrible conditions or, for whatever reason, are
suicidal; in any case
they are desperate, and desperate people will risk
everything in a fight. This gives them a huge advantage. Already defeated
by circumstances, they have nothing to lose. You do. Leave them alone.
Conversely, attacking enemies when their morale is low gives you the
advantage. Maybe they are fighting for a cause they know
is unjust or for a
leader they do not respect. Find a way to lower their spirits even further.
Troops with low morale are
discouraged by the slightest setback. A show of
force will crush their fighting spirit.
Always try to lower the other side’s sense of urgency. Make your enemies
think they have all the time in the world; when you
suddenly appear at their
border, they are in a slumbering state, and you will easily overrun them.
While you are sharpening
your fighting spirit, always do what you can to
blunt theirs.
PART
II
ORGANIZATIONAL (TEAM) WARFARE
You may have brilliant ideas, you may be able to invent unbeatable
strategies—but if the group that you lead, and that you
depend on to
execute your plans, is unresponsive and uncreative, and if its members
always put their personal agendas first,
your ideas will mean nothing. You
must learn the lesson of war: it is the structure of the army—the chain of
command and the
relationship of the parts to the whole—that will give your
strategies force.
The primary goal in war is to build speed and mobility into the very
structure of your army. That means having a single authority
on top,
avoiding the hesitancy and confusion of divided leadership. It means giving
soldiers a sense of the overall goal to
be accomplished and the latitude to
take action to meet that goal; instead of reacting like automatons, they are
able to respond
to events in the field. Finally, it means motivating soldiers,
creating an overall esprit de corps that gives them irresistible
momentum.
With forces organized in this manner, a general can adapt to circumstances
faster than the enemy can, gaining a
decided advantage.
This military model is extremely adaptable to any group. It has one
simple requirement: before formulating a strategy or taking
action,
understand the structure of your group. You can always change it and
redesign it to fit your purposes. The following
three chapters will help you
focus on this critical issue and give you strategic options—possible
organizational models to
follow, as well as disastrous mistakes to avoid.
5
AVOID THE SNARES
OF GROUPTHINK
THE COMMAND-AND-CONTROL
STRATEGY
The problem in leading any group is that people inevitably have
their own agendas. If you are too authoritarian, they will
resent
you and rebel in silent ways. If you are too easygoing, they will
revert to their natural selfishness and you will
lose control. You
have to create a chain of command in which people do not feel
constrained by your influence yet follow your
lead. Put the right
people in place—people who will enact the spirit of your ideas
without being automatons. Make your commands
clear and
inspiring, focusing attention on the team, not the leader. Create
a sense of participation, but do not fall into
Groupthink—the
irrationality of collective decision making. Make yourself look
like a paragon of fairness, but never relinquish
unity of
command.
How very different is the cohesion between that of an army rallying around
one flag carried into battle at the personal command
of one general and
that of an allied military force extending 50 or 100 leagues, or even on
different sides of the theater!
In the first case, cohesion is at its strongest
and unity at its closest. In the second case, the unity is very remote, often
consisting of no more than a shared political intention, and therefore only
scanty and imperfect, while the cohesion of the
parts is mostly weak and
often no more than an illusion.
ON WAR, CARL VON CLAUSEWITZ, 1780–1831
THE BROKEN CHAIN
World War I began in August 1914, and by the end of that year, all along
the Western Front, the British and French were caught
in a deadly stalemate
with the Germans. Meanwhile, though, on the Eastern Front, Germany was
badly beating the Russians, allies
of Britain and France. Britain’s military
leaders had to try a new strategy, and their plan, backed by First Lord of the
Admiralty
Winston Churchill and others, was to stage an attack on
Gallipoli, a peninsula on Turkey’s Dardanelles Strait. Turkey was
an ally of
Germany’s, and the Dardanelles was the gateway to Constantinople, the
Turkish capital (present-day Istanbul). If
the Allies could take Gallipoli,
Constantinople would follow, and Turkey would have to leave the war. In
addition, using bases
in Turkey and the Balkans, the Allies could attack
Germany from the southeast, dividing its armies and weakening its ability
to fight on the Western Front. They would also have a clear supply line to
Russia. Victory at Gallipoli would change the course
of the war.
The plan was approved, and in March 1915, General Sir Ian Hamilton
was named to lead the campaign. Hamilton, at sixty-two,
was an able
strategist and an experienced commander. He and Churchill felt certain that
their forces, including Australians
and New Zealanders, would outmatch the
Turks. Churchill’s orders were simple: take Constantinople. He left the
details to
the general.
Hamilton’s plan was to land at three points on the southwestern tip of the
Gallipoli peninsula, secure the beaches, and sweep
north. The landings took
place on April 27. From the beginning almost everything went wrong: the
army’s maps were inaccurate,
its troops landed in the wrong places, the
beaches were much narrower than expected. Worst of all, the Turks fought
back unexpectedly
fiercely and well. At the end of the first day, most of the
Allies’ 70,000 men had landed, but they were unable to advance
beyond the
beaches, where the Turks would hold them pinned down for several weeks.
It was another stalemate; Gallipoli had
become a disaster.
All seemed lost, but in June, Churchill convinced the government to send
more troops and Hamilton devised a new plan. He would
land 20,000 men
at Suvla Bay, some twenty miles to the north. Suvla was a vulnerable target:
it had a large harbor, the terrain
was low-lying and easy, and it was
defended by only a handful of Turks. An invasion here would force the
Turks to divide their
forces, freeing up the Allied armies to the south. The
stalemate would be broken, and Gallipoli would fall.
To command the Suvla operation Hamilton was forced to accept the most
senior Englishman available for the job, Lieutenant
General Sir Frederick
Stopford. Under him, Major General Frederick Hammersley would lead the
Eleventh Division. Neither of
these men was Hamilton’s first choice.
Stopford, a sixty-one-year-old military teacher, had never led troops in war
and saw
artillery bombardment as the only way to win a battle; he was also
in poor health. Hammersley, for his part, had suffered
a nervous breakdown
the previous year.
In war it is not men, but the man, that counts.
NAPOLEON BONAPARTE, 1769–1821
Hamilton’s style was to tell his officers the purpose of an upcoming battle
but leave it to them how to bring it about. He
was a gentleman, never blunt
or forceful. At one of their first meetings, for example, Stop-ford requested
changes in the
landing plans to reduce risk. Hamilton politely deferred to
him.
Hamilton did have one request. Once the Turks knew of the landings at
Suvla, they would rush in reinforcements. As soon as
the Allies were
ashore, then, Hamilton wanted them to advance immediately to a range of
hills four miles inland, called Tekke
Tepe, and to get there before the Turks.
From Tekke Tepe the Allies would dominate the peninsula. The order was
simple enough,
but Hamilton, so as not to offend his subordinate, expressed
it in the most general terms. Most crucially, he specified no
time frame. He
was sufficiently vague that Stopford completely misinterpreted him: instead
of trying to reach Tekke Tepe “as
soon as possible,” Stopford thought he
should advance to the hills “if possible.” That was the order he gave
Hammersley. And
as Hammersley, nervous about the whole campaign,
passed it down to his colonels, the order became less urgent and vaguer
still.
Also, despite his deference to Stopford, Hamilton overruled the lieutenant
general in one respect: he denied a request for
more artillery bombardments
to loosen up the Turks. Stopford’s troops would outnumber the Turks at
Suvla ten to one, Hamilton
replied; more artillery was superfluous.
The attack began in the early morning of August 7. Once again much
turned bad: Stopford’s changes in the landing plans made
a mess. As his
officers came ashore, they began to argue, uncertain about their positions
and objectives. They sent messengers
to ask their next step: Advance?
Consolidate? Hammersley had no answers. Stopford had stayed on a boat
offshore, from which
to control the battlefield—but on that boat he was
impossible to reach quickly enough to get prompt orders from him.
Hamilton
was on an island still farther away. The day was frittered away in
argument and the endless relaying of messages.
The next morning Hamilton began to sense that something had gone very
wrong. From reconnaissance aircraft he knew that the
flat land around
Suvla was essentially empty and undefended; the way to Tekke Tepe was
open—the troops had only to march—but
they were staying where they
were. Hamilton decided to visit the front himself. Reaching Stopford’s boat
late that afternoon,
he found the general in a self-congratulatory mood: all
20,000 men had gotten ashore. No, he had not yet ordered the troops
to
advance to the hills; without artillery he was afraid the Turks might
counterattack, and he needed the day to consolidate
his positions and to
land supplies. Hamilton strained to control himself: he had heard an hour
earlier that Turkish reinforcements
had been seen hurrying toward Suvla.
The Allies would have to secure Tekke Tepe this evening, he said—but
Stopford was against
a night march. Too dangerous. Hamilton retained his
cool and politely excused himself.
Any army is like a horse, in that it reflects the temper and the spirit of its
rider. If there is an uneasiness and an uncertainty,
it transmits itself through
the reins, and the horse feels uneasy and uncertain.
LONE STAR PREACHER, COLONEL JOHN W. THOMASON, JR., 1941
In near panic, Hamilton decided to visit Hammersley at Suvla. Much to
his dismay, he found the army lounging on the beach
as if it were a bank
holiday. He finally located Hammersley—he was at the far end of the bay,
busily supervising the building
of his temporary headquarters. Asked why
he had failed to secure the hills, Hammersley replied that he had sent
several brigades
for the purpose, but they had encountered Turkish artillery
and his colonels had told him they could not advance without more
instructions. Communications between Hammersley, Stopford, and the
colonels in the field were taking forever, and when Stopford
had finally
been reached, he had sent the message back to Hammersley to proceed
cautiously, rest his men, and wait to advance
until the next day. Hamilton
could control himself no longer: a handful of Turks with a few guns were
holding up an army of
20,000 men from marching a mere four miles!
Tomorrow morning would be too late; the Turkish reinforcements were on
their way.
Although it was already night, Hamilton ordered Hammersley to
send a brigade immediately to Tekke Tepe. It would be a race
to the finish.
Hamilton returned to a boat in the harbor to monitor the situation. At
sunrise the next morning, he watched the battlefield
through binoculars—
and saw, to his horror, the Allied troops in headlong retreat to Suvla. A
large Turkish force had arrived
at Tekke Tepe thirty minutes before them. In
the next few days, the Turks managed to regain the flats around Suvla and
to
pin Hamilton’s army on the beach. Some four months later, the Allies
gave up their attack on Gallipoli and evacuated their
troops.
Interpretation
In planning the invasion at Suvla, Hamilton thought of everything. He
understood the need for surprise, deceiving the Turks
about the landing site.
He mastered the logistical details of a complex amphibious assault.
Locating the key point—Tekke Tepe—from
which the Allies could break
the stalemate in Gallipoli, he crafted an excellent strategy to get there. He
even tried to prepare
for the kind of unexpected contingencies that can
always happen in battle. But he ignored the one thing closest to him: the
chain of command, and the circuit of communications by which orders,
information, and decisions would circulate back and forth.
He was
dependent on that circuit to give him control of the situation and allow him
to execute his strategy.
The first links in the chain of command were Stopford and Hammersley.
Both men were terrified of risk, and Hamilton failed
to adapt himself to
their weakness: his order to reach Tekke Tepe was polite, civilized, and
unforceful, and Stopford and
Hammersley interpreted it according to their
fears. They saw Tekke Tepe as a possible goal to aim for once the beaches
were
secured.
The next links in the chain were the colonels who were to lead the assault
on Tekke Tepe. They had no contact with Hamilton
on his island or with
Stopford on his boat, and Hammersley was too overwhelmed to lead them.
They themselves were terrified
of acting on their own and maybe messing
up a plan they had never understood; they hesitated at every step. Below the
colonels
were officers and soldiers who, without leadership, were left
wandering on the beach like lost ants. Vagueness at the top
turned into
confusion and lethargy at the bottom. Success depended on the speed with
which information could pass in both
directions along the chain of
command, so that Hamilton could understand what was happening and
adapt faster than the enemy.
The chain was broken, and Gallipoli was lost.
When a failure like this happens, when a golden opportunity slips through
your fingers, you naturally look for a cause. Maybe
you blame your
incompetent officers, your faulty technology, your flawed intelligence. But
that is to look at the world backward;
it ensures more failure. The truth is
that everything starts from the top. What determines your failure or success
is your
style of leadership and the chain of command that you design. If
your orders are vague and halfhearted, by the time they reach
the field they
will be meaningless. Let people work unsupervised and they will revert to
their natural selfishness: they will
see in your orders what they want to see,
and their behavior will promote their own interests.
Unless you adapt your leadership style to the weaknesses of the people in
your group, you will almost certainly end up with
a break in the chain of
command. Information in the field will reach you too slowly. A proper
chain of command, and the control
it brings you, is not an accident; it is
your creation, a work of art that requires constant attention and care. Ignore
it
at your peril.
For what the leaders are, that, as a rule, will the men below them be.
—Xenophon (430?–355? B.C.)
REMOTE CONTROL
In the late 1930s, U.S. Brigadier General George C. Marshall (1880– 1958)
preached the need for major military reform. The
army had too few
soldiers, they were badly trained, current doctrine was ill suited to modern
technology—the list of problems
went on. In 1939, President Franklin D.
Roosevelt had to select his next army chief of staff. The appointment was
critical:
World War II had begun in Europe, and Roosevelt believed that the
United States was sure to get involved. He understood the
need for military
reform, so he bypassed generals with more seniority and experience and
chose Marshall for the job.
The appointment was a curse in disguise, for the War Department was
hopelessly dysfunctional. Many of its generals had monstrous
egos and the
power to impose their way of doing things. Senior officers, instead of
retiring, took jobs in the department,
amassing power bases and fiefdoms
that they did everything they could to protect. A place of feuds, waste,
communication breakdowns,
and overlapping jobs, the department was a
mess. How could Marshall revamp the army for global war if he could not
control
it? How could he create order and efficiency?
What must be the result of an operation which is but partially understood
by the commander, since it is not his own conception?
I have undergone a
pitiable experience as prompter at head-quarters, and no one has a better
appreciation of the value of
such services than myself; and it is particularly
in a council of war that such a part is absurd. The greater the number and
the higher the rank of the military officers who compose the council, the
more difficult will it be to accomplish the triumph
of truth and reason,
however small be the amount of dissent. What would have been the action
of a council of war to which Napoleon proposed the movement of Arcola,
the crossing of the
Saint-Bernard, the maneuver at Ulm, or that at Gera and
Jena? The timid would have regarded them as rash, even to madness,
others
would have seen a thousand difficulties of execution, and all would have
concurred in rejecting them; and if, on the
contrary, they had been adopted,
and had been executed by any one but Napoleon, would they not certainly
have proved failures?
BARON ANTOINE-HENRI DE JOMINI, 1779–1869
Some ten years earlier, Marshall had served as the assistant commander
of the Infantry School at Fort Benning, Georgia, where
he had trained many
officers. Throughout his time there, he had kept a notebook in which he
recorded the names of promising
young men. Soon after becoming chief of
staff, Marshall began to retire the older officers in the War Department and
replace
them with these younger men whom he had personally trained.
These officers were ambitious, they shared his desire for reform,
and he
encouraged them to speak their minds and show initiative. They included
men like Omar Bradley and Mark Clark, who would
be crucial in World
War II, but no one was more important than the protégé Marshall spent the
most time on: Dwight D. Eisenhower.
The relationship began a few days after the attack on Pearl Harbor, when
Marshall asked Eisenhower, then a colonel, to prepare
a report on what
should be done in the Far East. The report showed Marshall that
Eisenhower shared his ideas on how to run
the war. For the next few
months, he kept Eisenhower in the War Plans Division and watched him
closely: the two men met every
day, and in that time Eisenhower soaked up
Marshall’s style of leadership, his way of getting things done. Marshall
tested
Eisenhower’s patience by indicating that he planned to keep him in
Washington instead of giving him the field assignment that
he desperately
wanted. The colonel passed the test. Much like Marshall himself, he got
along well with other officers yet
was quietly forceful.
In July 1942, as the Americans prepared to enter the war by fighting
alongside the British in North Africa, Marshall surprised
one and all by
naming Eisenhower commander in the European Theater of Operations.
Eisenhower was by this time a lieutenant
general but was still relatively
unknown, and in his first few months in the job, as the Americans fared
poorly in North Africa,
the British clamored for a replacement. But
Marshall stood by his man, offering him advice and encouragement. One
key suggestion
was for Eisenhower to develop a protégé much as Marshall
had with him—a kind of roving deputy who thought the way he did and
would act as his go-between with subordinates. Marshall’s suggestion for
the post was Major General Bradley, a man he knew
well; Eisenhower
accepted the idea, essentially duplicating the staff structure that Marshall
had created in the War Department.
With Bradley in place, Marshall left
Eisenhower alone.
Marshall positioned his protégés throughout the War Department, where
they quietly spread his way of doing things. To make
the task easier, he cut
the waste in the department with utter ruthlessness, reducing from sixty to
six the number of deputies
who reported to him. Marshall hated excess; his
reports to Roosevelt made him famous for his ability to summarize a
complex
situation in a few pages. The six men who reported to him found
that any report that lasted a page too long simply went unread.
He would
listen to their oral presentations with rapt attention, but the minute they
wandered from the topic or said something
not thought through, he would
look away, bored, uninterested. It was an expression they dreaded: without
saying a word, he
had made it known that they had displeased him and it
was time for them to leave. Marshall’s six deputies began to think like
him
and to demand from those who reported to them the efficiency and
streamlined communications style he demanded of them.
The speed of the
information flow up and down the line was now quadrupled.
“Do you think every Greek here can be a king? It’s no good having a
carload of commanders. We need One commander, one king, the one to
whom Zeus, Son of Cronus the crooked,
has given the staff And the right to
make decisions for his people.” And so Odysseus mastered the army. The
men all Streamed back from their ships and huts and assembled With a roar.
THE ILIAD, HOMER, CIRCA NINTH CENTURY B.C.
Marshall exuded authority but never yelled and never challenged men
frontally. He had a knack for communicating his wishes
indirectly —a skill
that was all the more effective since it made his officers think about what he
meant. Brigadier General
Leslie R. Groves, the military director of the
project to develop the atom bomb, once came to Marshall’s office to get
him
to sign off on $100 million in expenditures. Finding the chief of staff
engrossed in paperwork, he waited while Marshall diligently
compared
documents and made notes. Finally Marshall put down his pen, examined
the $100 million request, signed it, and returned
it to Groves without a
word. The general thanked him and was turning to leave when Marshall
finally spoke: “It may interest
you to know what I was doing: I was writing
the check for $3.52 for grass seed for my lawn.”
The thousands who worked under Marshall, whether in the War
Department or abroad in the field, did not have to see him personally
to feel
his presence. They felt it in the terse but insightful reports that reached them
from his deputies, in the speed of
the responses to their questions and
requests, in the department’s efficiency and team spirit. They felt it in the
leadership
style of men like Eisenhower, who had absorbed Marshall’s
diplomatic yet forceful way of doing things. In a few short years,
Marshall
transformed the War Department and the U.S. Army. Few really understood
how he had done it.
Interpretation
When Marshall became chief of staff, he knew that he would have to hold
himself back. The temptation was to do combat with
everyone in every
problem area: the recalcitrance of the generals, the political feuds, the layers
of waste. But Marshall
was too smart to give in to that temptation. First,
there were too many battles to fight, and they would exhaust him. He’d
get
frustrated, lose time, and probably give himself a heart attack. Second, by
trying to micromanage the department, he would
become embroiled in petty
entanglements and lose sight of the larger picture. And finally he would
come across as a bully.
The only way to slay this many-headed monster,
Marshall knew, was to step back. He had to rule indirectly through others,
controlling with such a light touch that no one would realize how
thoroughly he dominated.
Reports gathered and presented by the General Staff, on the one hand, and
by the Statistical Bureau, on the other, thus constituted
the most important
sources of information at Napoleon’s disposal. Climbing through the chain
of command, however, such reports tend to become less and less specific;
the more numerous the
stages through which they pass and the more
standardized the form in which they are presented, the greater the danger
that
they will become so heavily profiled (and possibly sugar-coated or
merely distorted by the many summaries) as to become almost
meaningless.
To guard against this danger and to keep subordinates on their toes, a
commander needs to have in addition a
kind of directed telescope— the
metaphor is an apt one—which he can direct, at will, at any part of the
enemy’s forces, the
terrain, or his own army in order to bring in information
that is not only less structured than that passed on by the normal
channels
but also tailored to meet his momentary (and specific) needs. Ideally, the
regular reporting system should tell the
commander which questions to ask,
and the directed telescope should enable him to answer those questions. It
was the two systems together, cutting across each other and wielded by
Napoleon’s masterful hand, which made the revolution in command
possible.
COMMAND IN WAR, MARTIN VAN CREVELD, 1985
The key to Marshall’s strategy was his selection, grooming, and
placement of his protégé He metaphorically cloned himself
in these men,
who enacted the spirit of his reforms on his behalf, saving him time and
making him appear not as a manipulator
but as a delegator. His cutting of
waste was heavy-handed at first, but once he put his stamp on the
department, it began
to run efficiently on its own—fewer people to deal
with, fewer irrelevant reports to read, less wasted time on every level.
This
streamlining achieved, Marshall could guide the machine with a lighter
touch. The political types who were clogging the
chain of command were
either retired or joined in the team spirit he infused. His indirect style of
communicating amused some
of his staff, but it was actually a highly
effective way of asserting his authority. An officer might go home
chuckling about
finding Marshall fussing over a gardening bill, but it would
slowly dawn on him that if he wasted a penny, his boss would
know.
Like the War Department that Marshall inherited, today’s world is
complex and chaotic. It is harder than ever to exercise
control through a
chain of command. You cannot supervise everything yourself; you cannot
keep your eye on everyone. Being
seen as a dictator will do you harm, but if
you submit to complexity and let go of the chain of command, chaos will
consume
you.
The solution is to do as Marshall did: operate through a kind of remote
control. Hire deputies who share your vision but can
think on their own,
acting as you would in their place. Instead of wasting time negotiating with
every difficult person, work
on spreading a spirit of camaraderie and
efficiency that becomes self-policing. Streamline the organization, cutting
out waste—in
staff, in the irrelevant reports on your desk, in pointless
meetings. The less attention you spend on petty details, the more
time you
will have for the larger picture, for asserting your authority generally and
indirectly. People will follow your
lead without feeling bullied. That is the
ultimate in control.
Madness is the exception in individuals but the rule in groups.
—Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900)
KEYS TO WARFARE
Now more than ever, effective leadership requires a deft and subtle touch.
The reason is simple: we have grown more distrustful
of authority. At the
same time, almost all of us imagine ourselves as authorities in our own right
—officers, not foot soldiers.
Feeling the need to assert themselves, people
today put their own interests before the team. Group unity is fragile and can
easily crack.
These trends affect leaders in ways they barely know. The tendency is to
give more power to the group: wanting to seem democratic,
leaders poll the
whole staff for opinions, let the group make decisions, give subordinates
input into the crafting of an overall
strategy. Without realizing it, these
leaders are letting the politics of the day seduce them into violating one of
the most
important rules of warfare and leadership: unity of command.
Before it is too late, learn the lessons of war: divided leadership
is a recipe
for disaster, the cause of the greatest military defeats in history.
Among the foremost of these defeats was the Battle of Cannae, in 216
B.C., between the Romans and the Carthaginians led by
Hannibal. The
Romans outnumbered the Carthaginians two to one but were virtually
annihilated in a perfectly executed strategic
envelopment. Hannibal, of
course, was a military genius, but the Romans take much of the blame for
their own defeat: they
had a faulty command system, with two tribunes
sharing leadership of the army. Disagreeing over how to fight Hannibal,
these
men fought each other as much as they fought him, and they made a
mess of things.
Nearly two thousand years later, Frederick the Great, king of Prussia and
leader of its army, outfought and outlasted the
five great powers aligned
against him in the Seven Years’ War partly because he made decisions so
much faster than the alliance
generals, who had to consult each other in
every move they made. In World War II, General Marshall was well aware
of the dangers
of divided leadership and insisted that one supreme
commander should lead the Allied armies. Without his victory in this battle,
Eisenhower could not have succeeded in Europe. In the Vietnam War, the
unity of command enjoyed by the North Vietnamese general
Vo Nguyen
Giap gave him a tremendous advantage over the Americans, whose strategy
was crafted by a crowd of politicians and
generals.
Divided leadership is dangerous because people in groups often think and
act in ways that are illogical and ineffective—call
it Groupthink. People in
groups are political: they say and do things that they think will help their
image within the group.
They aim to please others, to promote themselves,
rather than to see things dispassionately. Where an individual can be bold
and creative, a group is often afraid of risk. The need to find a compromise
among all the different egos kills creativity.
The group has a mind of its
own, and that mind is cautious, slow to decide, unimaginative, and
sometimes downright irrational.
This is the game you must play: Do whatever you can to preserve unity of
command. Keep the strings to be pulled in your hands;
the overarching
strategic vision must come from you and you alone. At the same time, hide
your tracks. Work behind the scenes;
make the group feel involved in your
decisions. Seek their advice, incorporating their good ideas, politely
deflecting their
bad ones. If necessary, make minor, cosmetic strategy
changes to assuage the insecure political animals in the group, but
ultimately trust your own vision. Remember the dangers of group decision
making. The first rule of effective leadership is
never to relinquish your
unity of command.
Tomorrow at dawn you depart [from St. Cloud] and travel to Worms, cross
the Rhine there, and make sure that all preparations for the crossing of the
river by my guard
are being made there. You will then proceed to Kassel
and make sure that the place is being put in a state of defense and
provisioned. Taking due security precautions, you will visit the fortress of
Hanau. Can it be secured by a coup de main? If
necessary, you will visit the
citadel of Marburg too. You will then travel on to Kassel and report to me
by way of my chargé d’affaires at that place, making sure that he is in fact
there. The voyage from Frankfurt to Kassel is not to take place
by night, for
you are to observe anything that might interest me. From Kassel you are to
travel, also by day, by the shortest way to Köln. The land between Wesel,
Mainz, Kassel, and Köln. is to be reconnoitered. What roads and good
communications exist there? Gather information about communications
between Kassel and
Paderborn. What is the significance of Kassel? Is the
place armed and capable of resistance? Evaluate the forces of the Prince
Elector in regard to their present state, their artillery, militia, strong places.
From Köln. you will travel to meet me at
Mainz; you are to keep to the right
bank on the Rhine and submit a short appreciation of the country around
Dusseldorf, Wesel, and Kassel. I shall be at Mainz on the
29th in order to
receive your report. You can see for yourself how important it is for the
beginning of the campaign and its progress that you should have the
country well imprinted on your memory.
NAPOLEON’S WRITTEN INSTRUCTIONS TO FIELD GENERAL,
QUOTED IN COMMAND IN WAR, MARTIN VAN CREVELD, 1985
Control is an elusive phenomenon. Often, the harder you tug at people,
the less control you have over them. Leadership is
more than just barking
out orders; it takes subtlety.
Early in his career, the great Swedish film director Ingmar Bergman was
often overwhelmed with frustration. He had visions
of the films he wanted
to make, but the work of being a director was so taxing and the pressure so
immense that he would lash
out at his cast and crew, shouting orders and
attacking them for not giving him what he wanted. Some would stew with
resentment
at his dictatorial ways, others became obedient automatons.
With almost every new film, Bergman would have to start again
with a new
cast and crew, which only made things worse. But eventually he put
together a team of the finest cinematographers,
editors, art directors, and
actors in Sweden, people who shared his high standards and whom he
trusted. That let him loosen
the reins of command; with actors like Max von
Sydow, he could just suggest what he had in mind and watch as the great
actor
brought his ideas to life. Greater control could now come from letting
go.
A critical step in creating an efficient chain of command is assembling a
skilled team that shares your goals and values.
That team gives you many
advantages: spirited, motivated people who can think on their own; an
image as a delegator, a fair
and democratic leader; and a saving in your own
valuable energy, which you can redirect toward the larger picture.
In creating this team, you are looking for people who make up for your
deficiencies, who have the skills you lack. In the
American Civil War,
President Abraham Lincoln had a strategy for defeating the South, but he
had no military background and
was disdained by his generals. What good
was a strategy if he could not realize it? But Lincoln soon found his
teammate in
General Ulysses S. Grant, who shared his belief in offensive
warfare and who did not have an oversize ego. Once Lincoln discovered
Grant, he latched on to him, put him in command, and let him run the war
as he saw fit.
Be careful in assembling this team that you are not seduced by expertise
and intelligence. Character, the ability to work
under you and with the rest
of the team, and the capacity to accept responsibility and think
independently are equally key.
That is why Marshall tested Eisenhower for
so long. You may not have as much time to spare, but never choose a man
merely
by his glittering résumé. Look beyond his skills to his psychological
makeup.
Rely on the team you have assembled, but do not be its prisoner or give it
undue influence. Franklin D. Roosevelt had his
infamous “brain trust,” the
advisers and cabinet members on whom he depended for their ideas and
opinions, but he never let
them in on the actual decision making, and he
kept them from building up their own power base within the administration.
He
saw them simply as tools, extending his own abilities and saving him
valuable time. He understood unity of command and was
never seduced
into violating it.
A key function of any chain of command is to supply information rapidly
from the trenches, letting you adapt fast to circumstances.
The shorter and
more streamlined the chain of command, the better for the flow of
information. Even so, information is often
diluted as it passes up the chain:
the telling details that reveal so much become standardized and general as
they are filtered
through formal channels. Some on the chain, too, will
interpret the information for you, filtering what you hear. To get more
direct
knowledge, you might occasionally want to visit the field yourself.
Marshall would sometimes drop in on an army base
incognito to see with
his own eyes how his reforms were taking effect; he would also read letters
from soldiers. But in these
days of increasing complexity, this can consume
far too much of your time.
What you need is what the military historian Martin van Creveld calls “a
directed telescope”: people in various parts of the
chain, and elsewhere, to
give you instant information from the battlefield. These people—an
informal network of friends, allies,
and spies—let you bypass the slow-
moving chain. The master of this game was Napoleon, who created a kind
of shadow brigade
of younger officers in all areas of the military, men
chosen for their loyalty, energy, and intelligence. At a moment’s notice,
he
would send one of these men to a far-off front or garrison, or even to enemy
headquarters (ostensibly as a diplomatic envoy),
with secret instructions to
gather the kind of information he could not get fast enough through normal
channels. In general,
it is important to cultivate these directed telescopes
and plant them throughout the group. They give you flexibility in the
chain,
room to maneuver in a generally rigid environment.
The single greatest risk to your chain of command comes from the
political animals in the group. People like this are inescapable;
they spring
up like weeds in any organization. Not only are they out for themselves, but
they build factions to further their
own agendas and fracture the cohesion
you have built. Interpreting your commands for their own purposes, finding
loopholes
in any ambiguity, they create invisible breaks in the chain.
Try to weed them out before they arrive. In hiring your team, look at the
candidates’ histories: Are they restless? Do they
often move from place to
place? That is a sign of the kind of ambition that will keep them from fitting
in. When people seem
to share your ideas exactly, be wary: they are
probably mirroring them to charm you. The court of Queen Elizabeth I of
England
was full of political types. Elizabeth’s solution was to keep her
opinions quiet; on any issue, no one outside her inner circle
knew where she
stood. That made it hard for people to mirror her, to disguise their intentions
behind a front of perfect agreement.
Hers was a wise strategy.
Another solution is to isolate the political moles—to give them no room
to maneuver within the organization. Marshall accomplished
this by
infusing the group with his spirit of efficiency; disrupters of that spirit stood
out and could quickly be isolated.
In any event, do not be naïve. Once you
identify the moles in the group, you must act fast to stop them from
building a power
base from which to destroy your authority.
Finally, pay attention to the orders themselves—their form as well as
their substance. Vague orders are worthless. As they
pass from person to
person, they are hopelessly altered, and your staff comes to see them as
symbolizing uncertainty and indecision.
It is critical that you yourself be
clear about what you want before issuing your orders. On the other hand, if
your commands
are too specific and too narrow, you will encourage people
to behave like automatons and stop thinking for themselves—which
they
must do when the situation requires it. Erring in neither direction is an art.
Here, as in so much else, Napoleon was the master. His orders were full
of juicy details, which gave his officers a feel for
how his mind worked
while also allowing them interpretive leeway. He would often spell out
possible contingencies, suggesting
ways the officer could adapt his
instructions if necessary. Most important, he made his orders inspiring. His
language communicated
the spirit of his desires. A beautifully worded order
has extra power; instead of feeling like a minion, there only to execute
the
wishes of a distant emperor, the recipient becomes a participant in a great
cause. Bland, bureaucratic orders filter down
into listless activity and
imprecise execution. Clear, concise, inspiring orders make officers feel in
control and fill troops
with fighting spirit.
Image: The Reins. A horse with no bridle is useless, but equally bad is the
horse whose reins you pull at every turn, in a
vain effort at control. Control
comes from almost letting go, holding the reins so lightly that the horse
feels no tug but
senses the slightest change in tension and responds as you
desire. Not everyone can master such an art.
Authority: Better one bad general than two good ones. —
Napoleon Bonaparte (1769–1821)
REVERSAL
No good can ever come of divided leadership. If you are ever offered a
position in which you will have to share command, turn
it down, for the
enterprise will fail and you will be held responsible. Better to take a lower
position and let the other
person have the job.
It is always wise, however, to take advantage of your opponent’s faulty
command structure. Never be intimidated by an alliance
of forces against
you: if they share leadership, if they are ruled by committee, your
advantage is more than enough. In fact,
do as Napoleon did and seek out
enemies with that kind of command structure. You cannot fail to win.
6
SEGMENT YOUR FORCES
THE CONTROLLED-CHAOS
STRATEGY
The critical elements in war are speed and adaptability— the
ability to move and make decisions faster than the enemy. But
speed and adaptability are hard to achieve today. We have more
information than ever before at our fingertips, making
interpretation
and decision making more difficult. We have
more people to manage, those people are more widely spread,
and we face more uncertainty.
Learn from Napoleon, warfare’s
greatest master: speed and adaptability come from flexible
organization. Break your forces
into independent groups that
can operate and make decisions on their own. Make your forces
elusive and unstoppable by infusing
them with the spirit of the
campaign, giving them a mission to accomplish, and then
letting them run.
Finally, a most important point to be considered is that the revolutionary
system of command employed by Napoleon was the
outcome not of any
technological advances, as one might expect, but merely of superior
organization and doctrine. The technical
means at the emperor’s disposal
were not a whit more sophisticated than those of his opponents; he differed
from them in that
he possessed the daring and ingenuity needed to
transcend the limits that technology had imposed on commanders for
thousands
of years. Whereas Napoleon’s opponents sought to maintain
control and minimize uncertainty by keeping their forces closely
concentrated, Napoleon chose the opposite way, reorganizing and
decentralizing his army in such a way as to enable its parts
to operate
independently for a limited period of time and consequently tolerate a
higher degree of uncertainty. Rather than
allowing the technological means
at hand to dictate the method of strategy and the functioning of command,
Napoleon made profitable
use of the very limitations imposed by the
technology.
COMMAND IN WAR, MARTIN VAN CREVELD, 1985
CALCULATED DISORDER
In 1800, by defeating Austria in the Battle of Marengo, Napoleon gained
control of northern Italy and forced the Austrians
to sign a treaty
recognizing French territorial gains there and in Belgium. For the next five
years, an uneasy peace held
sway—but Napoleon crowned himself emperor
of France, and many in Europe began to suspect that this Corsican upstart
had limitless
ambitions. Karl Mack, the Austrian quartermaster general and
an older and influential member of the Austrian military, advocated
a
preemptive strike against France, with an army large enough to guarantee
victory. He told his colleagues, “In war the object
is to beat the enemy, not
merely to avoid being beaten.”
Mack and like-minded officers slowly gained influence, and in April
1805, Austria, England, and Russia signed a treaty of
alliance to wage war
on France and force her to return to her pre-Napoleonic borders. That
summer they formulated their plan:
95,000 Austrian troops would attack the
French in northern Italy, redressing the humiliating defeat of 1800. Another
23,000
troops would secure the Tyrol, between Italy and Austria. Mack
would then lead a force of 70,000 men west along the Danube
into Bavaria,
preventing this strategically located country from allying itself with France.
Once encamped in Bavaria, Mack
and his army would await the arrival a
few weeks later of 75,000 troops from Russia; the two armies would link
up, and this
unstoppable force would march west into France. Meanwhile
the English would attack the French at sea. More troops would later
be
funneled into each war zone, making for an army totaling 500,000 men
overall—the largest military force ever assembled
in Europe up to that
point. Not even Napoleon could withstand an army more than twice the size
of his own, moving in on him
from all sides.
In the middle of September, Mack began his phase of the campaign by
advancing along the Danube to Ulm, in the heart of Bavaria.
Having
established his camp there, he felt hugely satisfied. Mack loathed disorder
and uncertainty. He tried to think of everything
in advance, to come up with
a clear plan and make sure everyone stuck to it—“clockwork warfare,” he
called it. He thought
his plan was perfect; nothing could go wrong.
Napoleon was doomed.
Mack had once been captured and forced to spend three years in France,
where he had studied Napoleon’s style of war. A key
Napoleonic strategy
was to make the enemy divide his forces, but now the trick was reversed:
with trouble in Italy, Napoleon
could not afford to send more than 70,000
French troops across the Rhine into Germany and Bavaria. The moment he
crossed the
Rhine, the Austrians would know his intentions and would act
to slow his march; his army would need at least two months to
reach Ulm
and the Danube. By then the Austrians would already have linked up with
the Russians and swept through the Alsace
and France. The strategy was as
close to foolproof as any Mack had ever known. He savored the role he
would play in destroying
Napoleon, for he hated the man and all he
represented—undisciplined soldiers, the fomenting of revolution throughout
Europe,
the constant threat to the status quo. For Mack the Russians could
not arrive in Ulm too soon.
We find our attention drawn repeatedly to what one might call “the
organizational dimension of strategy.” Military organizations, and the
states that develop them, periodically assess their own ability to handle
military threats.
When they do so they tend to look at that which can be
quantified: the number of troops, the quantities of ammunition, the
readiness rates of key equipment, the amount of transport, and so on.
Rarely, however, do they look at the adequacy of their organization as such,
and particularly high level organization, to
handle these challenges. Yet as
Pearl Harbor and other cases suggest, it is in the deficiency of
organizations that the embryo
of misfortune develops. 
MILITARY MISFORTUNES: THE ANATOMY OF FAILURE IN WAR,
ELIOT A. COHEN AND JOHN GOOCH, 1990
Near the end of September, however, Mack began to sense something
wrong. To the west of Ulm lay the Black Forest, between
his own position
and the French border. Suddenly scouts were telling him that a French army
was passing through the forest
in his direction. Mack was bewildered: it
made the best sense for Napoleon to cross the Rhine into Germany farther
to the
north, where his passage east would be smoother and harder to stop.
But now he was yet again doing the unexpected, funneling
an army through
a narrow opening in the Black Forest and sending it straight at Mack. Even
if this move were just a feint,
Mack had to defend his position, so he sent
part of his army west into the Black Forest to stem the French advance long
enough
for the Russians to come to his aid.
A few days later, Mack began to feel horribly confused. The French were
proceeding through the Black Forest, and some of their
cavalry had come
quite far. At the same time, though, word reached Mack of a large French
army somewhere to the north of his
position. The reports were
contradictory: some said this army was at Stuttgart, sixty miles northwest of
Ulm; others had it
more to the east or even farther to the north or— quite
close, near the Danube. Mack could get no hard information, since
the
French cavalry that had come through the Black Forest blocked access to
the north for reconnaissance. The Austrian general
now faced what he
feared most—uncertainty—and it was clouding his ability to think straight.
Finally he ordered all of his
troops back to Ulm, where he would
concentrate his forces. Perhaps Napoleon intended to do battle at Ulm. At
least Mack would
have equal numbers.
In early October, Austrian scouts were at last able to find out what was
really going on, and it was a nightmare. A French
army had crossed the
Danube to the east of Ulm, blocking Mack’s way back to Austria and
cutting off the Russians. Another
army lay to the south, blocking his route
to Italy. How could 70,000 French soldiers appear in so many places at
once? And
move so fast? Gripped by panic, Mack sent probes in every
direction. On October 11 his men discovered a weak point: only a
small
French force barred the way north and east. There he could push through
and escape the French encirclement. He began
to prepare for the march. But
two days later, when he was on the point of ordering the retreat, his scouts
reported that a
large French force had appeared overnight, blocking the
northeastern route as well.
On October 20, finding out that the Russians had decided not to come to
his rescue, Mack surrendered. Over 60,000 Austrian
soldiers were taken
prisoner with hardly a shot fired. It was one of the most splendidly
bloodless victories in history.
In the next few months, Napoleon’s army turned east to deal with the
Russians and remaining Austrians, culminating in his
spectacular victory at
Austerlitz. Meanwhile Mack languished in an Austrian prison, sentenced to
two years for his role in
this humiliating defeat. There he racked his brains
(losing his sanity in the process, some said): Where had his plan gone
wrong? How had an army appeared out of nowhere to his east, so easily
swallowing him up? He had never seen anything like it,
and he was trying
to figure it out to the end of his days.
The fact that, historically speaking, those armies have been most successful
which did not turn their troops into automatons,
did not attempt to control
everything from the top, and allowed subordinate commanders considerable
latitude has been abundantly
demonstrated. The Roman centurions and
military tribunes; Napoleon’s marshals; Moltke’s army commanders;
Luden-dorff’s storm
detachments . . .—all these are examples, each within
its own stage of technological development, of the way things were done
in
some of the most successful military forces ever.
COMMAND IN WAR, MARTIN VAN CREVELD, 1985
Interpretation
History should not judge General Mack too harshly, for the French armies
he faced in the fall of 1805 represented one of the
greatest revolutions in
military history. For thousands of years, war had been fought in essentially
the same way: the commander
led his large and unified army into battle
against an opponent of roughly equal size. He would never break up his
army into
smaller units, for that would violate the military principle of
keeping one’s forces concentrated; furthermore, scattering
his forces would
make them harder to monitor, and he would lose control over the battle.
Suddenly Napoleon changed all that. In the years of peace between 1800
and 1805, he reorganized the French military, bringing
different forces
together to form the Grande Armée, 210,000 men strong. He divided this
army into several corps, each with
its own cavalry, infantry, artillery, and
general staff. Each was led by a marshal general, usually a young officer of
proven
strength in previous campaigns. Varying in size from 15,000 to
30,000 men, each corps was a miniature army headed by a miniature
Napoleon.
The key to the system was the speed with which the corps could move.
Napoleon would give the marshals their mission, then
let them accomplish
it on their own. Little time was wasted with the passing of orders back and
forth, and smaller armies,
needing less baggage, could march with greater
speed. Instead of a single army moving in a straight line, Napoleon could
disperse
and concentrate his corps in limitless patterns, which to the enemy
seemed chaotic and unreadable.
Patton’s philosophy of command was: “Never tell people how to do things.
Tell them what to do and they will surprise you with
their ingenuity.”
PATTON: A GENIUS FOR WAR, CARLO D’ESTE, 1995
This was the monster that Napoleon unleashed on Europe in September
1805. While a few corps were dispatched to northern Italy
as a holding
force against Austria’s planned invasion there, seven corps moved east into
Germany in a scattered array. A reserve
force with much cavalry was sent
through the Black Forest, drawing Mack to the west—and so making it
harder for him to understand
what was happening to the north and easier to
entrap. (Napoleon understood Mack’s simple psychology and how the
appearance
of disorder would paralyze him.) Meanwhile, with Stuttgart as a
pivot, the seven corps wheeled south to the Danube and cut
off Mack’s
various escape routes. One corps marshal, hearing that the northeastern
route was weakly held, did not wait for
Napoleon to send orders but simply
sped and covered it on his own. Wherever Mack went, he would hit a corps
large enough to
hold him until the rest of the French army could tighten the
circle. It was like a pack of coyotes against a rabbit.
Agamemnon smiled and moved on, Coming next to the two captains Who
shared the name Ajax As they were strapping on their helmets. Behind them
a cloud of infantry loomed . . . Agamemnon Was glad to see them, and his
words flew out: “Ajax, both of you, Achaean commanders, I would be out of
line if I issued you orders. You push your men to fight hard on your own. By
Father Zeus, by Athena and Apollo, If all of my men had your kind of heart,
King Priam’s city would soon bow her head,
Taken and ravaged under our
hands.”
THE ILIAD, HOMER, CIRCA NINTH CENTURY B.C.
Understand: the future belongs to groups that are fluid, fast, and
nonlinear. Your natural tendency as a leader may be to
want to control the
group, to coordinate its every movement, but that will just tie you to the
past and to the slow-moving
armies of history. It takes strength of character
to allow for a margin of chaos and uncertainty—to let go a little—but by
decentralizing your army and segmenting it into teams, you will gain in
mobility what you lose in complete control. And mobility
is the greatest
force multiplier of them all. It allows you to both disperse and concentrate
your army, throwing it into patterns
instead of advancing in straight lines.
These patterns will confuse and paralyze your opponents. Give your
different corps
clear missions that fit your strategic goals, then let them
accomplish them as they see fit. Smaller teams are faster, more
creative,
more adaptable; their officers and soldiers are more engaged, more
motivated. In the end, fluidity will bring you
far more power and control
than petty domination.
Separate to live, unite to fight.
—Napoleon Bonaparte (1769–1821)
KEYS TO WARFARE
The world is full of people looking for a secret formula for success and
power. They do not want to think on their own; they
just want a recipe to
follow. They are attracted to the idea of strategy for that very reason. In
their minds strategy is
a series of steps to be followed toward a goal. They
want these steps spelled out for them by an expert or a guru. Believing
in
the power of imitation, they want to know exactly what some great person
has done before. Their maneuvers in life are as
mechanical as their
thinking.
To separate yourself from such a crowd, you need to get rid of a common
misconception: the essence of strategy is not to carry
out a brilliant plan that
proceeds in steps; it is to put yourself in situations where you have more
options than the enemy
does. Instead of grasping at Option A as the single
right answer, true strategy is positioning yourself to be able to do A,
B, or C
depending on the circumstances. That is strategic depth of thinking, as
opposed to formulaic thinking.
Sun-tzu expressed this idea differently: what you aim for in strategy, he
said, is shih, a position of potential force—the position of a boulder perched
precariously on a hilltop, say, or of a bowstring stretched
taut. A tap on the
boulder, the release of the bowstring, and potential force is violently
unleashed. The boulder or arrow
can go in any direction; it is geared to the
actions of the enemy. What matters is not following preordained steps but
placing
yourself in shih and giving yourself options.
Napoleon was probably unaware of Sun-tzu’s concept of shih, yet he had
perhaps history’s greatest understanding of it. Once he had positioned his
seven corps in their seemingly chaotic
pattern along the Rhine and his
reserve forces in the Black Forest, he was in shih. Wherever Mack turned,
whatever he did, the Austrians were doomed. Napoleon had endless options
while Mack had only a few,
and all of them bad.
It was during this period of post-war introspection and evaluation that one
of the fundamental military concepts of Scharnhorst
and Gneisenau
coalesced into a clearly defined doctrine understandable to and understood
by all officers in the Army. This
was the concept of Auftragstaktik, or
mission tactics. Moltke himself inserted in the draft of a new tactical
manual for senior commanders the following lines:
“A favorable situation
will never be exploited if commanders wait for orders. The highest
commander and the youngest soldier
must always be conscious of the fact
that omission and inactivity are worse than resorting to the wrong
expedient.” . . . Nothing epitomized the outlook and performance of the
German General Staff, and of the German Army which it coordinated,
more
than this concept of mission tactics: the responsibility of each German
officer and noncommissioned officer . . . to
do without question or doubt
whatever the situation required, as he saw it. This meant that he should act
without awaiting orders, if action seemed necessary. It also meant that he
should act contrary
to orders, if these did not seem to be consistent with the
situation. To make perfectly clear that action contrary to orders was not
considered either as disobedience or lack of discipline, German
commanders began to repeat one of Moltke’s favorite stories, of an incident
observed while visiting the headquarters of Prince
Frederick Charles. A
major, receiving a tongue-lashing from the Prince for a tactical blunder,
offered the excuse that he
had been obeying orders, and reminded the
Prince that a Prussian officer was taught that an order from a superior was
tantamount
to an order from the King. Frederick Charles promptly
responded: “His Majesty made you a major because he believed you would
know when not to obey his orders.” This simple story became guidance
for
all following generations of German officers.
A GENIUS FOR WAR: THE GERMAN ARMY AND GENERAL STAFF,
1807–1945, COLONEL T.N. DUPUY, 1977
Napoleon had always aimed at his version of shih, and he perfected it in
the 1805 campaign. Obsessed with structure and organization, he developed
the corps system, building
flexibility into the very skeleton of his army. The
lesson is simple: a rigid, centralized organization locks you into linear
strategies; a fluid, segmented army gives you options, endless possibilities
for reaching shih. Structure is strategy—perhaps the most important
strategic choice you will make. Should you inherit a group, analyze its
structure and
alter it to suit your purposes. Pour your creative energy into its
organization, making fluidity your goal. In doing so you
will be following
in the footsteps not only of Napoleon but of perhaps the greatest war
machine in modern times, the Prussian
(and later German) army.
Shortly after Napoleon’s devastating defeat of the Prussians at the Battle
of Jena in 1806 (see chapter 2), the Prussian leaders
did some soul-
searching. They saw they were stuck in the past; their way of doing things
was too rigid. Suddenly the military
reformers, including Carl von
Clausewitz, were taken seriously and given power. And what they decided
to do was unprecedented
in history: they would institutionalize success by
designing a superior army structure.
At the core of this revolution was the creation of a general staff, a cadre
of officers specially trained and educated in
strategy, tactics, and leadership.
A king, a prime minister, or even a general might be incompetent at war,
but a group of
brilliant and well-trained officers on the army’s staff could
compensate for his failures. The structure of this body was
unfixed: each
new chief of staff could alter its size and function to suit his needs and the
times. After each campaign or
training exercise, the staff would rigorously
examine itself and its performance. A whole section was created for the
purpose
of these examinations and for the study of military history. The
general staff would learn from its mistakes and those of
others. It was to be
a work permanently in progress.
The most important reform was the development of the Auftragstak-tik
(mission-oriented command system). In German there are two words for
“command”: Auftrag and Befehl. A Befehl is an order to be obeyed to the
letter. An Auftrag is much more general: it is a statement of overall mission,
a directive to be followed in its spirit, not its letter. The
Auftragstaktik—
inspired by Prussia’s archenemy Napoleon and the leeway he gave his
marshals—permeated the general staff. Officers were first
inculcated with
the philosophy of German warfare: speed, the need to take the offensive,
and so on. Then they were put through
exercises to help them develop their
ability to think on their own, to make decisions that met the overall
philosophy but
responded to the circumstances of the moment. Leading the
equivalent of a corps in battle, officers were given missions to
accomplish
and then were let loose. They were judged by the results of their actions,
not on how those results were achieved.
The general staff (with a few interruptions) was in place from 1808 to the
end of World War II. During that period the Germans
consistently outfought
other armies in the field–including the Allies in World War I, despite the
severe limitations of trench
warfare. Their success culminated in the most
devastating military victory in modern history: the 1940 blitzkrieg invasion
of France and the Low Countries, when the German army ran rings around
the rigid defenses of the French. It was the structure
of their army, and their
use of the Auftragstaktik, that gave them more options and greater potential
force.
The German general staff should serve as the organizational model for
any group that aims at mobility and strategic depth.
First, the staff’s
structure was fluid, allowing its leaders to adapt it to their own needs.
Second, it examined itself constantly
and modified itself according to what
it had learned. Third, it replicated its structure through the rest of the army:
its
officers trained the officers below them, and so on down the line. The
smallest team was inculcated with the overall philosophy
of the group.
Finally, rather than issuing rigid orders, the staff embraced the mission
command, the Auftragstaktik. By making officers and soldiers feel more
creatively engaged, this tactic improved their performance and sped up the
decision-making
process. Mobility was written into the system.
The key to the Auftragstaktik is an overall group philosophy. This can be
built around the cause you are fighting for or a belief in the evil of the
enemy
you face. It can also include the style of warfare—defensive, mobile,
ruthlessly aggressive—that best suits it. You must bring
the group together
around this belief. Then, through training and creative exercises, you must
deepen its hold on them, infuse
it into their blood. Now, when you unleash
your corps on their missions, you can trust their decisions and feel confident
in your power to coordinate them.
The Mongol hordes led by Genghis Khan in the first half of the thirteenth
century were perhaps the closest precursors to Napoleon’s
corps. Genghis,
who preached a philosophy of Mongol superiority, was a master of mobility
in warfare. His segmented forces
could disperse and concentrate in
complicated patterns; the armies that faced them were shocked at how
chaotic they seemed,
so impossible to figure out, yet they maneuvered with
amazing coordination. Mongol soldiers knew what to do, and when, without
being told. For their victims the only explanation was that they were
possessed by the devil.
The sinister coordination of the Mongols, however, was actually the
result of rigorous training. Every winter in peacetime,
Genghis would run
the Great Hunt, a three-month-long operation in which he would scatter the
entire Mongol army along an eighty-mile
line in the steppes of Central Asia
and what is now Mongolia. A flag in the ground hundreds of miles away
marked the hunt’s
endpoint. The line would advance, driving before it all
the animals in its path. Slowly, in an intricately choreographed maneuver,
the ends of the line would curve to form a circle, trapping the animals
within. (The hunt’s endpoint would form the center
of the circle.) As the
circle tightened, the animals were killed; the most dangerous of them, the
tigers, were left till last.
The Great Hunt exercised the Mongols’ ability to
communicate through signals at a distance, coordinate their movements
with
precision, know what to do in different circumstances, and act without
waiting for orders. Even bravery became an exercise,
when individual
soldiers would have to take on a tiger. Through hunting and a form of play,
Genghis could instill his philosophy,
develop cohesion and trust among his
men, and tighten his army’s discipline.
[Tom] Yawkey was thirty years old when he bought the Red Sox, a
hopelessly bankrupt team that had won only forty-three games the
previous
season and averaged only 2,365 paying customers. The ball club became
his toy. Because he loved his players, he spoiled
them rotten. And because
he spoiled them rotten, they praised him to the skies. . . . There is a well-
publicized exchange in which Bobby Doerr asks Tommy Henrich why the
Red Sox weren’t able to beat the Yankees
in big games. “Weren’t we good
enough?” Doerr asks. It wasn’t that they weren’t good enough, Henrich
answers. “Your owner was too good to you. The Red Sox didn’t have to get
into the World Series to drive Cadillacs. The Yankees did.” . . . [The Red
Sox organization] was an amateur operation . . . pitted against the toughest,
most professional operation of all time.
HITTER: THE LIFE AND TURMOILS OF TED WILLIAMS, ED LINN,
1993
In unifying your own hordes, find exercises to increase your troops’
knowledge of and trust in each other. This will develop
implicit
communication skills between them and their intuitive sense of what to do
next. Time will not then be wasted in the
endless transmission of messages
and orders or in constantly monitoring your troops in the field. If you can
disguise these
exercises as play, as in the Great Hunt, so much the better.
Throughout the 1940s and ’50s, two great baseball organizations did
battle: the Boston Red Sox, built around Ted Williams,
and the New York
Yankees, with their great hitter Joe DiMaggio. The owner of the Red Sox,
Tom Yawkey, believed in pampering
his players, creating a pleasant
environment for them, developing friendships with them. A happy team
would play well, he
thought. For this purpose he went drinking with his
men, played cards with them, checked them in to nice hotels on tour. He
also meddled in managerial decisions, always with an eye toward making
things better for his players and keeping them happy.
The Yankees’ philosophy was very different, emphasizing discipline and
victory at all costs. The organization’s separate parts
stayed out of one
another’s business—they understood the team ethos and knew they would
be judged on results. The manager
was left to make his own decisions.
Yankee players felt an intense need to live up to the team’s winning
traditions; they
were afraid of losing.
In those two decades, the Red Sox players fought among themselves, fell
into factions, whined and complained at any perceived
slight, and won just
one pennant. The Yankees were cohesive and spirited; they won thirteen
pennants and ten World Series.
The lesson is simple: do not confuse a
chummy, clublike atmosphere with team spirit and cohesion. Coddling your
soldiers and
acting as if everyone were equal will ruin discipline and
promote the creation of factions. Victory will forge stronger bonds
than
superficial friendliness, and victory comes from discipline, training, and
ruthlessly high standards.
Finally, you need to structure your group according to your soldiers’
strengths and weaknesses, to their social circumstances.
To do that you
must be attuned to the human side of your troops; you must understand
them, and the spirit of the times, inside
and out.
In a real sense, maximum disorder was our equilibrium.
T. E. LAWRENCE, 1885–1935
During the American Civil War, the Union generals struggled with the
ragtag nature of their army. Unlike the disciplined,
well-trained troops of
the Confederacy, many Northern soldiers had been forcibly conscripted at
the last minute; they were
pioneers, rugged frontiersmen, and they were
fiercely independent. Some generals tried desperately to instill discipline,
and mostly they failed. Others just paid attention to map strategy, while
their armies continued to perform badly.
General William Tecumseh Sherman had a different solution: he changed
his organization to suit the personalities of his men.
He created a more
democratic army, encouraged initiative in his officers, let them dress as they
saw fit; he loosened outward
discipline to foster morale and group spirit.
Like frontiersmen generally, his soldiers were restless and nomadic, so he
exploited
their mobility and kept his army in perpetual motion, always
marching faster than his enemies could. Of all the Union armies,
Sherman’s
were the most feared and performed the best.
Like Sherman, do not struggle with your soldiers’ idiosyncrasies, but
rather turn them into a virtue, a way to increase your
potential force. Be
creative with the group’s structure, keeping your mind as fluid and
adaptable as the army you lead.
Image:
The Spider’s Web.
Most animals attack along a straight line; the spider weaves a web, adapted
to its location and spun in a pattern, whether
simple or complex. Once the
web is woven, the work is done. The spider has no need to hunt; it simply
waits for the next fool
to fall into the web’s barely visible strands.
Authority: Thus the army . . . moves for advantage, and changes
through segmenting and reuniting. Thus its speed is like the
wind, its slowness like the forest; its invasion and plundering
like a fire. . . . It is as difficult to know as the darkness; in
movement it is like thunder.—The Art of War, Sun-tzu, (fourth
century B.C.)
REVERSAL
Since the structure of your army has to be suited to the people who
compose it, the rule of decentralization is flexible:
some people respond
better to rigid authority. Even if you run a looser organization, there may be
times when you will have
to tighten it and give your officers less freedom.
Wise generals set nothing in stone, always retaining the ability to reorganize
their army to fit the times and their changing needs.
7
TRANSFORM YOUR WAR
INTO A CRUSADE
MORALE STRATEGIES
The secret to motivating people and maintaining their morale is
to get them to think less about themselves and more about
the
group. Involve them in a cause, a crusade against a hated
enemy. Make them see their survival as tied to the success of
the
army as a whole. In a group in which people have truly bonded,
moods and emotions are so contagious that it becomes easy
to
infect your troops with enthusiasm. Lead from the front: let your
soldiers see you in the trenches, making sacrifices for
the cause.
That will fill them with the desire to emulate and please you.
Make both rewards and punishments rare but meaningful.
Remember:
a motivated army can work wonders, making up for
any lack of material resources.
You can do nothing with an army that is an amalgam of a hundred people
here, a hundred people there, and so on. What can be
achieved with four
thousand men, united and standing shoulder to shoulder, you cannot do
with forty or even four hundred thousand
men who are divided and pulled
this way and that by internal conflicts. . . .
RULES OF WAR AND BRAVERY, MUBARAKSHAH, PERSIA,
THIRTEENTH CENTURY
THE ART OF MAN MANAGEMENT
We humans are selfish by nature. Our first thoughts in any situation revolve
around our own interests: How will this affect
me? How will it help me? At
the same time, by necessity, we try to disguise our selfishness, making our
motives look altruistic or disinterested.
Our inveterate selfishness and our
ability to disguise it are problems for you as a leader. You may think that
the people
working for you are genuinely enthusiastic and concerned—that
is what they say, that is what their actions suggest. Then slowly
you see
signs that this person or that is using his or her position in the group to
advance purely personal interests. One
day you wake up to find yourself
leading an army of selfish, conniving individuals.
That is when you start thinking about morale—about finding a way to
motivate your troops and forge them into a group. Perhaps
you try artfully
to praise people, to offer them the possibility of reward—only to find you
have spoiled them, strengthening
their selfishness. Perhaps you try
punishments and discipline—only to make them resentful and defensive.
Perhaps you try to
fire them up with speeches and group activities— but
people are cynical nowadays; they will see right through you.
The problem is not what you are doing but the fact that it comes late. You
have begun to think about morale only after it
has become an issue, not
before. That is your mistake. Learn from history’s great motivators and
military leaders: the way
to get soldiers to work together and maintain
morale is to make them feel part of a group that is fighting for a worthy
cause.
That distracts them from their own interests and satisfies their human
need to feel part of something bigger than they are.
The more they think of
the group, the less they think of themselves. They soon begin to link their
own success to the group’s;
their own interests and the larger interests
coincide. In this kind of army, people know that selfish behavior will
disgrace
them in the eyes of their companions. They become attuned to a
kind of group conscience.
Morale is contagious: put people in a cohesive, animated group and they
naturally catch that spirit. If they rebel or revert
to selfish behavior, they are
easily isolated. You must establish this dynamic the minute you become the
group’s leader; it
can only come from the top—that is, from you.
The ability to create the right group dynamic, to maintain the collective
spirit, is known in military language as “man management.”
History’s great
generals—Alexander the Great, Hannibal, Napoleon—were all masters of
the art, which for military men is more
than simply important: in battle it
can be the deciding issue, a matter of life and death. In war, Napoleon once
said, “The
moral is to the physical as three to one.” He meant that his
troops’ fighting spirit was crucial in the outcome of the battle:
with
motivated soldiers he could beat an army three times the size of his own.
To create the best group dynamic and prevent destructive morale
problems, follow these eight crucial steps culled from the
writings and
experiences of the masters of the art. It is important to follow as many of
the steps as possible; none is less
important than any other.
What stronger breastplate than a heart untainted! Thrice is he arm’d that
hath his quarrel just, And he but naked, though lock’d up in steel, Whose
conscience with injustice
is corrupted.
KING HENRY V, WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE, 1564–1616
Step 1: Unite your troops around a cause. Make them fight for an idea. Now
more than ever, people have a hunger to believe
in something. They feel an
emptiness, which, left alone, they might try to fill with drugs or spiritual
fads, but you can
take advantage of it by channeling it into a cause you can
convince them is worth fighting for. Bring people together around
a cause
and you create a motivated force.
The cause can be anything you wish, but you should represent it as
progressive: it fits the times, it is on the side of the
future, so it is destined
to succeed. If necessary, you can give it a veneer of spirituality. It is best to
have some kind
of enemy to hate—an enemy can help a group to define
itself in opposition. Ignore this step and you are left with an army
of
mercenaries. You will deserve the fate that usually awaits such armies.
Step 2: Keep their bellies full. People cannot stay motivated if their material
needs go unmet. If they feel exploited in
any way, their natural selfishness
will come to the surface and they will begin to peel off from the group. Use
a cause—something
abstract or spiritual—to bring them together, but meet
their material needs. You do not have to spoil them by overpaying them;
a
paternalistic feeling that they are being taken care of, that you are thinking
of their comfort, is more important. Attending
to their physical needs will
make it easier to ask more of them when the time comes.
There are always moments when the commander’s place is not back with his
staff but up with the troops. It is sheer nonsense to say that maintenance of
the men’s morale is the job of the battalion commander alone. The higher
the
rank, the greater the effect of the example. The men tend to feel no kind
of contact with a commander who, they know, is sitting
somewhere in
headquarters. What they want is what might be termed a physical contact
with him. In moments of panic, fatigue, or disorganization, or when
something out of the ordinary has to be demanded from them, the personal
example of the commander works wonders, especially
if has had the wit to
create some sort of legend around himself. 
FIELD MARSHAL ERWIN ROMMEL, 1891–1944
Step 3: Lead from the front. The enthusiasm with which people join a cause
inevitably wanes. One thing that speeds up its
loss, and that produces
discontent, is the feeling that the leaders do not practice what they preach.
Right from the beginning,
your troops must see you leading from the front,
sharing their dangers and sacrifices—taking the cause as seriously as they
do. Instead of trying to push them from behind, make them run to keep up
with you.
Step 4: Concentrate their ch’i. There is a Chinese belief in an energy called
ch’i, which dwells in all living things. All groups have their own level of
ch’i, physical and psychological. A leader must understand this energy and
know how to manipulate it.
Idleness has a terrible effect on ch’i. When soldiers are not working, their
spirits lower. Doubts creep in, and selfish interests
take over. Similarly,
being on the defensive, always waiting and reacting to what the enemy
dishes out, will also lower ch’i.
So keep your soldiers busy, acting for a
purpose, moving in a direction. Do not make them wait for the next attack;
propelling
them forward will excite them and make them hungry for battle.
Aggressive action concentrates ch’i, and concentrated ch’i
is full of latent
force.
During the Spring and Autumn era, the state of Qi was invaded by the states
of Jin and Yan. At first the invaders overcame
the military forces of Qi. One
of the eminent nobles of the court of Qi recommended the martialist Tian
Rangju to the lord
of Qi. To this man, later called Sima Rangju, is attributed
the famous military handbook “Sima’s Art of War.” . . . The lord of Qi then
summoned Rangju to discuss military matters with him. The lord was very
pleased with what Rangju had
to say, and he made him a general,
appointing him to lead an army to resist the aggression of the forces of Yan
and Jin. Rangju
said, “I am lowly in social status, yet the lord has promoted
me from the ranks and placed me above even the grandees. The
soldiers are
not yet loyal to me, and the common people are not familiar with me; as a
man of little account, my authority
is slight. I request one of your favorite
ministers, someone honored by the state, to be overseer of the army.” The
lord acceded
to this request and appointed a nobleman to be the overseer.
Rangju took his leave, arranging to meet the nobleman at the military
headquarters at noon the following day. Then Rangju
hastened back to set
up a sundial and a water-clock to await the new overseer. Now this new
overseer was a proud and haughty aristocrat, and he imagined that as
overseer he was leading his own
army. Because of his pride and arrogance,
he did not see any need to hurry, in spite of his promise with Rangju the
martial master.
His relatives and close associates gave him a farewell party,
and he stayed to drink with them. At noon the next day, the
new overseer
had not arrived at headquarters. Rangju took down the sundial and emptied
the water-clock. He assembled the troops
and informed them of the
agreement with the new overseer. That evening the nobleman finally
arrived. Rangju said to him, “Why
are you late?”He said, “My relatives,
who are grandees, gave me a farewell party, so I stayed for that.” Rangju
said, “On the day a military leader receives his orders, he forgets about his
home; when a promise is made in the face
of battle, one forgets his family;
when the war drums sound, one forgets his own body. Now hostile states
have invaded our territory; the state is in an uproar; the soldiers are
exposed at the borders; the lord
cannot rest or enjoy his food; the lives of
the common people all depend on you— how can you talk about farewell
parties?”
Rangju then summoned the officer in charge of military discipline
and asked him, “According to military law, what happens
to someone who
arrives later than an appointed time?” The officer replied, “He is supposed
to be decapitated.”Terrified, the aristocrat had a messenger rush back to
report this
to the lord and beseech him for help. But the haughty nobleman
was executed before the messenger even returned, and his execution
was
announced to the army. The soldiers all shook with fear. Eventually the lord
sent an emissary with a letter pardoning the nobleman, who was, after
all,
the new overseer of the army. The emissary galloped right into camp on
horseback with the lord’s message. Rangju said, “When a general is in the
field, there are orders he doesn’t take from the ruler.” He also said to the
disciplinary officer, “It is a rule that there shall be no galloping through
camp, yet now the emissary
has done just that. What should be done with
him?” The officer said, “He should be executed.” The emissary was
petrified, but Rangju said, “It is not proper to kill an emissary of the lord,”
and had two of the emissary’s
attendants executed in his stead. This too was
announced to the army. Rangju sent the emissary back to report to the lord,
and then he set out with the army. When the soldiers made camp, Rangju
personally oversaw the digging of wells, construction of stoves, preparation
of food
and drink, and care of the sick. He shared all of the supplies of the
leadership with the soldiers, personally eating the
same rations as they. He
was especially kind to the weary and weakened. After three days, Rangju
called the troops to order. Even those who were ill wanted to go along,
eager to go into battle
for Rangju. When the armies of Jin and Yan heard
about this, they withdrew from the state of Qi. Now Rangju led his troops to
chase them
down and strike them. Eventually he recovered lost territory and
returned with the army victorious.
MASTERING THE ART OF WAR: ZHUGE LIANG’S AND LIU JI’S
COMMEN-TARIES ON THE CLASSIC BY SUN-TZU, TRANSLATED BY
THOMAS CLEARY, 1989
Step 5: Play to their emotions. The best way to motivate people is not
through reason but through emotion. Humans, however,
are naturally
defensive, and if you begin with an appeal to their emotions—some
histrionic harangue—they will see you as manipulative
and will recoil. An
emotional appeal needs a setup: lower their defenses, and make them bond
as a group, by putting on a show,
entertaining them, telling a story. Now
they have less control over their emotions and you can approach them more
directly,
moving them easily from laughter to anger or hatred. Masters of
man management have a sense of drama: they know when and how
to hit
their soldiers in the gut.
Step 6: Mix harshness and kindness. The key to man management is a
balance of punishment and reward. Too many rewards will
spoil your
soldiers and make them take you for granted; too much punishment will
destroy their morale. You need to hit the
right balance. Make your kindness
rare and even an occasional warm comment or generous act will be
powerfully meaningful.
Anger and punishment should be equally rare;
instead your harshness should take the form of setting very high standards
that
few can reach. Make your soldiers compete to please you. Make them
struggle to see less harshness and more kindness.
Step 7: Build the group myth. The armies with the highest morale are
armies that have been tested in battle. Soldiers who
have fought alongside
one another through many campaigns forge a kind of group myth based on
their past victories. Living
up to the tradition and reputation of the group
becomes a matter of pride; anyone who lets it down feels ashamed. To
generate
this myth, you must lead your troops into as many campaigns as
you can. It is wise to start out with easy battles that they
can win, building
up their confidence. Success alone will help bring the group together.
Create symbols and slogans that fit
the myth. Your soldiers will want to
belong.
Step 8: Be ruthless with grumblers. Allow grumblers and the chronically
disaffected any leeway at all and they will spread
disquiet and even panic
throughout the group. As fast as you can, you must isolate them and get rid
of them. All groups contain
a core of people who are more motivated and
disciplined than the rest—your best soldiers. Recognize them, cultivate
their
goodwill, and set them up as examples. These people will serve as
natural ballasts against those who are disaffected and panicky.
You know, I am sure, that not numbers or strength brings victory in war;
but whichever army goes into battle stronger in soul,
their enemies
generally cannot withstand them.
—Xenophon (430?–355? B.C.)
HISTORICAL EXAMPLES
1. In the early 1630s, Oliver Cromwell (1599–1658), a provincial
gentleman farmer in Cambridgeshire, England, fell victim to
a depression
and to constant thoughts of death. Deep in crisis, he converted to the Puritan
religion, and suddenly his life
took a new turn: he felt he had experienced a
direct communion with God. Now he believed in providence, the idea that
everything
happens for a reason and according to God’s will. Whereas
before he had been despondent and indecisive, now he was filled
with
purpose: he thought himself among God’s elect.
Eventually Cromwell became a member of Parliament and a vocal
defender of the common people in their grievances against the
aristocracy.
Yet he felt marked by providence for something larger than politics: he had
visions of a great crusade. In 1642,
Parliament, in a bitter struggle with
Charles I, voted to cut off the king’s funds until he agreed to limits on royal
power.
When Charles refused, civil war broke out between the Cavaliers
(supporters of the king, who wore their hair long) and the
Roundheads (the
rebels, so called since they cropped their hair short). Parliament’s most
fervent supporters were Puritans
like Cromwell, who saw the war against
the king as his chance—more than his chance, his calling.
Although Cromwell had no military background, he hurriedly formed a
troop of sixty horsemen from his native Cambridgeshire.
His aim was to
incorporate them in a larger regiment, gain military experience by fighting
under another commander, and slowly
prove his worth. He was confident of
ultimate victory, for he saw his side as unbeatable: after all, God was on
their side,
and all his men were believers in the cause of creating a more
pious England.
Despite his lack of experience, Cromwell was something of a military
visionary: he imagined a new kind of warfare spearheaded
by a faster, more
mobile cavalry, and in the war’s first few months he proved a brave and
effective leader. He was given more
troops to command but soon realized
that he had grossly overestimated the fighting spirit of those on his side:
time and again
he led cavalry charges that pierced enemy lines, only to
watch in disgust as his soldiers broke order to plunder the enemy
camp.
Sometimes he tried to hold part of his force in reserve to act as
reinforcements later in the battle, but the only command
they listened to
was to advance, and in retreat they were hopelessly disordered.
Representing themselves as crusaders, Cromwell’s
men were re- vealed by
battle as mercenaries, fighting for pay and adventure. They were useless.
In 1643, when Cromwell was made a colonel at the head of his own
regiment, he decided to break with the past. From now on,
he would recruit
only soldiers of a certain kind: men who, like himself, had experienced
religious visions and revelations.
He sounded out the aspirants, tested them
for the depth of their faith. Departing from a long tradition, he appointed
commoners,
not aristocrats, as officers; as he wrote to a friend, “I had rather
have a plain russet-coated captain that knows what he
fights for, and loves
what he knows, than that which you call a gentleman and is nothing else.”
Cromwell made his recruits
sing psalms and pray together. In a stern check
on bad discipline, he taught them to see all their actions as part of God’s
plan. And he looked after them in an unusual way for the times, making
sure they were well fed, well clothed, and promptly
paid.
When Cromwell’s army went into battle, it was now a force to reckon
with. The men rode in tight formation, loudly singing
psalms. As they
neared the king’s forces, they would break into a “pretty round trot,” not the
headlong and disorderly charge
of other troops. Even in contact with the
enemy, they kept their order, and they retreated with as much discipline as
when
they advanced. Since they believed that God was with them, they had
no fear of death: they could march straight up a hill
into enemy fire without
breaking step. Having gained control over his cavalry, Cromwell could
maneuver them with infinite
flexibility. His troops won battle after battle.
In 1645, Cromwell was named lieutenant general of the cavalry in the
New Model Army. That year, at the Battle of Naseby, his
disciplined
regiment was crucial in the Roundheads’ victory. A few days later, his
cavalry finished off the Royalist forces
at Langport, effectively putting an
end to the first stage of the Civil War.
Interpretation
That Cromwell is generally considered one of history’s great military
leaders is all the more remarkable given that he learned
soldiery on the job.
During the second stage of the Civil War, he became head of the
Roundhead armies, and later, after defeating
King Charles and having him
executed, he became Lord Protector of England. Although he was ahead of
his times with his visions
of mobile warfare, Cromwell was not a brilliant
strategist or field tactician; his success lay in the morale and discipline
of
his cavalry, and the secret to those was the quality of the men he recruited—
true believers in his cause. Such men were
naturally open to his influence
and accepting of his discipline. With each new victory, they grew more
committed to him and
more cohesive. He could ask the most of them.
Above all else, then, pay attention to your staff, to those you recruit to
your cause. Many will pretend to share your beliefs,
but your first bat- tle
will show that all they wanted was a job. Soldiers like these are mercenaries
and will get you nowhere.
True believers are what you want; expertise and
impressive résumés matter less than character and the capacity for sacrifice.
Recruits of character will give you a staff already open to your influence,
making morale and discipline infinitely easier
to attain. This core personnel
will spread the gospel for you, keeping the rest of the army in line. As far as
possible in
this secular world, make battle a religious experience, an ecstatic
involvement in something transcending the present.
2. In 1931 the twenty-three-year-old Lyndon Baines Johnson was offered
the kind of job he had been dreaming of: secretary to
Richard Kleberg,
newly elected congressman from Texas’s Fourteenth Congressional District.
Johnson was a high-school debating
teacher at the time, but he had worked
on several political campaigns and was clearly a young man of ambition.
His students
at Sam Houston High—in Houston, Texas— assumed that he
would quickly forget about them, but, to the surprise of two of his
best
debaters, L. E. Jones and Gene Latimer, he not only kept in touch, he wrote
to them regularly from Washington. Six months
later came a bigger surprise
still: Johnson invited Jones and Latimer to Washington to work as his
assistants. With the Depression
at its height, jobs were scarce—particularly
jobs with this kind of potential. The two teenagers grabbed the opportunity.
Little did they know what they were in for.
The pay was ridiculously low, and it soon became clear that Johnson
intended to work the two men to their human limit. They
put in eighteen-or
twenty-hour days, mostly answering constituents’ mail. “The chief has a
knack, or, better said, a genius
for getting the most out of those around
him,” Latimer later wrote. “He’d say, ‘Gene, it seems L.E.’s a little faster
than
you today.’ And I’d work faster. ‘L.E., he’s catching up with you.’ And
pretty soon, we’d both be pounding [the typewriter]
for hours without
stopping, just as fast as we could.”
Jones didn’t usually take orders too well, but he found himself working
harder and harder for Johnson. His boss seemed destined
for something
great: that Johnson would scale the heights of power was written all over
his face—and he would bring the ambitious
Jones along with him. Johnson
could also turn everything into a cause, making even the most trivial issue a
crusade for Kleberg’s
constituents, and Jones felt part of that crusade—part
of history.
The most important reason for both Jones’s and Latimer’s willingness to
work so hard, though, was that Johnson worked still
harder. When Jones
trudged into the office at five in the morning, the lights would already be
on, and Johnson would be hard
at work. He was also the last to leave. He
never asked his employees to do anything he wouldn’t do himself. His
energy was
intense, boundless, and contagious. How could you let such a
man down by working less hard than he did?
THE WOLVES AND THE DOGS AT WAR
One day, enmity broke out between the dogs and the wolves. The dogs
elected a Greek to be their general. But he was in no
hurry to engage in
battle, despite the violent intimidation of the wolves. “Understand,” he said
to them, “why I deliberately
put off engagement. It is because one must
always take counsel before acting. The wolves, on the one hand, are all of
the
same race, all of the same color. But our soldiers have very varied
habits, and each one is proud of his own country. Even
their colors are not
uniform: some are black, some russet, and others white or ash-grey. How
can I lead into battle those who are not in harmony and who
are all
dissimilar?’ In all armies it is unity of will and purpose which assures
victory over the enemy.
FABLES, AESOP, SIXTH CENTURY B.C.
Not only was Johnson relentlessly demanding, but his criticisms were
often cruel. Occasionally, though, he would do Jones
and Latimer some
unexpected favor or praise them for something they hadn’t realized he had
noticed. At moments like this,
the two young men quickly forgot the many
bitter moments in their work. For Johnson, they felt, they would go to the
ends
of the earth.
And indeed Johnson rose through the ranks, first winning influence
within Kleberg’s office, then gaining the attention of
President Franklin D.
Roosevelt himself. In 1935, Roosevelt named Johnson Texas state director
for the recently built National
Youth Administration. Now Johnson began to
build a larger team around the core of his two devoted assistants; he also
built
loyalties in a scattering of others for whom he found jobs in
Washington. The dynamic he had created with Jones and Latimer
now
repeated itself on a larger scale: assistants competed for his attention, tried
to please him, to meet his standards,
to be worthy of him and of his causes.
In 1937, when Congressman James Buchanan suddenly died, the seat for
Texas’s Tenth District unexpectedly fell empty. Despite
the incredible odds
against him—he was still relatively unknown and way too young—Johnson
decided to run and called in his
chips: his carefully cultivated acolytes
poured into Texas, becoming chauffeurs, canvassers, speechwriters,
barbecue cooks,
crowd entertainers, nurses—whatever the campaign
needed. In the six short weeks of the race, Johnson’s foot soldiers covered
the length and breadth of the Tenth District. And in front of them at every
step was Johnson himself, campaigning as if his
life depended on it. One by
one, he and his team won over voters in every corner of the district, and
finally, in one of the
greatest upsets in any American political race, Johnson
won the election. His later career, first as a senator, then as U.S.
president,
obscured the foundation of his first great success: the army of devoted and
tireless followers that he had carefully
built up over the previous five years.
Interpretation
Lyndon Johnson was an intensely ambitious young man. He had neither
money nor connections but had something more valuable:
an understanding
of human psychology. To command influence in the world, you need a
power base, and here human beings—a devoted
army of followers—are
more valuable than money. They will do things for you that money cannot
buy.
That army is tricky to build. People are contradictory and defensive: push
them too hard and they resent you; treat them well
and they take you for
granted. Johnson avoided those traps by making his staff want his approval.
To do that he led from the
front. He worked harder than any of his staff, and
his men saw him do it; failing to match him would have made them feel
guilty
and selfish. A leader who works that hard stirs competitive instincts
in his men, who do all they can to prove themselves
worthier than their
teammates. By showing how much of his own time and effort he was
willing to sacrifice, Johnson earned
their respect.
Once he had that respect, criticism, even when harsh, became an effective
motivator, making his followers feel they were disappointing
him. At the
same time, some kind act out of the blue would break down any ability to
resist him.
Hannibal was the greatest general of antiquity by reason of his admirable
comprehension of the morale of combat, of the morale
of the soldier,
whether his own or the enemy’s. He shows his greatness in this respect in
all the different incidents of war,
of campaign, of action. His men were not
better than the Roman soldiers. They were not as well-armed, one-half less
in number. Yet he was always
the conqueror. He understood the value of
morale. He had the absolute confidence of his people. In addition, he had
the art,
in commanding an army, of always securing the advantage of
morale.
COLONEL CHARLES ARDANT DU PICQ, 1821–70
Understand: morale is contagious, and you, as leader, set the tone. Ask
for sacrifices you won’t make yourself (doing everything
through
assistants) and your troops grow lethargic and resentful; act too nice, show
too much concern for their well-being,
and you drain the tension from their
souls and create spoiled children who whine at the slightest pressure or
request for
more work. Personal example is the best way to set the proper
tone and build morale. When your people see your devotion to
the cause,
they ingest your spirit of energy and self-sacrifice. A few timely criticisms
here and there and they will only
try harder to please you, to live up to your
high standards. Instead of having to push and pull your army, you will find
them
chasing after you.
3. In May of 218 B.C., the great general Hannibal, of Carthage in modern
Tunisia, embarked on a bold plan: he would lead an army
through Spain,
Gaul, and across the Alps into northern Italy. His goal was to defeat Rome’s
legions on their own soil, finally
putting an end to Rome’s expansionist
policies.
The Alps were a tremendous obstacle to military advance—in fact, the
march of an army across the high mountains was unprecedented.
Yet in
December of that year, after much hardship, Hannibal reached northern
Italy, catching the Romans completely off guard
and the region undefended.
There was a price to pay, however: of Hannibal’s original 102,000 soldiers,
a mere 26,000 survived,
and they were exhausted, hungry, and demoralized.
Worse, there was no time to rest: a Roman army was on its way and had
already
crossed the Po River, only a few miles from the Carthaginian camp.
On the eve of his army’s first battle with the fearsome Roman legions,
Hannibal somehow had to bring his worn-out men alive.
He decided to put
on a show: gathering his army together, he brought in a group of prisoners
and told them that if they fought
one another to the death in a gladiatorial
contest, the victors would win freedom and a place in the Carthaginian
army. The
prisoners agreed, and Hannibal’s soldiers were treated to hours of
bloody entertainment, a great distraction from their troubles.
When the fighting was over, Hannibal addressed his men. The contest
had been so enjoyable, he said, because the prisoners
had fought so
intensely. That was partly because the weakest man grows fierce when
losing means death, but there was another
reason as well: they had the
chance to join the Carthaginian army, to go from being abject prisoners to
free soldiers fighting
for a great cause, the defeat of the hated Romans. You
soldiers, said Hannibal, are in exactly the same position. You face
a much
stronger enemy. You are many miles from home, on hostile territory, and
you have nowhere to go—in a way you are prisoners,
too. It is either
freedom or slavery, victory or death. But fight as these men fought today
and you will prevail.
Four brave men who do not know each other will not dare to attack a lion.
Four less brave, but knowing each other well, sure
of their reliability and
consequently of mutual aid, will attack resolutely. There is the science of the
organization of armies
in a nutshell.
COLONEL CHARLES ARDANT DU PICQ, 1821–70
The contest and speech got hold of Hannibal’s soldiers, and the next day
they fought with deadly ferocity and defeated the
Romans. A series of
victories against much larger Roman legions followed.
Nearly two years later, the two sides met at Cannae. Before the battle,
with the armies arrayed within sight of each other,
the Carthaginians could
see that they were hopelessly outnumbered, and fear passed through the
ranks. Everyone went quiet.
A Carthaginian officer called Gisgo rode out in
front of the men, taking in the Roman lines; stopping before Hannibal, he
remarked, with a quaver in his voice, on the disparity in numbers. “There is
one thing, Gisgo, that you have not noticed,”
Hannibal replied: “In all that
great number of men opposite, there is not a single one whose name is
Gisgo.”
Gisgo burst out laughing, so did those within hearing, and the joke passed
through the ranks, breaking the tension. No, the
Romans had no Gisgo.
Only the Carthaginians had Gisgo, and only the Carthaginians had
Hannibal. A leader who could joke at
a moment like this had to feel
supremely confident—and if the leader were Hannibal, that feeling was
probably justified.
Just as the troops had been swept with anxiety, now they were infected
with self-assurance. At Cannae that day, in one of
the most devastating
victories in history, the Carthaginians crushed the Roman army.
The Greeks met the Trojans without a tremor. Agamemnon ranged among
them, commanding: “Be men, my friends. Fight with valor And with a sense
of shame before your comrades. You’re less likely to be killed with a sense
of shame. Running away never won glory or a fight.”
THE ILIAD, HOMER, CIRCA NINTH CENTURY B.C.
Interpretation
Hannibal was a master motivator of a rare kind. Where others would
harangue their soldiers with speeches, he knew that to
depend on words was
to be in a sorry state: words only hit the surface of a soldier, and a leader
must grab his men’s hearts,
make their blood boil, get into their minds, alter
their moods. Hannibal reached his soldiers’ emotions indirectly, by relaxing
them, calming them, taking them outside their problems and getting them to
bond. Only then did he hit them with a speech that
brought home their
precarious reality and swayed their emotions.
At Cannae a one-line joke had the same effect: instead of trying to
persuade the troops of his confidence, Hannibal showed
it to them. Even as
they laughed at the joke about Gisgo, they bonded over it and understood its
inner meaning. No need for
a speech. Hannibal knew that subtle changes in
his men’s mood could spell the difference between victory and defeat.
Like Hannibal, you must aim indirectly at people’s emotions: get them to
laugh or cry over something that seems unrelated
to you or to the issue at
hand. Emotions are contagious—they bring people together and make them
bond. Then you can play them
like a piano, moving them from one emotion
to the other. Oratory and eloquent pleas only irritate and insult us; we see
right
through them. Motivation is subtler than that. By advancing indirectly,
setting up your emotional appeal, you will get inside
instead of just
scratching the surface.
He suddenly lost concern for himself, and forgot to look at a menacing fate.
He became not a man but a member. He felt that
something of which he was
a part—a regiment, an army, a cause, or a country—was in a crisis. He was
welded into a common personality
which was dominated by a single desire.
For some moments he could not flee, no more than a little finger can
commit a revolution
from a hand. . . . There was a consciousness always of
the presence of his comrades about him. He felt the subtle battle
brotherhood more potent
even than the cause for which they were fighting.
It was a mysterious fraternity born of the smoke and danger of death.
THE RED BADGE OF COURAGE, STEPHEN CRANE, 1871–1900
4. In the 1930s and ’40s, the Green Bay Packers were one of the most
successful teams in professional football, but by the late
’50s they were the
worst. What went wrong? The team had many talented players, like the
former All-American Paul Hornung.
The owners cared about it deeply and
kept hiring new coaches, new players—but nothing could slow the fall. The
players tried;
they hated losing. And, really, they weren’t that bad—they
came close to winning many of the games they lost. So what could
they do
about it?
The Packers hit bottom in 1958. For the 1959 season, they tried the usual
trick, bringing in a new coach and general manager:
Vince Lom-bardi. The
players mostly didn’t know much about the man, except that he had been an
assistant coach for the New
York Giants.
As the players convened to meet the new coach, they expected the typical
speech: this is the year to turn things around; I’m
going to get tough with
you; no more business as usual. Lombardi did not disappoint them: in a
quiet, forceful tone, he explained
a new set of rules and code of conduct.
But a few players noticed something different about Lom-bardi: he oozed
confidence—no
shouts, no demands. His tone and manner suggested that
the Packers were already a winning team; they just had to live up to
it. Was
he an idiot or some kind of visionary?
Then came the practices, and once again the difference was not so much
how they were conducted as the spirit behind them—they
felt different.
They were shorter but more physically demanding, almost to the point of
torture. And they were intense, with the
same simple plays endlessly
repeated. Unlike other coaches, Lombardi explained what he was doing:
installing a simpler system,
based not on novelty and surprise but on
efficient execution. The players had to concentrate intensely—the slightest
mistake
and they were doing extra laps or making the whole team do extra
laps. And Lombardi changed the drills constantly: the players
were never
bored and could never relax their mental focus.
Earlier coaches had always treated a few players differently: the stars.
They had a bit of an attitude, and they took off
early and stayed up late. The
other men had come to accept this as part of the pecking order, but deep
down they resented
it. Lombardi, though, had no favorites; for him there
were no stars. “Coach Lombardi is very fair,” said defensive tackle
Henry
Jordan. “He treats us all the same—like dogs.” The players liked that. They
enjoyed seeing Hornung yelled at and disciplined
just as much as the others.
Lombardi’s criticisms were relentless and got under his players’ skins. He
seemed to know their weak points, their insecurities.
How did he know, for
instance, that Jordan hated to be criticized in front of the others? Lombardi
exploited his fear of public
lashings to make him try harder. “We were
always trying to show [Lombardi] he was wrong,” commented one player.
“That was
his psych.”
Once more unto the breach, dear friends, once more; Or close the wall up
with our English dead. In peace there’s nothing so becomes a man As
modest stillness and humility: But when the blast of war blows in our ears,
Then imitate the action of the tiger; Stiffen the sinews, summon up the
blood,
Disguise fair nature with hard-favour’d rage; Then lend the eye a
terrible aspect; Let it pry through the portage of the head
Like the brass
cannon; let the brow o’er-whelm it As fearfully as doth a galled rock
O’erhang and jutty his confounded base,
Swill’d with the wild and wasteful
ocean. Now set the teeth and stretch the nostril wide, Hold hard to the
breath and bend up every spirit To his full height. On,
on, you noblest
English, Whose blood is fet from fathers of war-proof! Fathers that, like so
many Alexanders, Have in these parts from morn till even fought And
sheathed their swords for lack of
argument: Dishonour not your mothers;
now attest That those whom you call’d fathers did beget you. Be copy now
to men of grosser blood, And teach them how to war. And you, good
yeomen, Whose limbs were made in England, show
us here The mettle of
your pasture; let us swear That you are worth your breeding; which I doubt
not; For there is none of
you so mean and base, That hath not noble lustre
in your eyes. I see you stand like greyhounds in the slips, Straining upon the
start. The game’s afoot: Follow your spirit, and upon this charge Cry “God
for Harry, England, and Saint George!”
KING HENRY V, WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE, 1564–1616
The practices grew more intense still; the players had never worked this
hard in their lives. Yet they found themselves showing
up earlier and
staying later. By the season’s first game, Lombardi had prepared them for
every contingency. Sick of training,
they were grateful to be playing in a
real game at last—and, to their surprise, all that work made the game a lot
easier.
They were more prepared than the other team and less tired in the
fourth quarter. They won their first three games. With this
sudden success,
their morale and confidence soared.
The Packers finished the year with a 7–5 record, a remarkable turnaround
from 1958’s 1-10-1. After one season under Lombardi,
they had become the
most tight-knit team in professional sports. No one wanted to leave the
Packers. In 1960 they reached
the championship game, and in 1961 they
won it, with many more to follow. Over the years various of Lombardi’s
Packers would
try to explain how he had transformed them, but none of
them could really say how he had pulled it off.
Interpretation
When Vince Lombardi took over the Packers, he recognized the problem
right away: the team was infected with adolescent defeatism.
Teenagers will
often strike a pose that is simultaneously rebellious and lackadaisical. It’s a
way of staying in place: trying
harder brings more risk of failure, which
they cannot handle, so they lower their expectations, finding nobility in
slacking
off and mediocrity. Losing hurts less when they embrace it.
Groups can get infected with this spirit without realizing it. All they need
is a few setbacks, a few adolescent-minded individuals,
and slowly
expectations lower and defeatism sets in. The leader who tries to change the
group’s spirit directly—yelling, demanding,
disciplining—actually plays
into the teenage dynamic and reinforces the desire to rebel.
Lombardi was a motivational genius who saw everything in
psychological terms. To him the National Football League teams were
virtually equal in talent. The differences lay in attitude and morale:
reversing the Packers’ defeatism would translate into
wins, which would lift
their morale, which in turn would bring more wins. Lombardi knew he had
to approach his players indirectly—had
to trick them into changing. He
began with a show of confidence, talking as if he assumed they were
winners who had fallen
on bad times. That got under their skins, far more
than they realized. Then, in his practices, Lombardi didn’t make demands—
a
defensive, whiny approach that betrays insecurity. Instead he changed the
practices’ spirit, making them quiet, intense, focused,
workmanlike. He
knew that willpower is tied to what you believe possible; expand that belief
and you try harder. Lombardi
created a better team—which won its first
game—by making its players see possibilities. Defeat was no longer
comfortable.
Understand: a group has a collective personality that hardens over time,
and sometimes that personality is dysfunctional or
adolescent. Changing it
is difficult; people prefer what they know, even if it doesn’t work. If you
lead this kind of group,
do not play into its negative dynamic. Announcing
intentions and making demands will leave people defensive and feeling like
children. Like Lombardi, play the wily parent. Ask more of them. Expect
them to work like adults. Quietly alter the spirit
with which things are done.
Emphasize efficiency: anybody can be efficient (it isn’t a question of
talent), efficiency breeds
success, and success raises morale. Once the spirit
and personality of the group start to shift, everything else will fall
into
place.
5. In April 1796 the twenty-six-year-old Napoleon Bonaparte was named
commander of the French forces fighting the Austrians in
Italy. For many
officers his appointment was something of a joke: they saw their new leader
as too short, too young, too inexperienced,
and even too badly groomed to
play the part of “general.” His soldiers, too, were underpaid, underfed, and
increasingly disillusioned
with the cause they were fighting for, the French
Revolution. In the first few weeks of the campaign, Napoleon did what he
could to make them fight harder, but they were largely resistant to him.
On May 10, Napoleon and his weary forces came to the Bridge of Lodi,
over the river Adda. Despite his uphill struggle with
his troops, he had the
Austrians in retreat, but the bridge was a natural place to take a stand, and
they had manned it with
soldiers on either side and with well-placed
artillery. Taking the bridge would be costly—but suddenly the French
soldiers
saw Napoleon riding up in front of them, in a position of extreme
personal risk, directing the attack. He delivered a stirring
speech, then
launched his grenadiers at the Austrian lines to cries of “Vive la
République!” Caught up in the spirit, his senior officers led the charge.
The French took the bridge, and now, after this relatively minor
operation, Napoleon’s troops suddenly saw him as a different
man. In fond
recognition of his courage, they gave him a nickname: “Le Petit Capo-ral.”
The story of Napoleon facing the enemy
at the Bridge of Lodi passed
through the ranks. As the campaign wore on, and Napoleon won victory
after victory, a bond developed
between the soldiers and their general that
went beyond mere affection.
Between battles Napoleon would sometimes wander among the soldiers’
campfires, mingling with them. He himself had risen through
the ranks—he
had once been an ordinary gunner—and he could talk to the men as no
other general could. He knew their names,
their histories, even in what
battles they’d been wounded. With some men he would pinch an earlobe
between his finger and
thumb and give it a friendly tweak.
Mercenary and auxiliary arms are useless and dangerous; and if one keeps
his state founded on mercenary arms, one will never
be firm or secure; for
they are disunited, ambitious, without discipline, unfaithful; bold among
friends, among enemies cowardly;
no fear of God, no faith with men; ruin is
postponed only as long as attack is postponed; and in peace you are
despoiled by
them, in war by the enemy. The cause of this is that they have
no love nor cause to keep them in the field other than a small
stipend, which
is not sufficient to make them want to die for you.
THE PRINCE, NICCOLÒ MACHIAVELLI, 1513
Napoleon’s soldiers did not see him often, but when they did, it was as if
an electrical charge passed through them. It was
not just his personal
presence; he knew exactly when to show up—before a big battle or when
morale had slipped for some reason.
At these moments he would tell them
they were making history together. If a squad were about to lead a charge or
seemed in
trouble, he would ride over and yell, “Thirty-eighth: I know you!
Take me that village—at the charge!” His soldiers felt they
weren’t just
obeying orders, they were living out a great drama.
Napoleon rarely showed anger, but when he did, his men felt worse than
just guilty or upset. Late in the first Italian campaign,
Austrian troops had
forced some of his troops into a humiliating retreat for which there was no
excuse. Napoleon visited their
camp personally. “Soldiers, I am not satisfied
with you,” he told them, his large gray eyes seemingly on fire. “You have
shown
neither bravery, discipline, nor perseverance. . . . You have allowed
yourselves to be driven from positions where a handful
of men could have
stopped an army. Soldiers of the Thirty-ninth and Eighty-fifth, you are not
French soldiers. General, chief
of staff, let it be inscribed on their colors:
‘They no longer form part of the Army of Italy!’ ” The soldiers were
astounded.
Some cried; others begged for another chance. They repented
their weakness and turned completely around: the Thirty-ninth
and Eighty-
fifth would go on to distinguish themselves for strengths they had never
shown previously.
Some years later, during a difficult campaign against the Austrians in
Bavaria, the French won a hard-fought victory. The
next morning Napoleon
reviewed the Thirteenth Regiment of Light Infantry, which had played a key
role in the battle, and asked
the colonel to name its bravest man. The
colonel thought for a moment: “Sir, it is the drum major.” Napoleon
immediately asked
to see the young bandsman, who appeared, quaking in
his boots. Then Napoleon announced loudly for everyone to hear, “They
say
that you are the bravest man in this regiment. I appoint you a knight of the
Legion of Honor, baron of the Empire, and
award you a pension of four
thousand francs.” The soldiers gasped. Napoleon was famous for his well-
timed promotions and for
promoting soldiers on merit, making even the
lowliest private feel that if he proved himself, he could someday be a
marshal.
But a drum major becoming a baron overnight? That was entirely
beyond their experience. Word of it spread rapidly through
the troops and
had an electrifying effect—particularly on the newest conscripts, the ones
who were most homesick and depressed.
Throughout his long, very bloody campaigns and even his heart-
wrenching defeats—the bitter winter in Russia, the eventual
exile to Elba,
the final act at Waterloo—Napoleon’s men would go to the ends of the earth
for Le Petit Caporal and for no
one else.
Interpretation
Napoleon was the greatest man manager in history: he took millions of
unruly, undisciplined, unsoldierly young men, recently
liberated by the
French Revolution, and molded them into one of the most successful
fighting forces ever known. Their high
morale was all the more remarkable
for the ordeals he put them through. Napoleon used every trick in the book
to build his
army. He united them around a cause, spreading first the ideas
of the French Revolution, later the glory of France as a growing
empire. He
treated them well but never spoiled them. He appealed not to their greed but
to their thirst for glory and recognition.
He led from the front, proving his
bravery again and again. He kept his men moving—there was always a new
campaign for glory.
Having bonded with them, he skillfully played on their
emotions. More than soldiers fighting in an army, his men felt themselves
part of a myth, united under the emperor’s legendary eagle standards.
If you wish to be loved by your soldiers, husband their blood and do not
lead them to slaughter.
FREDERICK THE GREAT, 1712–86
Of all Napoleon’s techniques, none was more effective than his use of
punishments and rewards, all staged for the greatest
dramatic impact. His
personal rebukes were rare, but when he was angry, when he punished, the
effect was devastating: the
target felt disowned, outcast. As if exiled from
the warmth of his family, he would struggle to win back the general’s favor
and then never to give him a reason to be angry again. Promotions, rewards,
and public praise were equally rare, and when
they came, they were always
for merit, never for some political calculation. Caught between the poles of
wanting never to
displease Napoleon and yearning for his recognition, his
men were pulled into his sway, following him devotedly but never
quite
catching up.
Learn from the master: the way to manage people is to keep them in
suspense. First create a bond between your soldiers and
yourself. They
respect you, admire you, even fear you a little. To make the bond stronger,
hold yourself back, create a little
space around yourself; you are warm yet
with a touch of distance. Once the bond is forged, appear less often. Make
both your
punishments and your praises rare and unexpected, whether for
mistakes or for successes that may seem minor at the time but
have
symbolic meaning. Understand: once people know what pleases you and
what angers you, they turn into trained poodles,
working to charm you with
apparent good behavior. Keep them in suspense: make them think of you
constantly and want to please
you but never know just how to do it. Once
they are in the trap, you will have a magnetic pull over them. Motivation
will
become automatic.
Image:
The Ocean’s Tide. It ebbs and flows so powerfully that no one in its path
can escape its pull or move against it. Like the
moon, you are the force that
sets the tide, which carries everything along in its wake.
Authority: The Way means inducing the people to have the
same aim as the leadership, so that they will share death and
share
life, without fear of danger. —Sun-tzu (fourth century
B.C.)
REVERSAL
If morale is contagious, so is its opposite: fear and discontent can spread
through your troops like wildfire. The only way
to deal with them is to cut
them off before they turn into panic and rebellion.
In 58 B.C., when Rome was fighting the Gallic War, Julius Caesar was
preparing for battle against the Germanic leader Ariovistus.
Rumors about
the ferocity and size of the German forces were flying, and his army was
panicky and mutinous. Caesar acted fast:
first he had the rumormongers
arrested. Next he addressed his soldiers personally, reminding them of their
brave ancestors
who had fought and defeated the Germans. He would not
lead their weaker descendants into battle; since the Tenth Legion alone
seemed immune to the growing panic, he would take them alone. As Caesar
prepared to march with the valiant Tenth Legion, the
rest of the army,
ashamed, begged him to forgive them and let them fight. With a show of
reluctance, he did so, and these
once frightened men fought fiercely.
In such cases you must act like Caesar, turning back the tide of panic.
Waste no time, and deal with the whole group. People
who spread panic or
mutiny experience a kind of madness in which they gradually lose contact
with reality. Appeal to their
pride and dignity, make them feel ashamed of
their moment of weakness and madness. Remind them of what they have
accomplished
in the past, and show them how they are falling short of the
ideal. This social shaming will wake them up and reverse the
dynamic.
PART
III
DEFENSIVE
WARFARE
To fight in a defensive manner is not a sign of weakness; it is the height of
strategic wisdom, a powerful style of waging
war. Its requirements are
simple: First, you must make the most of your resources, fighting with
perfect economy and engaging
only in battles that are necessary. Second,
you must know how and when to retreat, luring an aggressive enemy into
an imprudent
attack. Then, waiting patiently for his moment of exhaustion,
launch a vicious counterattack.
In a world that frowns on displays of overt aggression, the ability to fight
defensively—to let others make the first move
and then wait for their own
mistakes to destroy them—will bring you untold power. Because you waste
neither energy nor time,
you are always ready for the next inevitable battle.
Your career will be long and fruitful.
To fight this way, you must master the arts of deception. By seeming
weaker than you are, you can draw the enemy into an ill-advised
attack; by
seeming stronger than you are—perhaps through an occasional act that is
reckless and bold—you can deter the enemy
from attacking you. In
defensive warfare you are essentially leveraging your weaknesses and
limitations into power and victory.
The following four chapters will instruct you in the basic arts of
defensive warfare: economy of means, counterattack, intimidation
and
deterrence, and how to retreat skillfully and lie low when under aggressive
attack.
8
PICK YOUR BATTLES CAREFULLY
THE PERFECT-ECONOMY
STRATEGY
We all have limitations—our energies and skills will take us
only so far. Danger comes from trying to surpass our limits.
Seduced by some glittering prize into overextending ourselves,
we end up exhausted and vulnerable. You must know your limits
and pick your battles carefully. Consider the hidden costs of a
war: time lost, political goodwill squandered, an embittered
enemy bent on revenge. Sometimes it is better to wait, to
undermine your enemies covertly rather than hitting them
straight
on. If battle cannot be avoided, get them to fight on
your terms. Aim at their weaknesses; make the war expensive
for them
and cheap for you. Fighting with perfect economy, you
can outlast even the most powerful foe.
In the utilization of a theater of war, as in everything else, strategy calls for
economy of strength. The less one can manage
with, the better; but manage
one must, and here, as in commerce, there is more to it than mere stinginess.
CARL VON CLAUSEWITZ, 1780–1831
THE SPIRAL EFFECT
In 281 B.C. war broke out between Rome and the city of Tarentum, on
Italy’s east coast. Tarentum had begun as a colony of
the Greek city of
Sparta; its citizens still spoke Greek, considered themselves cultured
Spartans, and thought other Italian
cities barbaric. Rome meanwhile was an
emerging power, locked in a series of wars with neighboring cities.
The prudent Romans were reluctant to take on Tarentum. It was Italy’s
wealthiest city at the time, rich enough to finance
its allies in a war against
Rome; it was also too far away, off in the southeast, to pose an immediate
threat. But the Tarentines
had sunk some Roman ships that had wandered
into their harbor, killing the fleet’s admiral, and when Rome had tried to
negotiate
a settlement, its ambassadors had been insulted. Roman honor
was at stake, and it readied itself for war.
Tarentum had a problem: it was wealthy but had no real army. Its citizens
had gotten used to easy living. The solution was
to call in a Greek army to
fight on its behalf. The Spartans were otherwise occupied, so the Tarentines
called on King Pyrrhus
of Epirus (319–272 B.C.), the greatest Greek
warrior king since Alexander the Great.
Epirus was a small kingdom in west-central Greece. It was a poor land,
sparsely populated, with meager resources, but Pyrrhus—raised
on stories
of Achilles, from whom his family claimed to be descended, and of
Alexander the Great, a distant cousin—was determined
to follow in the
footsteps of his illustrious ancestors and relatives, expanding Epirus and
carving out his own empire. As
a young man, he had served in the armies of
other great military men, including Ptolemy, a general of Alexander’s who
now
ruled Egypt. Pyrrhus had quickly proved his value as a warrior and
leader. In battle he had become known for leading dangerous
charges,
earning himself the nickname “The Eagle.” Back in Epirus he had built up
his small army and trained it well, even
managing to defeat the much larger
Macedonian army in several battles.
Pyrrhus’s reputation was on the rise, but it was hard for a small country
like his to gain ascendancy over more powerful Greek
neighbors like the
Macedonians, the Spartans, and the Athenians. And the Tarentines’ offer
was tempting: First, they promised
him money and a large army raised from
allied states. Second, by defeating the Romans, he could make himself
master of Italy,
and from Italy he could take first Sicily, then Carthage in
North Africa. Alexander had moved east to create his empire; Pyrrhus
could
move west and dominate the Mediterranean. He accepted the offer.
In the spring of 280 B.C., Pyrrhus set sail with the largest Greek army
ever to cross into Italy: 20,000 foot soldiers, 3,000
horsemen, 2,000
bowmen, and twenty elephants. Once in Tarentum, though, he realized he
had been tricked: not only did the
Tarentines have no army, they had made
no effort to assemble one, leaving Pyrrhus to do it himself. Pyrrhus wasted
no time:
he declared a military dictatorship in the city and began to build
and train an army from among the Tarentines as fast as
possible.
Pyrrhus’s arrival in Tarentum worried the Romans, who knew his
reputation as a strategist and fighter. Deciding to give him
no time to
prepare, they quickly sent out an army, forcing Pyrrhus to make do with
what he had and he set off to face them.
The two armies met near the town
of Heraclea. Pyrrhus and his troops were outnumbered and at one point
were on the verge of
defeat, when he unleashed his secret weapon: his
elephants, with their massive weight, loud, fearsome trumpeting, and
soldiers
on top, firing arrows down at will. The Romans had never faced
elephants in battle before, and panic spread among them, turning
the tide of
the fight. Soon the disciplined Roman legions were in headlong retreat.
“The Eagle” had won a great victory. His fame spread across the Italian
peninsula; he was indeed the reincarnation of Alexander
the Great. Now
other cities sent him reinforcements, more than making up for his losses at
Heraclea. But Pyrrhus was worried.
He had lost many veterans in the battle,
including key generals. More important, the strength and discipline of the
Roman
legions had impressed him—they were like no other troops he had
faced. He decided to try to negotiate a peaceful settlement
with the Romans,
offering to share the peninsula with them. At the same time, though, he
marched on Rome, to give the negotiations
urgency and to make it clear that
unless the Romans sued for peace, they would face him again.
Meanwhile the defeat at Heraclea had had a powerful effect on the
Romans, who were not easily intimidated and did not take
defeat lightly.
Immediately after the battle, a call went out for recruits, and young men
responded in droves. The Romans
proudly rejected the offer of a settlement;
they would never share Italy.
The two armies met again near the town of Asculum, not far from Rome,
in the spring of 279 B.C. This time their numbers were
about equal. The
first day of battle was fierce, and once again the Romans seemed to have
the edge, but on the second day
Pyrrhus, a strategic master, managed to lure
the Roman legions onto terrain better suited to his own style of
maneuvering,
and he gained the advantage. As was his wont, near the end
of the day he personally led a violent charge at the heart of the
Roman
legions, elephants in front. The Romans scattered, and Pyrrhus was once
again victorious.
King Pyrrhus had now scaled the heights, yet he felt only gloom and
foreboding. His losses had been terrible; the ranks of
the generals he
depended on were decimated, and he himself had been badly wounded. At
the same time, the Romans seemed inexhaustible,
undaunted by their
defeat. When congratulated on his victory at Asculum, he replied, “If we
defeat the Romans in one more
such battle, we shall be totally ruined.”
Pyrrhus, however, was already ruined. His losses at Asculum were too
large to be quickly replaced, and his remaining forces
were too few to fight
the Romans again. His Italian campaign was over.
Interpretation
From the story of King Pyrrhus and his famous lament after the Battle of
Asculum comes the expression “Pyrrhic victory,” signifying
a triumph that
is as good as a defeat, for it comes at too great a cost. The victor is too
exhausted to exploit his win, too
vulnerable to face the next battle.
And indeed, after the “victory” at Asculum, Pyrrhus staggered from one
disaster to the next, his army never quite strong enough
to defeat his
growing hosts of enemies. This culminated in his untimely death in battle,
ending Epirus’s hopes to become a
power in Greece.
Pyrrhus could have avoided this downward spiral. Advance intelligence
would have told him about both the disciplined ferocity
of the Romans and
the decadence and treachery of the Tarentines, and, knowing this, he could
have taken more time to build
an army or canceled the expedition
altogether. Once he saw that he had been tricked, he could have turned
back; after Heraclea
there was still time to retrench, consolidate, quit while
he was ahead. Had he done any of this, his story might have had
a different
ending. But Pyrrhus could not stop himself—the dream was too alluring.
Why worry about the costs? He could recover
later. One more battle, one
more victory, would seal the deal.
Pyrrhic victories are much more common than you might think.
Excitement about a venture’s prospects is natural before it begins,
and if the
goal is enticing, we unconsciously see what we want to see—more of the
possible gains, fewer of the possible difficulties.
The further we go, the
harder it becomes to pull back and rationally reassess the situation. In such
circumstances the costs
tend not just to mount—they spiral out of control. If
things go badly, we get exhausted, which leads us to make mistakes,
which
lead to new, unforeseen problems, which in turn lead to new costs. Any
victories we might have along the way are meaningless.
Understand: the more you want the prize, the more you must compensate
by examining what getting it will take. Look beyond
the obvious costs and
think about the intangible ones: the goodwill you may squander by waging
war, the fury of the loser
if you win, the time that winning may take, your
debt to your allies. You can always wait for a better time; you can always
try something more in line with your resources. Remember: history is
littered with the corpses of people who ignored the costs.
Save yourself
unnecessary battles and live to fight another day.
When the weapons have grown dull and spirits depressed, when our
strength has been expended and resources consumed, then others
will take
advantage of our exhaustion to arise. Then even if you have wise generals
you cannot make things turn out well in
the end.
—The Art of War, Sun-tzu (fourth century B.C.)
STRENGTHS AND WEAKNESSES
When Queen Elizabeth I (1533–1603) ascended the throne of England in
1558, she inherited a second-rate power: the country
had been racked by
civil war, and its finances were in a mess. Elizabeth dreamed of creating a
long period of peace in which
she could slowly rebuild England’s founda-
tions and particularly its economy: a government with money was a
government with
options. England, a small island with limited resources,
could not hope to compete in war with France and Spain, the great
powers
of Europe. Instead it would gain strength through trade and economic
stability.
He whom the ancients called an expert in battle gained victory where
victory was easily gained. Thus the battle of the expert
is never an
exceptional victory, nor does it win him reputation for wisdom or credit for
courage. His victories in battle
are unerring. Unerring means that he acts
where victory is certain, and conquers an enemy that has already lost.
THE ART OF WAR, SUN-TZU, FOURTH CENTURY B.C.
Year by year for twenty years, Elizabeth made progress. Then, in the late
1570s, her situation suddenly seemed dire: an imminent
war with Spain
threatened to cancel all the gains of the previous two decades. The Spanish
king, Philip II, was a devout Catholic
who considered it his personal
mission to reverse the spread of Protestantism. The Low Countries (now
Holland and Belgium)
were properties of Spain at the time, but a growing
Protestant rebellion was threatening its rule, and Philip went to war
with the
rebels, determined to crush them. Meanwhile his most cherished dream was
to restore Catholicism to England. His short-term
strategy was a plot to
have Elizabeth assassinated and then to place her half sister, the Catholic
Mary Queen of Scots, on
the British throne. In case this plan failed, his
long-term strategy was to build an immense armada of ships and invade
England.
Philip did not keep his intentions well hidden, and Elizabeth’s ministers
saw war as inevitable. They advised her to send
an army to the Low
Countries, forcing Philip to put his resources there instead of into an attack
on England—but Elizabeth
balked at that idea; she would send small forces
there to help the Protestant rebels avert a military disaster, but she would
not commit to anything more. Elizabeth dreaded war; maintaining an army
was a huge expense, and all sorts of other hidden
costs were sure to emerge,
threatening the stability she had built up. If war with Spain really was
inevitable, Elizabeth
wanted to fight on her own terms; she wanted a war
that would ruin Spain financially and leave England safe.
Defying her ministers, Elizabeth did what she could to keep the peace
with Spain, refusing to provoke Philip. That bought
her time to put aside
funds for building up the British navy. Meanwhile she worked in secret to
damage the Spanish economy,
which she saw as its only weak spot. Spain’s
enormous, expanding empire in the New World made it powerful, but that
empire
was far away. To maintain it and profit from it, Philip was entirely
dependent on shipping, a vast fleet that he paid for
with enormous loans
from Italian bankers. His credit with these banks depended on the safe
passage of his ships bringing gold
from the New World. The power of Spain
rested on a weak foundation.
And so Queen Elizabeth unleashed her greatest captain, Sir Francis
Drake, on the Spanish treasure ships. He was to appear
to be operating on
his own, a pirate out for his own profit. No one was to know of the
connection between him and the queen.
With each ship that he captured, the
interest rate on Philip’s loans crept upward, until eventually the Italian
bankers were
raising the rate more because of the threat of Drake than
because of any specific loss. Philip had hoped to launch his armada
against
England by 1582; short of money, he had to delay. Elizabeth had bought
herself more time.
Achilles now routed the Trojans and pursued them towards the city, but his
course, too, was run. Poseidon and Apollo, pledged
to avenge the deaths of
Cycnus and Troilus, and to punish certain insolent boasts that Achilles had
uttered over Hector’s
corpse, took counsel together. Veiled with cloud and
standing by the Scaean gate, Apollo sought out Paris in the thick of battle,
turned his bow and guided
the fatal shaft. It struck the one vulnerable part
of Achilles’s body, the right heel, and he died in agony.
THE GREEK MYTHS, VOL. 2, ROBERT GRAVES, 1955
Meanwhile, much to the chagrin of Philip’s finance ministers, the king
refused to scale back the size of the invading armada.
Building it might take
longer, but he would just borrow more money. Seeing his fight with
England as a religious crusade,
he would not be deterred by mere matters of
finance.
While working to ruin Philip’s credit, Elizabeth put an important part of
her meager resources into building up England’s
spy network— in fact, she
made it the most sophisticated intelligence agency in Europe. With agents
throughout Spain, she
was kept informed of Philip’s every move. She knew
exactly how large the armada was to be and when it was to be launched.
That allowed her to postpone calling up her army and reserves until the very
last moment, saving the government money.
Finally, in the summer of 1588, the Spanish Armada was ready. It
comprised 128 ships, including twenty large galleons, and
a vast number of
sailors and soldiers. Equal in size to England’s entire navy, it had cost a
fortune. The Armada set sail
from Lisbon in the second week of July. But
Elizabeth’s spies had fully informed her of Spain’s plans, and she was able
to
send a fleet of smaller, more mobile English ships to harass the Armada
on its way up the French coast, sinking its supply
ships and generally
creating chaos. As the commander of the English fleet, Lord Howard of
Effingham, reported, “Their force
is wonderful great and strong; and yet we
pluck their feathers little by little.”
Finally the Armada came to anchor in the port of Calais, where it was to
link up with the Spanish armies stationed in the
Low Countries. Determined
to prevent it from picking up these reinforcements, the English gathered
eight large ships, loaded
them with flammable substances, and set them on
course for the Spanish fleet, which was anchored in tight formation. As the
British ships approached the harbor under full sail, their crews set them on
fire and evacuated. The result was havoc, with
dozens of Spanish ships in
flames. Others scrambled for safe water, often colliding with one another. In
their haste to put
to sea, all order broke down.
The loss of ships and supplies at Calais devastated Spanish discipline and
morale, and the invasion was called off. To avoid
further attacks on the
return to Spain, the remaining ships headed not south but north, planning to
sail home around Scotland
and Ireland. The English did not even bother
with pursuit; they knew that the rough weather in those waters would do the
damage
for them. By the time the shattered Armada returned to Spain,
forty-four of its ships had been lost and most of the rest were
too damaged
to be seaworthy. Almost two-thirds of its sailors and soldiers had perished
at sea. Meanwhile England had lost
not a single ship, and barely a hundred
men had died in action.
It was a great triumph, but Elizabeth wasted no time on gloating. To save
money, she immediately decommissioned the navy.
She also refused to
listen to advisers who urged her to follow up her victory by attacking the
Spanish in the Low Countries.
Her goals were limited: to exhaust Philip’s
resources and finances, forcing him to abandon his dreams of Catholic
dominance
and instituting a delicate balance of power in Europe. And this,
indeed, was ultimately her greatest triumph, for Spain never
recovered
financially from the disaster of the Armada and soon gave up its designs on
England altogether.
Limitations are troublesome, but they are effective. If we live economically
in normal times, we are prepared for times of
want. To be sparing saves us
from humiliation. Limitations are also indispensable in the regulation of
world conditions. In
nature there are fixed limits for summer and winter,
day and night, and these limits give the year its meaning. In the same
way,
economy, by setting fixed limits upon expenditures, acts to preserve
property and prevent injury to the people.
THE I CHING, CHINA, CIRCA EIGHTH CENTURY B.C.
Interpretation
The defeat of the Spanish Armada has to be considered one of the most
cost-effective in military history: a second-rate power
that barely
maintained a standing army was able to face down the greatest empire of its
time. What made the victory possible
was the application of a basic military
axiom: attack their weaknesses with your strengths. England’s strengths
were its small,
mobile navy and its elaborate intelligence network; its
weaknesses were its limited resources in men, weaponry, and money.
Spain’s strengths were its vast wealth and its huge army and fleet; its
weaknesses were the precarious structure of its finances,
despite their
magnitude, and the lumbering size and slowness of its ships.
Elizabeth refused to fight on Spain’s terms, keeping her army out of the
fray. Instead she attacked Spain’s weaknesses with
her strengths: plaguing
the Spanish galleons with her smaller ships, wreaking havoc on the
country’s finances, using special
ops to grind its war machine to a halt. She
was able to control the situation by keeping England’s costs down while
making
the war effort more and more expensive for Spain. Eventually a
time came when Philip could only fail: if the Armada sank,
he would be
ruined for years to come, and even if the Armada triumphed, victory would
come so dear that he would ruin himself
trying to exploit it on English soil.
Understand: no person or group is completely either weak or strong.
Every army, no matter how invincible it seems, has a weak
point, a place
left unprotected or undeveloped. Size itself can be a weakness in the end.
Meanwhile even the weakest group
has something it can build on, some
hidden strength. Your goal in war is not simply to amass a stockpile of
weapons, to increase
your firepower so you can blast your enemy away.
That is wasteful, expensive to build up, and leaves you vulnerable to
guerrilla-style
attacks. Going at your enemies blow by blow, strength
against strength, is equally unstrategic. Instead you must first assess
their
weak points: internal political problems, low morale, shaky finances, overly
centralized control, their leader’s megalomania.
While carefully keeping
your own weaknesses out of the fray and preserving your strength for the
long haul, hit their Achilles’
heel again and again. Having their weaknesses
exposed and preyed upon will demoralize them, and, as they tire, new
weaknesses
will open up. By carefully calibrating strengths and
weaknesses, you can bring down your Goliath with a slingshot.
Abundance makes me poor.
—Ovid (43 B.C.–A.D. 17)
In all this—in selection of nutriment, of place and climate, of recreation—
there commands an instinct of self-preservation
which manifests itself most
unambiguously as an instinct for self-defense. Not to see many things, not to
hear them, not to
let them approach one— first piece of ingenuity, first
proof that one is no accident but a necessity. The customary word for
this
self-defensive instinct is taste. Its imperative commands, not only to say No
when Yes would be a piece of “selflessness,”
but also to say No as little as
possible. To separate oneself, to depart from that to which No would be
required again and again. The rationale is that defensive expenditures,
be
they never so small, become a rule, a habit, lead to an extraordinary and
perfectly superfluous impoverishment. Our largest
expenditures are our
most frequent small ones. Warding off, not letting come close, is an
expenditure—one should not deceive
oneself over this—a strength
squandered on negative objectives. One can merely through the constant
need to ward off become too weak any longer to defend oneself. . . . Another
form of sagacity and self-defense consists in reacting as seldom as possible
and withdrawing from situations and relationships in which one would be
condemned as it were to suspend one’s freedom, one’s initiative, and
become
a mere reagent.
ECCE HOMO, FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, 1888

KEYS TO WARFARE
Reality can be defined by a sharp series of limitations on every living thing,
the final boundary being death. We have only
so much energy to expend
before we tire; only so much in the way of food and resources is available
to us; our skills and
capacities can go only so far. An animal lives within
those limits: it does not try to fly higher or run faster or expend
endless
energy amassing a pile of food, for that would exhaust it and leave it
vulnerable to attack. It simply tries to make
the most of what it has. A cat,
for instance, instinctively practices an economy of motion and gesture,
never wasting effort.
People who live in poverty, similarly, are acutely
aware of their limits: forced to make the most of what they have, they
are
endlessly inventive. Necessity has a powerful effect on their creativity.
The problem faced by those of us who live in societies of abundance is
that we lose a sense of limit. We are carefully shielded
from death and can
pass months, even years, without contemplating it. We imagine endless time
at our disposal and slowly drift
further from reality; we imagine endless
energy to draw on, thinking we can get what we want simply by trying
harder. We start
to see everything as limitless—the goodwill of friends, the
possibility of wealth and fame. A few more classes and books and
we can
extend our talents and skills to the point where we become different people.
Technology can make anything achievable.
Abundance makes us rich in dreams, for in dreams there are no limits.
But it makes us poor in reality. It makes us soft and
decadent, bored with
what we have and in need of constant shocks to remind us that we are alive.
In life you must be a warrior,
and war requires realism. While others may
find beauty in endless dreams, warriors find it in reality, in awareness of
limits,
in making the most of what they have. Like the cat, they look for the
perfect economy of motion and gesture—the way to give
their blows the
greatest force with the least expenditure of effort. Their awareness that their
days are numbered—that they
could die at any time—grounds them in
reality. There are things they can never do, talents they will never have,
lofty goals
they will never reach; that hardly bothers them. Warriors focus
on what they do have, the strengths that they do possess and that they must
use creatively. Knowing when to slow down, to renew, to retrench, they
outlast their opponents.
They play for the long term.
Through the final years of French colonial rule in Vietnam and on
through the Vietnam War, the military leader of the Vietnamese
insurgents
was General Vo Nguyen Giap. In first the French and then the Americans,
he faced an enemy with vastly superior
resources, firepower, and training.
His own army was a ragtag collection of peasants; they had morale, a deep
sense of purpose,
but little else. Giap had no trucks to carry supplies, and
his communications were nineteenth century. Another general would
have
tried to catch up, and Giap had the opportunity—he had the offer of trucks,
radios, weapons, and training from China—but
he saw them as a trap. It
wasn’t only that he didn’t want to spend his limited funds on such things; in
the long run, he believed,
all they would do was turn the North Vietnamese
into a weaker version of their enemy. Instead he chose to make the most of
what he had, turning his army’s weaknesses into virtues.
Trucks could be spotted from the air, and the Americans could bomb
them. But the Americans could not bomb supply lines they
could not see.
Exploiting his resources, then, Giap used a vast network of peasant coolies
to carry supplies on their backs.
When they came to a river, they would
cross it on rope bridges hung just below the surface of the water. Right up
to the end
of the war, the Americans were still trying to figure out how
North Vietnam supplied its armies in the field.
Meanwhile Giap developed hit-and-run guerrilla tactics that gave him
enormous potential to disrupt American supply lines.
To fight, move troops,
and ferry supplies, the Americans used helicopters, which gave them
tremendous mobility. But the war
ultimately had to be fought on the
ground, and Giap was endlessly inventive in using the jungle to neutralize
American air
power, disorient American foot soldiers, and camouflage his
own troops. He could not hope to win a pitched battle against
superior U.S.
weaponry, so he put his effort into spectacular, symbolic, demoralizing
attacks that would drive home the futility
of the war when they appeared on
American TV. With the minimum that he had, he created the maximum
effect.
Armies that seem to have the edge in money, resources, and firepower
tend to be predictable. Relying on their equipment instead
of on knowledge
and strategy, they grow mentally lazy. When problems arise, their solution
is to amass more of what they already
have. But it’s not what you have that
brings you victory, it’s how you use it. When you have less, you are
naturally more
inventive. Creativity gives you an edge over enemies
dependent on technology; you will learn more, be more adaptable, and
you
will outsmart them. Unable to waste your limited resources, you will use
them well. Time will be your ally.
If you have less than your enemy, do not despair. You can always turn the
situation around by practicing perfect economy.
If you and your enemy are
equals, getting hold of more weaponry matters less than making better use
of what you have. If you
have more than your enemy, fighting economically
is as important as ever. As Pablo Picasso said, Even if you are wealthy,
act
poor. The poor are more inventive, and often have more fun, because they
value what they have and know their limits. Sometimes
in strategy you have
to ignore your greater strength and force yourself to get the maximum out
of the minimum. Even if you
have the technology, fight the peasant’s war.
This does not mean that you disarm or fail to exploit what advantages
you may have in matériel. In Operation Desert Storm,
the U.S. campaign
against Iraq in 1991, American military strategists made full use of their
superior technology, particularly
in the air, but they did not depend on this
for victory. They had learned the lesson of their debacle twenty years earlier
in Vietnam, and their maneuvers showed the kind of deceptive feints and
use of mobility associated with smaller, guerrilla-like
forces. This
combination of advanced technology and creative flair proved devastating.
War is a balance of ends and means: a general might have the best plan to
achieve a certain end, but unless he has the means
to accomplish it, his plan
is worthless. Wise generals through the ages, then, have learned to begin by
examining the means
they have at hand and then to develop their strategy
out of those tools. That is what made Hannibal a brilliant strategist:
he
would always think first of the givens—the makeup of his own army and of
the enemy’s, their respective proportions of cavalry
and infantry, the terrain,
his troops’ morale, the weather. That would give him the foundation not
only for his plan of attack
but for the ends he wanted to achieve in this
particular encounter. Instead of being locked in to a way of fighting, like
so
many generals, he constantly adjusted his ends to his means. That was the
strategic advantage he used again and again.
The next time you launch a campaign, try an experiment: do not think
about either your solid goals or your wishful dreams,
and do not plan out
your strategy on paper. Instead think deeply about what you have—the tools
and materials you will be working
with. Ground yourself not in dreams and
plans but in reality: think of your own skills, any political advantage you
might
have, the morale of your troops, how creatively you can use the
means at your disposal. Then, out of that process, let your
plans and goals
blossom. Not only will your strategies be more realistic, they will be more
inventive and forceful. Dreaming
first of what you want and then trying to
find the means to reach it is a recipe for exhaustion, waste, and defeat.
Do not mistake cheapness for perfect economy—armies have failed by
spending too little as often as by spending too much. When
the British
attacked Turkey during World War I, hoping to knock it out of the war and
then attack Germany from the east, they
began by sending a fleet to break
through the Dardanelles Strait and head for the Turkish capital of
Constantinople. The fleet
made good progress, but even so, after several
weeks some ships had been sunk, more lives than expected had been lost,
and
the venture in general was proving costly. So the British called off the
naval campaign, deciding instead to land an army
on the peninsula of
Gallipoli and fight through by land. That route seemed safer and cheaper—
but it turned into a months-long
fiasco that cost thousands of lives and in
the end led nowhere, for the Allies eventually gave up and pulled out their
troops.
Years later, Turkish documents were uncovered that revealed that
the British fleet had been on the verge of success: in another
day or two, it
would have broken through and Constantinople would probably have fallen.
The whole course of the war might
have been changed. But the British had
overeconomized; at the last moment, they had pulled their punches,
worrying about cost.
In the end the cost of trying to win on the cheap
wound up punitively expensive.
Every limitation has its value, but a limitation that requires persistent effort
entails a cost of too much energy. When, however, the limitation is a natural
one (as, for example, the limitation by which water flows only downhill), it
necessarily
leads to success, for then it means a saving of energy. The
energy that otherwise would be consumed in a vain struggle with
the object
is applied wholly to the benefit of the matter in hand, and success is
assured.
THE I CHING, CHINA, CIRCA EIGHTH CENTURY B.C.
Perfect economy, then, does not mean hoarding your resources. That is
not economy but stinginess—deadly in war. Perfect economy
means finding
a golden mean, a level at which your blows count but do not wear you out.
Overeconomizing will wear you out
more, for the war will drag on, its costs
growing, without your ever being able to deliver a knockout punch.
Several tactics lend themselves to economy in fighting. First is the use of
deception, which costs relatively little but can
yield powerful results.
During World War II the Allies used a complicated series of deceptions to
make the Germans expect
an attack from many different directions, forcing
them to spread themselves thin. Hitler’s Russian campaign was much
weakened
by the need to keep troops in France and the Balkans, to defend
from attacks there—attacks that never came. Deception can
be a great
equalizer for the weaker side. Its arts include the gathering of intelligence,
the spreading of misinformation,
and the use of propaganda to make the war
more unpopular within the enemy camp.
Second, look for opponents you can beat. Avoid enemies who have
nothing to lose—they will work to bring you down whatever
it costs. In the
nineteenth century, Otto von Bismarck built up Prussia’s military power on
the backs of weaker opponents
such as the Danes. Easy victories enhance
morale, develop your reputation, give you momentum, and, most important,
do not
cost you much.
There will be times when your calculations misfire; what had seemed to
be an easy campaign turns out hard. Not everything
can be foreseen. Not
only is it important to pick your battles carefully, then, but you must also
know when to accept your
losses and quit. In 1971 the boxers Muhammad
Ali and Joe Frazier, both at the heights of their careers, met for the world
heavyweight championship. It was a grueling match, one of the most
exciting in history; Frazier won by a decision after nearly
knocking out Ali
in the fifteenth round. But both men suffered horribly in the fight; both
threw a lot of good punches. Wanting
revenge, Ali gained a rematch in
1974—another grueling fifteen-round affair—and won by a decision.
Neither boxer was happy,
both wanted a more conclusive result, so they met
again in 1975, in the famous “Thrilla in Manila.” This time Ali won in the
fourteenth round, but neither man was ever the same again: these three
fights had taken too much out of them, shortening their
careers. Pride and
anger had overtaken their powers of reason. Do not fall into such a trap;
know when to stop. Do not soldier
on out of frustration or pride. Too much
is at stake.
Finally, nothing in human affairs stays the same. Over time either your
efforts will tend to slow down—a kind of friction
will build up, whether
from unexpected exterior events or from your own actions—or momentum
will help to move you forward.
Wasting what you have will create friction,
lowering your energy and morale. You are essentially slowing yourself
down. Fighting
economically, on the other hand, will build momentum.
Think of it as finding your level—a perfect balance between what you
are
capable of and the task at hand. When the job you are doing is neither
above nor below your talents but at your level,
you are neither exhausted
nor bored and depressed. You suddenly have new energy and creativity.
Fighting with perfect economy
is like hitting that level—less resistance in
your path, greater energy unleashed. Oddly enough, knowing your limits
will
expand your limits; getting the most out of what you have will let you
have more.
Image: The Swimmer. The water offers resistance; you can move only so
fast. Some swimmers pound at the water, trying to use
force to generate
speed—but they only make waves, creating resistance in their path. Others
are too delicate, kicking so lightly
they barely move. Consummate
swimmers hit the surface with perfect economy, keeping the water in front
of them smooth and
level. They move as fast as the water will let them and
cover great distances at a steady pace.
Authority: The value of a thing sometimes lies not in what one
attains with it but in what one pays for it—what it costs us.
—
Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900)
REVERSAL
There can never be any value in fighting uneconomically, but it is always a
wise course to make your opponent waste as much
of his resources as
possible. This can be done through hit-and-run tactics, forcing him to
expend energy chasing after you.
Lure him into thinking that one big
offensive will ruin you; then bog that offensive down in a protracted war in
which he
loses valuable time and resources. A frustrated opponent
exhausting energy on punches he cannot land will soon make mistakes
and
open himself up to a vicious counterattack.
9
TURN THE TABLES
THE COUNTERATTACK
STRATEGY
Moving first—initiating the attack—will often put you at a
disadvantage: you are exposing your strategy and limiting your
options. Instead discover the power of holding back and letting
the other side move first, giving you the flexibility to
counterattack
from any angle. If your opponents are aggressive,
bait them into a rash attack that will leave them in a weak
position. Learn
to use their impatience, their eagerness to get at
you, as a way to throw them off balance and bring them down.
In difficult
moments do not despair or retreat: any situation can
be turned around. If you learn how to hold back, waiting for the
right
moment to launch an unexpected counterattack, weakness
can become strength.
The technique of “according with” the enemy’s expectations and desires
requires first determining what they believe and want,
then apparently
conforming to them until the situation can be exploited: Definition: When
the enemy wants to take something
and you yield it, it is termed “according
with.” . . . In general, when going contrary to something merely solidifies it,
it is better to accord with it in order to lead them
to flaws. If the enemy
wants to advance, be completely flexible and display weakness in order to
induce an advance. If the
enemy wants to withdraw, disperse and open an
escape route for their retreat. If the enemy is relying upon a strong front,
establish your own front lines far off, solidly assuming a defensive posture
in order to observe their arrogance. If the enemy
relies upon their
awesomeness, be emptily respectful but substantially plan while awaiting
their laxness. Draw them forward and cover them, release and capture
them. Exploit their arrogance, capitalize on their laxity.
SEVENTEENTH-CENTURY MING DYNASTY TEXT, QUOTED IN
THE TAO OF SPYCRAFT, RALPH D. SAWYER
DISGUISED AGGRESSION
In September 1805, Napoleon Bonaparte faced the greatest crisis until that
moment in his career: Austria and Russia had joined
in an alliance against
him. To the south, Austrian troops were attacking the French soldiers
occupying northern Italy; to
the east, the Austrian general Karl Mack was
leading a large force into Bavaria. A sizable Russian army under General
Mikhail
Kutusov was on its way to join Mack’s army, and this allied force,
once merged and expanded, would head for France. East of
Vienna, more
Russian and Austrian troops were waiting to be deployed wherever needed.
Napoleon’s armies were outnumbered two
to one.
Napoleon’s plan was to try to defeat each of the alliance’s armies one by
one, using his smaller but more mobile corps to
fight them before they
could join forces. While committing enough troops to produce a stalemate
in Italy, he moved into Bavaria
before Kutusov could reach it and forced
Mack’s ignominious surrender at Ulm, with hardly a shot being fired (see
chapter
6). This bloodless victory was a masterpiece, but to exploit it to its
fullest, Napoleon needed to catch Kutusov before the
Russian general could
himself be reinforced by more Russian or Austrian troops. To that end,
Napoleon sent the bulk of his
army east, toward Vienna, hoping to trap the
retreating Russian forces. But the pursuit bogged down: the weather was
bad,
the French troops were tired, their marshals made mistakes, and, most
important, the wily Kutusov was cleverer in retreat
than in attack.
Managing to elude the French, he reached the town of Olmütz, northeast of
Vienna, where the remaining Austro-Russian
forces were stationed.
Now the situation reversed: suddenly it was Napoleon who was in grave
danger. The strength of his corps was their mobility;
relatively small, they
were vulnerable individually and worked best when operating close enough
to one another to come fast
to one another’s support. Now they were
dispersed in a long line from Munich to Vienna, which Napoleon had taken
after his
victory over Mack at Ulm. The men were hungry, tired, and short
of supplies. The Austrians fighting the French in northern
Italy had given
up the battle there and were in retreat—but that put them heading northeast,
posing a threat to Napoleon’s
southern flank. To the north, the Prussians,
seeing that Napoleon was in trouble, were considering joining the alliance.
If
that happened, they could wreak havoc on Napoleon’s extended lines of
communication and supply— and the two armies moving
in from north and
south could squeeze him to death.
Napoleon’s options were abysmal. To continue the pursuit of Ku-tusov
would further extend his lines. Besides, the Russians
and Austrians were
now 90,000 strong and in an excellent position at Olmütz. To stay put, on
the other hand, was to risk being
slowly swallowed by armies on all sides.
Retreat seemed the only solution, and it was what his generals advised, but
with
the weather deteriorating (it was mid-November) and the enemy sure
to harass him, that would be costly, too. And retreat would
mean that his
victory at Ulm had been wasted—a tremendous blow to the morale of his
men. That would virtually invite the Prussians
to join the war, and his
enemies the English, seeing him vulnerable, might go so far as to invade
France. Whatever path he
chose seemed to lead to disaster. For several days
he went into deep thought, ignoring his advisers and poring over maps.
A rapid, powerful transition to the attack— the glinting sword of vengeance
—is the most brilliant moment of the defense.
CARL VON CLAUSEWITZ, 1780–1831
Meanwhile, at Olmütz, the Austrian and Russian leaders—among them
the Austrian Emperor Francis I and the young czar Alexander
I— watched
Napoleon’s moves with intense curiosity and excitement. They had him
where they wanted him; surely they would be
able to recoup the disaster at
Ulm and then some.
On November 25, alliance scouts reported that Napoleon had moved a
large part of his army to Austerlitz, halfway between Vienna
and Olmütz.
There it looked as if his forces were occupying the Pratzen Heights, a
position that would indicate preparation
for battle. But Napoleon had only
some 50,000 men with him; he was outnumbered nearly two to one. How
could he hope to face
the allies? Even so, on November 27, Francis I
offered him an armistice. Napoleon was formidable, and even at those odds,
fighting him was a risk. In truth, Francis was also trying to buy enough time
to envelop the French army completely, but none
of the alliance generals
thought Napoleon would fall for that trick.
To their surprise, however, Napoleon seemed eager to come to terms.
Suddenly the czar and his generals had a new thought:
he was panicking,
grasping at straws. That suspicion seemed borne out almost immediately,
when, on November 29, Napoleon abandoned
the Pratzen Heights almost as
soon as he had taken them, assuming a position to their west and repeatedly
repositioning his
cavalry. He appeared utterly confused. The next day he
asked for a meeting with the czar himself. Instead the czar sent an
emissary,
who reported back that Napoleon had been unable to disguise his fear and
doubt. He had seemed on edge, emotional,
even distraught. The emissary’s
conditions for armistice had been harsh, and although Napoleon had not
agreed to them, he
had listened quietly, seeming chastened, even
intimidated. This was music to the ears of the young czar, who was burning
for
his first engagement with Napoleon. He was tired of waiting.
By abandoning the Pratzen Heights, Napoleon seemed to have put
himself in a vulnerable position: his southern lines were weak,
and his route
of retreat, southwest toward Vienna, was exposed. An allied army could
take the Pratzen Heights, pivot south
to break through that weak point in his
lines and cut off his retreat, then move back north to surround his army and
destroy
him. Why wait? A better chance would never come. Czar
Alexander and his younger gen- erals prevailed over the hesitant Austrian
emperor and launched the attack.
A sudden inspiration then came to William [at the Battle of Hastings, A.D.
1066], suggested by the disaster which had befallen the English right in the
first conflict. He determined to try the expedient
of a feigned flight, a
stratagem not unknown to Bretons and Normans of earlier ages. By his
orders a considerable portion
of the assailants suddenly wheeled about and
retired in seeming disorder. The English thought, with more excuse on this
occasion
than on the last, that the enemy was indeed routed, and for the
second time a great body of them broke the line and rushed
after the
retreating squadrons. When they were well on their way down the slope,
William repeated his former procedure. The
intact portion of his host fell
upon the flanks of the pursuers, while those who had simulated flight faced
about and attacked
them in front. The result was again a foregone
conclusion: the disordered men of the fyrd were hewn to pieces, and few or
none of them escaped back to their comrades on the height.
HISTORY OF THE ART OF WAR IN THE MIDDLE AGES, SIR CHARLES
OMAN, 1898
It began early on the morning of December 2. While two smaller
divisions faced off against the French from the north, pinning
them down, a
stream of Russian and Austrian soldiers moved toward the Pratzen Heights,
took them, then wheeled to the south,
aiming at the French weak point.
Although they met resistance from the outnumbered enemy, they quickly
broke through and were
soon able to take the key positions that would allow
them to turn north and surround Napoleon. But at 9:00 A.M., as the last
alliance troops (some 60,000 men in all) made their way to the heights and
headed south, word reached the allied commanders
that something
unexpected was afoot: a large French force, invisible to them beyond the
Pratzen Heights, was suddenly heading
due east, straight for the town of
Pratzen itself and the center of the allied lines.
Kutusov saw the danger: the allies had advanced so many men into the
gap in the French lines that they had left their own
center exposed. He tried
to turn back the last troops heading south, but it was too late. By 11:00
A.M. the French had retaken
the heights. Worse, French troops had come up
from the southwest to reinforce the southern position and prevent the allies
from surrounding the French. Everything had turned around. Through the
town of Pratzen, the French were now pouring through
the allied center and
were swiftly moving to cut off the retreat of the allied troops to their south.
Each part of the allied army—north, center, and south—was now
effectively isolated from the others. The Russians in the southernmost
position tried to retreat farther to the south, but thousands of them lost their
lives in the frozen lakes and marshes in
their path. By 5:00 P.M. the rout
was complete, and a truce was called. The Austro-Russian army had
suffered terrible casualties,
far more than the French. The defeat was so
great that the alliance collapsed; the campaign was over. Somehow
Napoleon had
snatched victory from defeat. Austerlitz was the greatest
triumph of his career.
Interpretation
In the crisis leading up to the Battle of Austerlitz, Napoleon’s advisers and
marshals had thought only of retreat. Sometimes
it is better, they believed,
to accept a setback willingly and go on the defensive. On the other side
stood the czar and his
allies, who had Napoleon weak. Whether they waited
to envelop him or attacked right away, they were on the offensive.
In the middle was Napoleon, who, as a strategist, stood far above both his
own advisers and marshals, on the one hand, and
the czar and alliance
generals on the other. His superiority lay in the fluidity of his thinking: he
did not conceive war
in mutually exclusive terms of defense and offense. In
his mind they were inextricably linked: a defensive position was the
perfect
way to disguise an offensive maneuver, a counterattack; an offensive
maneuver was often the best way to defend a weak
position. What
Napoleon orchestrated at Austerlitz was neither retreat nor attack but
something far more subtle and creative:
he fused defense and offense to set
up the perfect trap.
When the enemy finds itself in a predicament and wants to engage us in a
decisive battle, wait; when it is advantageous for
the enemy but not for us to
fight, wait; when it is expedient to remain still and whoever moves first will
fall into danger,
wait; when two enemies are engaged in a fight that will
result in defeat or injury, wait; when the enemy forces, though numerous,
suffer from mistrust and tend to plot against one another, wait; when the
enemy commander, though wise, is handicapped by
some of his cohorts,
wait.
THE WILES OF WAR: 36 MILITARY STRATEGIES FROM ANCIENT
CHINA, TRANSLATED BY SUN HAICHEN, 1991
First, having taken Vienna, Napoleon advanced to Austerlitz, apparently
taking the offensive. That startled the Austrians
and Russians, even though
they still heavily outnumbered him. Next he backed off and took a
defensive position; then he seemed
to switch between offense and defense,
giving every appearance of confusion. In his meeting with the czar’s
emissary, he seemed
confused personally as well as strategically. It was all
high drama, staged by Napoleon to make him look weak and vulnerable,
inviting attack.
These maneuvers fooled the allies into giving up prudence, striking out at
Napoleon with total abandon and exposing themselves
in the process. Their
defensive position at Olmütz was so strong and dominant that only leaving
it would ruin it, and that
was precisely what Napoleon lured them into
doing. Then, instead of defending himself against their rash attack, he
suddenly
switched to the offensive himself, the counterattack. In doing so
he altered the dynamic of the battle not only physically
but psychologically:
when an attacking army suddenly has to go on the defensive, its spirit
crumbles. And indeed the alliance
troops panicked, retreating to the frozen
lakes that Napoleon had intended as their graveyard all along.
Most of us only know how to play either offensively or defensively.
Either we go into attack mode, charging our targets in
a desperate push to
get what we want, or we try frantically to avoid conflict and, if it is forced
on us, to ward off our
enemies as best we can. Neither approach works
when it excludes the other. Making offense our rule, we create enemies and
risk acting rashly and losing control of our own behavior, but constant
defensiveness backs us into a corner, becomes a bad
habit. In either case we
are predictable.
Instead consider a third option, the Napoleonic way. At times you seem
vulnerable and defensive, getting your opponents to
disregard you as a
threat, to lower their guard. When the moment is right and you sense an
opening, you switch to the attack.
Make your aggression controlled and
your weakness a ploy to disguise your intentions. In a dangerous moment,
when those around
you see only doom and the need to retreat, that is when
you smell an opportunity. By playing weak you can seduce your aggressive
enemies to come at you full throttle. Then catch them off guard by
switching to the offense when they least expect it. Mixing
offense and
defense in this fluid fashion, you will stay one step ahead of your inflexible
opponents. The best blows are the
ones they never see coming.
However desperate the situation and circumstances, don’t despair. When
there is everything to fear, be unafraid. When surrounded by dangers, fear
none of them. When without resources, depend
on resourcefulness. When
surprised, take the enemy itself by surprise.
—Sun-tzu, The Art of War (fourth century B.C.)
These two main principles of application are specifically related to the
tactical value assigned to the personality of the
opponent in combat.
According to the unilateral principle of application, the personality of the
opponent was considered the
primary target of an attack or counterattack,
for the purpose of either total or partial subjugation. According to the
bilateral
principle of application, on the other hand, the opponent’s
personality was viewed not merely as a target, but also (and by
certain
bujutsu masters, primarily) as an instrument—that is, as the unwilling but
nevertheless useful vector of his own subjugation.
. . . . . . It is the principle
of bilateral application which seems to represent a tactical differentiation
between Japanese bujutsu
and the martial arts of the West. Lafcadio Hearn,
for example, considered this principle “a uniquely Oriental idea,” asking,
“What Western brain could have elaborated this strange teaching: never to
oppose force to force, but only to direct and utilize
the power of attack; to
overthrow the enemy solely by his own strength—to vanquish him solely by
his own efforts?” (Smith, 128) . . . Takuan, writing about the art of
swordsmanship in particular, refers to the strategic value of the bilateral
principle in the strategy of counterattack against an opponent, when he
advised his pupil to “make
use of his attack by turning it on to himself.
Then, his sword meant to kill you becomes your own and the weapon will
fall
on the opponent himself. In Zen this is known as ‘seizing the enemy’s
spear and using it as the weapon to kill him’ ” (Suzuki, 96) The ancient
schools of jujutsu were very empathetic on this subject. . . . Jujutsu (literally
“soft art”), as
its name implies, is based upon the principle of opposing
softness or elasticity to hardness or stiffness. Its secret lies in keeping one’s
body full of ki, with elasticity in one’s limbs, and in being ever on the alert
to turn the strength of one’s foe to one’s own advantage
with the minimum
employment of one’s own muscular force.
SECRETS OF THE SAMURAI, OSCAR RATTI AND ADELE
WESTBROOK, 1973
JUJITSU
In 1920 the Democratic Party nominated Ohio governor James Cox as its
candidate to succeed the retiring President Woodrow
Wilson. At the same
time, it named thirty-eight-year-old Franklin Delano Roosevelt as its vice
presidential nominee. Roosevelt
had served as the assistant secretary of the
navy under Wilson; more important, he was the cousin of Theodore
Roosevelt, still
very popular after his presidency in the first decade of the
century.
The Republican nominee was Warren G. Harding, and the campaign was
a grueling affair. The Republicans had a lot of money;
they avoided talking
about the issues and played up Harding’s folksy image. Cox and Roosevelt
responded to the Republicans
by going on a vigorous offensive, basing their
campaign on a single issue of Wilson’s: American participation in the
League
of Nations, which they hoped would bring peace and prosperity.
Roosevelt campaigned all over the country, delivering speech
after speech
—the idea was to counter the Republicans’ money with sheer effort. But the
race was a disaster: Harding won the
presidency in one of the biggest
landslides in American electoral history.
The following year, Roosevelt was stricken with polio and lost the use of
his legs. Coming just after the disastrous 1920
campaign, his illness marked
a turning point in his life: suddenly made aware of his physical fragility and
mortality, he
retreated into himself and reassessed. The world of politics
was vicious and violent. To win an election, people would do
anything,
stooping to all kinds of personal attacks. The public official moving in this
world was under pressure to be as
unscrupulous as everyone else and
survive as best he could—but that approach did not suit Roosevelt
personally and took too
much out of him physically. He decided to craft a
different political style, one that would separate him from the crowd and
give him a constant advantage.
In 1932, after a stint as governor of New York, Roosevelt ran as the
Democratic presidential nominee against the Republican
incumbent,
Herbert Hoover. The country was in the midst of the Depression, and
Hoover seemed incapable of dealing with it.
Given the weakness of his
record, a defensive hand was a difficult one for him to play, and, like the
Democrats in 1920, he
went vigorously on the offensive, attacking
Roosevelt as a socialist. Roosevelt in turn traveled the country, speaking on
his ideas for getting America out of the Depression. He didn’t give many
specifics, nor did he respond to Hoover’s attacks
directly—but he radiated
confidence and ability. Hoover meanwhile seemed shrill and aggressive.
The Depression would probably
have doomed him to defeat whatever he
did, but he lost far bigger than expected: the size of Roosevelt’s victory—
nearly an
electoral sweep—surprised one and all.
In the weeks following the election, Roosevelt essentially hid from public
view. Slowly his enemies on the right began to
use his absence to attack
him, circulating speculation that he was unprepared for the challenge of the
job. The criticisms
became pointed and aggressive. At his inauguration,
however, Roosevelt gave a rousing speech, and in his first months in office,
now known as the “Hundred Days,” he switched from the appearance of
inactivity to a powerful offensive, hurrying through legislation
that made
the country feel as if something were finally being done. The sniping died.
Over the next few years, this pattern repeatedly recurred. Roosevelt
would face resistance: The Supreme Court, say, would
overturn his
programs, and enemies on all sides (Senator Huey Long and labor leader
John L. Lewis on the left, Father Charles
Coughlin and wealthy
businessmen on the right) would launch hostile campaigns in the press.
Roosevelt would retreat, ceding
the spotlight. In his absence the attacks
would seem to pick up steam, and his advisers would panic—but Roosevelt
was just
biding his time. Eventually, he knew, people would tire of these
endless attacks and accusations, particularly because, by
refusing to reply to
them, he made them inevitably one-sided. Then—usually a month or two
before election time—he would go
on the offensive, defending his record
and attacking his opponents suddenly and vigorously enough to catch them
all off guard.
The timing would also jolt the public, winning him their
attention.
In the periods when Roosevelt was silent, his opponents’ attacks would
grow, and grow more shrill—but that only gave him material
he could use
later, taking advantage of their hysteria to make them ridiculous. The most
famous example of this came in 1944,
when that year’s Republican
presidential nominee, Thomas Dewey, launched a series of personal attacks
on Roosevelt, questioning
the activities of his wife, his sons, and even his
dog, the Scotch terrier Fala, whom Dewey accused of being pampered at
the
taxpayers’ expense. Roosevelt countered in a campaign speech,
Devastatingly funny, the speech was also ruthlessly effective.
And how
could his opponents reply to it when it quoted their own words right back at
them? Year after year Roosevelt’s opponents
exhausted themselves
attacking him, scoring points at moments when it didn’t matter and losing
one landslide election after
another to him.
The Republican leaders have not been content to make personal
attacks upon me—or my sons—they now include my little dog,
Fala.
Unlike the members of my family, Fala resents this. When
he learned that the Republican fiction writers had concocted a
story
that I left him behind on an Aleutian island and had sent a
destroyer back to find him—at a cost to the taxpayer of 2 or 3,
or 8 or 20 million dollars—his Scotch soul was furious. He has
not been the same dog since. I am accustomed to hearing
malicious
falsehoods about myself, but I think I have the right
to object to libelous statements about my dog.
To undertake the military operations, the army must prefer stillness to
movement. It reveals no shape when still but exposes
its shape in movement.
When a rash movement leads to exposure of the shape of the army, it will
fall victim to the enemy. But for movement, the
tiger and leopard will not
fall into trap, the deer will not run into snare, the birds will not be stuck by
net, and the fish
and turtles will not be caught by hooks. All these animals
become prey to man because of their movement. Therefore the wise
man
treasures stillness. By keeping still, he can dispel temerity and cope with the
temerarious enemy. When the enemy exposes a vulnerable shape, seize the
chance to subdue it. The Book of Master Weiliao observes, “The army
achieves victory by stillness.” Indeed, the army should not move without
careful thought, much less take
reckless action.
THE WILES OF WAR: 36 MILITARY STRATEGIES FROM ANCIENT
CHINA, TRANSLATED BY SUN HAICHEN, 1991
Interpretation
Roosevelt could not bear to feel cornered, to have no options. This was
partly because of his flexible nature; he preferred
to bend to circumstances,
changing direction effortlessly as needed. It also came out of his physical
limitations—he hated
to feel hemmed in and helpless. Early on, when
Roosevelt campaigned in the usual aggressive way of American politics,
arguing
his case and attacking his opponents, he felt hopelessly constricted.
Through experiment he learned the power of holding back.
Now he let his
opponents make the first move: whether by attacking him or by detailing
their own positions, they would expose
themselves, giving him openings to
use their own words against them later on. By staying silent under their
attacks, he would
goad them into going too far (nothing is more infuriating
than engaging with someone and getting no response) and ending up
shrill
and irrational, which played badly with the public. Once their own
aggression had made them vulnerable, Roosevelt would
come in for the kill.
Roosevelt’s style can be likened to jujitsu, the Japanese art of self-
defense. In jujitsu a fighter baits opponents by staying
calm and patient,
getting them to make the first aggressive move. As they come at the fighter
and either strike at him or
grab hold of him—either push or pull—the
fighter moves with them, using their strength against them. As he deftly
steps forward
or back at the right moment, the force of their own
momentum throws them off balance: often they actually fall, and even if
they don’t, they leave themselves vulnerable to a counterblow. Their
aggression becomes their weakness, for it commits them
to an obvious
attack, exposing their strategy and making it hard for them to stop.
In politics, jujitsu style yields endless benefits. It gives you the ability to
fight without seeming aggressive. It saves
energy, for your opponents tire
while you stay above the fray. And it widens your options, allowing you to
build on what they
give you.
Aggression is deceptive: it inherently hides weakness. Aggressors cannot
control their emotions. They cannot wait for the
right moment, cannot try
different approaches, cannot stop to think about how to take their enemies
by surprise. In that first
wave of aggression, they seem strong, but the
longer their attack goes on, the clearer their underlying weakness and
insecurity
become. It is easy to give in to impatience and make the first
move, but there is more strength in holding back, patiently
letting the other
person make the play. That inner strength will almost always prevail over
outward aggression.
Time is on your side. Make your counterattacks swift and sudden— like
the cat who creeps on padded paws to suddenly pounce
on its prey. Make
jujitsu your style in almost everything you do: it is your way of responding
to aggression in everyday life,
your way of facing circumstances. Let events
come to you, saving valuable time and energy for those brief moments
when you
blaze with the counterattack.
The soundest strategy in war is to postpone operations until the moral
disintegration of the enemy renders the delivery of
the mortal blow both
possible and easy.
—Vladimir Lenin (1870–1924)
THE HEFFALUMP TRAP
Piglet and Pooh have fallen into a Hole in the Floor of the Forest. They
have Agreed that it is Really a Heffalump Trap, which makes Piglet
Nervous. He imagines that a Heffalump has Landed
Close By: Heffalump
(gloatingly): “Ho-ho!” Piglet ( carelessly): “Tra-la-la, tra-la-la.” Heffalump
(surprised, and not quite so sure of himself): “Ho-ho!” Piglet (more
carelessly still): “Tiddle-um-tum, tiddle-um-tum.” Heffalump (beginning to
say Ho-ho and turning it awkwardly into a cough): “H’r’m! What’s all
this?” Piglet (surprised): “Hullo! This is a trap I’ve made, and I’m waiting
for a Heffalump to fall into it.” Heffalump (greatly disappointed): “Oh!”
(after a long silence): “Are you sure?” Piglet: “Yes.” Heffalump: “Oh!”
(nervously): “I— I thought it was a trap I’d made to catch Piglets.” Piglet
(surprised): “Oh, no!” Heffalump: “Oh!” (apologetically): “I— I must
have got it wrong, then.” Piglet: “I’m afraid so.” (politely): “I’m sorry.”
(he goes on humming.) Heffalump:“Well— well—I—well. I suppose I’d
better be getting back?” Piglet (looking up carelessly): “Must you? Well, if
you see Christopher Robin anywhere, you might tell him I want him.”
Heffalump (eager to please): “Certainly! Certainly!” (he hurries off.) Pooh
(who wasn’t going to be there, but we find we can’t do without him): “Oh
Piglet, how brave and clever you are!” Piglet (modestly): “Not at all,
Pooh.” (And then, when Christopher Robin comes, Pooh can tell him all
about it.)
THE HOUSE AT POOH CORNER, A. A. MILNE, 1928
KEYS TO WARFARE
Thousands of years ago, at the dawn of military history, various strategists
in different cultures noticed a peculiar phenomenon:
in battle, the side that
was on the defensive often won in the end. There seemed to be several
reasons for this. First, once
the aggressor went on the attack, he had no
more surprises in store—the defender could clearly see his strategy and take
protective
action. Second, if the defender could somehow turn back this
initial attack, the aggressor would be left in a weak position;
his army was
disorganized and exhausted. (It requires more energy to take land than to
hold it.) If the defenders could take
advantage of this weakness to deliver a
counterblow, they could often force the aggressor to retreat.
Based on these observations, the art of the counterattack was developed.
Its basic tenets were to let the enemy make the first
move, actively baiting
him into an aggressive attack that would expend his energy and unbalance
his lines, then taking advantage
of his weakness and disorganization. This
art was refined by theorists such as Sun-tzu and practiced to perfection by
leaders
like Philip of Macedon.
The counterattack is, in fact, the origin of modern strategy. The first real
example of an indirect approach to war, it represents
a major breakthrough
in thinking: instead of being brutal and direct, the counterattack is subtle
and deceptive, using the
enemy’s energy and aggression to bring about his
downfall. Although it is one of the oldest and most basic strategies in
warfare,
it remains in many ways the most effective and has proven highly
adaptable to modern conditions. It was the strategy of choice
of Napoleon
Bonaparte, T. E. Lawrence, Erwin Rommel, and Mao Tsetung.
The counterattack principle is infinitely applicable to any competitive
environment or form of conflict, since it is based
on certain truths of human
nature. We are inherently impatient creatures. We find it hard to wait; we
want our desires to
be satisfied as quickly as possible. This is a tremendous
weakness, for it means that in any given situation we often commit
ourselves without enough thought. In charging ahead we limit our options
and get ourselves into trouble. Patience, on the
other hand, particularly in
war, pays unlimited dividends: it allows us to sniff out opportunities, to
time a counterblow
that will catch the enemy by surprise. A person who can
lie back and wait for the right moment to take action will almost
always
have an advantage over those who give in to their natural impatience.
The first step in mastering the counterattack is to master yourself, and
particularly the tendency to grow emotional in conflict.
When the great
baseball player Ted Williams made the major leagues with the Boston Red
Sox, he took a look around. He was
now a member of an elite—the best
hitters in the country. They all had sharp vision, quick reflexes, and strong
arms, but
relatively few of them could control their impatience at the plate
—and pitchers preyed on that weakness, getting them to swing
on losing
pitches. Williams separated himself out, and made himself perhaps the
greatest pure hitter in baseball history,
by developing his patience and a
kind of hitter’s counterattack: he would wait, and keep waiting, for the best
pitch to swing
at. Good pitchers are masters at making a hitter feel
frustrated and emotional, but Williams would not be baited: whatever
they
did, he would wait for the pitch that was right for him. In fact, he turned the
situation around: given his ability to
wait, it was the pitcher, not Williams,
who would end up impatient and throwing the wrong pitch as a result.
Once you learn patience, your options suddenly expand. Instead of
wearing yourself out in little wars, you can save your energy
for the right
moment, take advantage of other people’s mistakes, and think clearly in
difficult situations. You will see opportunities
for counterattack where
others see only surrender or retreat.
The notion of “catching” (utsuraseru) applies to many things: yawning and
sleepiness, for example. Time can also be “catching.” In a large-scale
battle, when the
enemy is restless and trying to bring a quick conclusion to
the battle, pay no attention. Instead, try to pretend that you
are calm and
quiet with no urgent need to end the battle. The enemy will then be affected
by your calm and easy attitude and
become less alert. When this “catching”
occurs, quickly execute a strong attack to defeat the enemy. . . . There is
also a concept called “making one drunk,” which is similar to the notion of
“catching.” You can make your opponent
feel bored, carefree, or feeble
spirited. You should study these matters well.
THE BOOK OF FIVE RINGS, MIYAMOTO MUSASHI, 1584–1645
The key to the successful counterattack is staying calm while your
opponent gets frustrated and irritable. In sixteenth-century
Japan, there
emerged a novel way of fighting called Shinkage: the swordsman would
begin the fight by mirroring his opponent’s
every move, copying his every
footstep, every blink, every gesture, every twitch. This would drive the
enemy crazy, for he
would be unable to read the Shinkage samurai’s moves
or get any sense of what he was up to. At some point he would lose patience
and strike out, lowering his guard. The Shinkage samurai would inevitably
parry this attack and follow up with a fatal counterblow.
Shinkage samurai believed that the advantage in a life-and-death
swordfight lay not in aggression but in passivity. By mirroring
their
enemy’s moves, they could understand his strategy and thinking. By being
calm and observant—patient—they could detect
when their opponent had
decided to attack; the moment would register in his eyes or in a slight
movement of his hands. The
more irritated he became and the harder he
tried to hit the Shinkage fighter, the greater his imbalance and vulnerability.
Shinkage samurai were virtually unbeatable.
Mirroring people—giving back to them just what they give you—is a
powerful method of counterattack. In daily life, mirroring
and passivity can
charm people, flattering them into lowering their defenses and opening
themselves to attack. It can also
irritate and discomfit them. Their thoughts
become yours; you are feeding off them like a vampire, your passive front
disguising
the control you are exercising over their minds. Meanwhile you
are giving them nothing of yourself; they cannot see through
you. Your
counterattack will come as a complete surprise to them.
The other improvement was his father’s inspiration. Lyndon Johnson was
very dejected as he sat, on the day the Express poll appeared, in his
parents’ home in Johnson City after hours of campaigning, talking to his
parents, his brother, his Uncle
Tom, his cousin Ava Johnson Cox, and Ava’s
eight-year-old son, William, known as “Corky.” The leaders were almost all
against
him, he said; he had several large rallies scheduled, and he had not
been able to persuade a single prominent individual to
introduce him. So,
Ava recalls—in a recollection echoed by Lyndon’s brother— “his Daddy
said, ‘If you can’t use that route, why don’t you
go the other route?’ ”
“What other route?” Lyndon asked—and his Daddy mapped it out for him.
There was a tactic, Sam Johnson said, that could make the leaders’
opposition work for him, instead of against him. The same
tactic, Sam said,
could make the adverse newspaper polls work for him, instead of against
him. It could even make the youth issue work for him. If the leaders were
against him, he told his son, stop trying to conceal that fact; emphasize it—
in a dramatic fashion. If he was behind in the race, emphasize that— in a
dramatic fashion. If he was younger than the other candidates, emphasize
that. Lyndon asked his father what he meant, and his father told him. If no
leader would introduce Lyndon, Sam said, he should stop searching for
mediocre adults as substitutes, but instead should
be introduced by an
outstanding young child. And the child should introduce him not as an adult
would introduce him, but with
a poem, a very special poem. . . . And when
Lyndon asked who the child should be, Sam smiled, and pointed to Ava’s
son. In an area in which horsemanship was
one of the most esteemed
talents, Corky Cox was, at the age of eight, already well known for the feats
of riding and calf-roping
with which he had swept the children’s events in
recent rodeos; the best young cowboy in the Hill Country, people were
calling
him. “Corky can do it,” Sam said. All the next day, Sam trained him.
“He wanted Corky to really shout out ‘thousands,’ ” Ava recalls. “He
wanted him to smack down his hand every time he said that word. I can still
see Uncle Sam smacking down his
hand on the kitchen table to show Corky
how.” And that night, at a rally in Henly, in Hays County, Lyndon Johnson
told the
audience, “They say I’m a young candidate. Well, I’ve got a young
campaign manager, too,” and he called Corky to the podium, and Corky,
smacking down his hand, recited a stanza of Edgar A. Guest’s “It Couldn’t
Be Done”:
There are thousands to tell you it cannot be done, There are thousands to
prophesy failure; There are thousands to point out
to you one by one, The
dangers that wait to assail you. But just buckle in with a bit of a grin, Just
take off your coat and
go to it; Just start in to sing as you tackle the thing
That “cannot be done,” and you’ll do it.
THE PATH TO POWER: THE YEARS OF LYNDON JOHNSON, VOL. 1,
ROBERT A. CARO, 1990
The counterattack is a particularly effective strategy against what might
be called “the barbarian”—the man or woman who is
especially aggressive
by nature. Do not be intimidated by these types; they are in fact weak and
are easily swayed and deceived.
The trick is to goad them by playing weak
or stupid while dangling in front of them the prospect of easy gains.
During the era of the Warring States in ancient China, the state of Qi
found itself threatened by the powerful armies of the
state of Wei. The Qi
general consulted the famous strategist Sun Pin (a descendant of Sun-tzu
himself), who told him that
the Wei general looked down on the armies of
Qi, believing that their soldiers were cowards. That, said Sun Pin, was the
key
to victory. He proposed a plan: Enter Wei territory with a large army
and make thousands of campfires. The next day make half
that number of
campfires, and the day after that, half that number again. Putting his trust in
Sun Pin, the Qi general did
as he was told.
The Wei general, of course, was carefully monitoring the invasion, and he
noted the dwindling campfires. Given his predisposition
to see the Qi
soldiers as cowards, what could this mean but that they were defecting? He
would advance with his cavalry and
crush this weak army; his infantry
would follow, and they would march into Qi itself. Sun Pin, hearing of the
approaching
Wei cavalry and calculating how fast they were moving,
retreated and stationed the Qi army in a narrow pass in the mountains.
He
had a large tree cut down and stripped of its bark, then wrote on the bare
log, “The general of Wei will die at this tree.”
He set the log in the path of
the pursuing Wei army, then hid archers on both sides of the pass. In the
middle of the night,
the Wei general, at the head of his cavalry, reached the
place where the log blocked the road. Something was written on it;
he
ordered a torch lit to read it. The torchlight was the signal and the lure: the
Qi archers rained arrows on the trapped
Wei horsemen. The Wei general,
realizing he had been tricked, killed himself.
Sun Pin based his baiting of the Wei general on his knowledge of the
man’s personality, which was arrogant and violent. By
turning these
qualities to his advantage, encouraging his enemy’s greed and aggression,
Sun Pin could control the man’s mind.
You, too, should look for the
emotion that your enemies are least able to manage, then bring it to the
surface. With a little
work on your part, they will lay themselves open to
your counterattack.
In our own time, the family therapist Jay Haley has observed that for
many difficult people acting out is a strategy—a method
of control. They
give themselves the license to be impossible and neurotic. If you react by
getting angry and trying to make
them stop, you are doing just what they
want: they are engaging your emotions and dominating your attention. If,
on the other
hand, you simply let them run amok, you put them still more in
control. But Haley discovered that if you encourage their difficult
behavior,
agree with their paranoid ideas, and push them to go further, you turn the
dynamic around. This is not what they
want or expect; now they’re doing
what you want, which takes the fun out of it. It is the jujitsu strategy: you
are using their energy against them. In general, encouraging
people to
follow their natural direction, to give in to their greed or neuroses, will give
you more control over them than
active resistance will. Either they get
themselves into terrible trouble or they become hopelessly confused, all of
which
plays into your hands.
Whenever you find yourself on the defensive and in trouble, the greatest
danger is the impulse to overreact. You will often
exaggerate your enemy’s
strength, seeing yourself as weaker than is actually the case. A key principle
of counterattack is
never to see a situation as hopeless. No matter how
strong your enemies seem, they have vulnerabilities you can prey upon
and
use to develop a counterattack. Your own weakness can become a strength
if you play it right; with a little clever manipulation,
you can always turn
things around. That is how you must look at every apparent problem and
difficulty.
An enemy seems powerful because he has a particular strength or
advantage. Maybe it’s money and resources; maybe it’s the
size of his army
or of his territory; maybe, more subtly, it’s his moral standing and
reputation. Whatever his strength might
be, it is actually a potential
weakness, simply because he relies on it: neutralize it and he is vulnerable.
Your task is
to put him in a situation in which he cannot use his advantage.
In 480 B.C., when the Persian king Xerxes invaded Greece, he had a
huge advantage in the size of his army and particularly
his navy. But the
Athenian general Themistocles was able to turn that strength into weakness:
he lured the Persian fleet into
the narrow straits off the island of Salamis. In
these choppy, difficult waters, the very size of the fleet, its apparent
strength, became a nightmare: it was completely unable to maneuver. The
Greeks counterattacked and destroyed it, ending the
invasion.
If your opponent’s advantage comes from a superior style of fighting, the
best way to neutralize it is to learn from it, adapting
it to your own
purposes. In the nineteenth century, the Apaches of the American
Southwest were for many years able to torment
U.S. troops through
guerrilla-style tactics that were perfectly suited to the terrain. Nothing
seemed to work until General
George Crook hired disaffected Apaches to
teach him their way of fighting and serve as scouts. Adapting their style of
warfare,
Crook neutralized the Apaches’ strengths and finally defeated
them.
As you neutralize your enemy’s strengths, you must similarly reverse
your own weaknesses. If your forces are small, for example,
they are also
mobile; use that mobility to counterattack. Perhaps your reputation is lower
than your opponent’s; that just
means you have less to lose. Sling mud—
some of it will stick, and gradually your enemy will sink to your level.
Always find
ways to turn your weakness to advantage.
Difficulties with other people are inevitable; you must be willing to
defend yourself and sometimes to take the offensive.
The modern dilemma
is that taking the offensive is unacceptable today—attack and your
reputation will suffer, you will find
yourself politically isolated, and you
will create enemies and resistance. The counterattack is the answer. Let
your enemy
make the first move, then play the victim. Without overt
manipulation on your part, you can control your opponents’ minds.
Bait
them into a rash attack; when it ends up in disaster, they will have only
themselves to blame, and everyone around them
will blame them, too. You
win both the battle of appearances and the battle on the field. Very few
strategies offer such flexibility
and power.
Image: The Bull. It is large, its stare is intimidating, and its horns can
pierce your flesh. Attacking it and trying to escape
it are equally fatal.
Instead stand your ground and let the bull charge your cape, giving it
nothing to hit, making its horns
useless. Get it angry and irritated— the
harder and more furiously it charges, the faster it wears itself down. A
point will
come when you can turn the game around and go to work,
carving up the once fearsome beast.
Authority: The whole art of war consists in a well-reasoned and
extremely circumspect defensive, followed by a rapid and
audacious
attack. —Napoleon Bonaparte (1769–1821)
REVERSAL
The counterattack strategy cannot be applied in every situation: there will
always be times when it is better to initiate
the attack yourself, gaining
control by putting your opponents on the defensive before they have time to
think. Look at the
details of the situation. If the enemy is too smart to lose
patience and attack you, or if you have too much to lose by waiting,
go on
the offensive. It is also usually best to vary your methods, always having
more than one strategy to draw on. If your
enemies think you always wait to
counterattack, you have the perfect setup for moving first and surprising
them. So mix things
up. Watch the situation and make it impossible for your
opponents to predict what you will do.
Conditions are such that the hostile forces favored by the time are
advancing. In this case retreat is the right course, and
it is through retreat
that success is achieved. But success consists in being able to carry out the
retreat correctly. Retreat is not to be confused with flight. Flight means
saving oneself under any circumstances, whereas retreat is a sign of
strength. We must be careful not to miss
the right moment while we are in
full possession of power and position. Then we shall be able to interpret the
signs of the time before it is too late and to prepare for provisional retreat
instead
of being drawn into a desperate life-and-death struggle. Thus we do
not simply abandon the field to the opponent; we make it difficult for him to
advance by showing perseverance
in single acts of resistance. In this way
we prepare, while retreating, for the counter-movement. Understanding the
laws of a constructive retreat of this sort is not easy. The meaning that lies
hidden in such a time is important.
THE I CHING, CHINA, CIRCA EIGHTH CENTURY B.C.
10
CREATE A
THREATENING PRESENCE
DETERRENCE STRATEGIES
The best way to fight off aggressors is to keep them from
attacking you in the first place. To accomplish this you must
create
the impression of being more powerful than you are.
Build up a reputation: You’re a little crazy. Fighting you is not
worth it. You take your enemies with you when you lose. Create
this reputation and make it credible with
a few impressive—
impressively violent— acts. Uncertainty is sometimes better
than overt threat: if your opponents are never sure what
messing with you will cost, they will not want to find out. Play
on people’s natural
fears and anxieties to make them think
twice.
If your organization is small in numbers, then do what Gideon did: conceal
the members in the dark but raise a din and clamor that will make the
listener believe that your organization numbers
many more than it does. . . .
Always remember the first rule of power tactics: Power is not only what
you have but what the enemy thinks you have.
RULES FOR RADICALS, SAUL D. ALINSKY, 1972
REVERSE INTIMIDATION
Inevitably in life you will find yourself facing people who are more
aggressive than you are—crafty, ruthless people who are
determined to get
what they want. Fighting them head-on is generally foolish; fighting is what
they are good at, and they
are unscrupulous to boot. You will probably lose.
Trying to fend them off by giving them part of what they are after, or
otherwise
pleasing or appeasing them, is a recipe for disaster: you are only
showing your weakness, inviting more threats and attacks.
But giving in
completely, surrendering without a fight, hands them the easy victory they
crave and makes you resentful and
bitter. It can also become a bad habit, the
path of least resistance in dealing with difficult situations.
Instead of trying to avoid conflict or whining about the injustice of it all,
consider an option developed over the centuries
by military leaders and
strategists to deal with violent and acquisitive neighbors: reverse
intimidation. This art of deterrence
rests on three basic facts about war and
human nature: First, people are more likely to attack you if they see you as
weak
or vulnerable. Second, they cannot know for sure that you’re weak;
they depend on the signs you give out, through your behavior
both present
and past. Third, they are after easy victories, quick and bloodless. That is
why they prey on the vulnerable
and weak.
Deterrence is simply a matter of turning this dynamic around, altering
any perception of yourself as weak and naïve and sending
the message that
battle with you will not be as easy as they had thought. This is generally
done by taking some visible action
that will confuse aggressors and make
them think they have misread you: you may indeed be vulnerable, but they
are not sure.
You’re disguising your weakness and distracting them. Action
has much more credibility than mere threatening or fiery words;
hitting
back, for instance, even in some small, symbolic way, will show that you
mean what you say. With so many other people
around who are timid and
easy prey, the aggressor will most likely back off and move on to someone
else.
This form of defensive warfare is infinitely applicable to the battles of
daily life. Appeasing people can be as debilitating
as fighting them;
deterring them, scaring them out of attacking you or getting in your way,
will save you valuable energy
and resources. To deter aggressors you must
become adept at deception, manipulating appearances and their perceptions
of you—valuable
skills that can be applied to all aspects of daily warfare.
And finally, by practicing the art as needed, you will build for
yourself a
reputation as someone tough, someone worthy of respect and a little fear.
The passive–aggressive obstructionists
who try to undermine you covertly
will also think twice about taking you on.
The following are five basic methods of deterrence and reverse
intimidation. You can use them all in offensive warfare, but
they are
particularly effective in defense, for moments when you find yourself
vulnerable and under attack. They are culled
from the experiences and
writings of the greatest masters of the art.
Surprise with a bold maneuver. The best way to hide your weakness and
to bluff your enemies into giving up their attack is to take some unexpected,
bold,
risky action. Perhaps they had thought you were vulnerable, and now
you are acting as someone who is fearless and confident.
This will have two
positive effects: First, they will tend to think your move is backed up by
something real—they will not
imagine you could be foolish enough to do
something audacious just for effect. Second, they will start to see strengths
and
threats in you that they had not imagined.
A certain person said the following. There are two kinds of dispositions,
inward and outward, and a person who is lacking in one or the other is
worthless. It
is, for example, like the blade of a sword, which one should
sharpen well and then put in its scabbard, periodically taking
it out and
knitting one’s eyebrows as in an attack, wiping off the blade, and then
placing it in its scabbard again. If a
person has his sword out all the time,
he is habitually swinging a naked blade; people will not approach him and
he will have
no allies. If a sword is always sheathed, it will become rusty,
the blade will dull, and people will think as much of its
owner.
HAGAKURE: THE BOOK OF THE SAMURAI, YAMAMOTO
TSUNETOMO, 1659–1720
Reverse the threat. If your enemies see you as someone to be pushed
around, turn the tables with a sudden move, however small, designed to
scare
them. Threaten something they value. Hit them where you sense they
may be vulnerable, and make it hurt. If that infuriates them
and makes them
attack you, back off a moment and then hit them again when they’re not
expecting it. Show them you are not
afraid of them and that you are capable
of a ruthlessness they had not seen in you. You needn’t go too far; just
inflict a
little pain. Send a short, threatening message to indicate that you
are capable of a lot worse.
Seem unpredictable and irrational. In this instance you do something
suggesting a slightly suicidal streak, as if you felt you had nothing to lose.
You show
that you are ready to take your enemies down with you,
destroying their reputations in the process. (This is particularly
effective
with people who have a lot to lose themselves—powerful people with
sterling reputations.) To defeat you will be
costly and perhaps self-
destructive. This will make fighting you very unattractive. You are not
acting out emotionally; that
is a sign of weakness. You are simply hinting
that you are a little irrational and that your next move could be almost
anything.
Crazy opponents are terrifying—no one likes fighting people who
are unpredictable and have nothing to lose.
Play on people’s natural paranoia. Instead of threatening your opponents
openly, you take action that is indirect and designed to make them think.
This might
mean using a go-between to send them a message—to tell some
disturbing story about what you are capable of. Or maybe you
“inadvertently”
let them spy on you, only to hear something that should
give them cause for concern. Making your enemies think they have found
out you are plotting a countermove is more effective than telling them so
yourself; make a threat and you may have to live
up to it, but making them
think you are working treacherously against them is another story. The
more veiled menace and uncertainty
you generate, the more their
imaginations will run away with them and the more dangerous an attack on
you will seem.
Establish a frightening reputation. This reputation can be for any number
of things: being difficult, stubborn, violent, ruthlessly efficient. Build up
that
image over the years and people will back off from you, treating you
with respect and a little fear. Why obstruct or pick
an argument with
someone who has shown he will fight to the bitter end? Someone strategic
yet ruthless? To create this image,
you may every now and then have to
play a bit rough, but eventually it will become enough of a deterrent to
make those occasions
rare. It will be an offensive weapon, scaring people
into submission before they even meet you. In any event, you must build
your reputation carefully, allowing no inconsistencies. Any holes in this
kind of image will make it worthless.
Injuring all of a man’s ten fingers is not as effective as chopping off one.
—Mao Tse-tung (1893–1976)
Brinkmanship is . . . the deliberate creation of a recognizable risk, a risk
that one does not completely control. It is the tactic of deliberately
letting
the situation get somewhat out of hand, just because its being out of hand
may be intolerable to the other party and
force his accommodation. It
means harassing and intimidating an adversary by exposing him to a
shared risk, or deterring him
by showing that if he makes a contrary move
he may disturb us so that we slip over the brink whether we want to or not,
carrying
him with us.
THINKING STRATEGICALLY, AVINASH K. DIXIT AND BARRY J.
NALEBUFF, 1991
DETERRENCE AND REVERSE INTIMIDATION IN
PRACTICE
1. In March 1862, less than a year after the start of the American Civil War,
the Confederates’ situation looked bleak: they
had lost a series of important
battles, their generals were squabbling, morale was low, and recruits were
hard to find. Sensing
the South’s great weakness, a large Union army under
Major General George B. McClellan headed toward the Virginia coast,
planning
to march from there west to Richmond, the capital of the South.
There were enough Confederate troops in the area to hold off
McClellan’s
army for a month or two, but Southern spies reported that Union troops
stationed near Washington were about to
be transferred to the march on
Richmond. If these troops reached McClellan—and they were promised by
Abraham Lincoln himself—
Richmond would be doomed; and if Richmond
fell, the South would have to surrender.
The Confederate general Stonewall Jackson was based in Virginia’s
Shenandoah Valley at the head of 3,600 men, a ragtag group
of rebels he
had recruited and trained. His job was merely to defend the fertile valley
against a Union army in the area,
but as he pondered the developing
campaign against Richmond, he saw the possibility of something much
greater. Jackson had
been a classmate of McClellan’s at West Point and
knew that underneath his brash, talkative exterior he was basically timid,
overly anxious about his career and making any mistakes. McClellan had
90,000 men ready for the march on Richmond, almost
double the available
Confederate forces, but Jackson knew that this cautious man would wait to
fight until his army was overwhelming;
he wanted the extra troops that
Lincoln had promised him. Lincoln, however, would not release those
forces if he saw danger
elsewhere. The Shenandoah Valley was to the
southwest of Washington. If Jackson could possibly create enough
confusion as
to what was happening there, he could disrupt the Union plans
and perhaps save the South from disaster.
On March 22, Jackson’s spies reported that two-thirds of the Union army
stationed in the Shenandoah Valley, under General
Nathaniel Banks, was
heading east to join McClellan. Soon an army near Washington, led by
General Irvin McDowell, would move
toward Richmond as well. Jackson
wasted no time: he marched his men fast to the north to attack the Union
soldiers still in
the valley, near Kernstown. The battle was fierce, and at the
end of the day Jackson’s soldiers were forced to retreat. To
them the
engagement seemed to have been a defeat, even a disaster: outnumbered
nearly two to one, they had suffered terrible
casualties. But Jackson, always
a hard man to figure out, seemed oddly satisfied.
A few days later, Jackson received the news he had been waiting for:
Lincoln had ordered Banks’s army to return to the valley
and McDowell’s
army to stay where it was. The battle at Kernstown had gotten his attention
and made him worry—only a little,
but enough. Lincoln did not know what
Jackson was up to or how large his army was, but he wanted the
Shenandoah Valley pacified
no matter what. Only then would he release
Banks and McDowell. McClellan was forced to agree with that logic, and
although
he had the men to march on Richmond right away, he wanted to
wait for the reinforcements who would make the attack a sure
thing.
After Kernstown, Jackson retreated south, away from Banks, and lay low
for a few weeks. In early May, thinking that the Shenandoah
Valley had
been secured, Lincoln sent McDowell toward Richmond, and Banks
prepared to join him. Again Jackson was ready: he
marched his army in a
completely bizarre fashion, first to the east, toward McDowell, then back
west into the Valley. Not
even his own soldiers knew what he was doing.
Mystified by these strange maneuvers, Lincoln imagined—but wasn’t sure
—that
Jackson was marching to fight McDowell. Once again he halted
McDowell’s march south, kept half of Banks’s army in the valley,
and sent
the other half to help McDowell defend himself against Jackson.
Suddenly the Union’s plans, which had seemed so perfect, were in
disarray, its troops too scattered to support each other.
Now Jackson went in
for the kill: he linked up with other Confederate divisions in the area and,
on May 24, marched on the
Union army—now divided and dangerously
diminished—that remained in the valley. Jackson maneuvered onto its flank
and sent
it in headlong retreat north to the Potomac River. His pursuit of
this army sent a wave of panic through Washington: this
now dreaded
general, commanding forces that seemed to have doubled in size overnight,
was heading straight for the capital.
Secretary of War Edwin Stanton telegraphed Northern governors to alert
them to the threat and to muster troops for the city’s
defense.
Reinforcements quickly arrived to halt the Confederate advance.
Meanwhile Lincoln, determined to eliminate Jackson
once and for all,
ordered half of McDowell’s army west to join in the fight to destroy this
pest and the other half to return
to Washington to secure the capital.
McClellan could only agree.
One classic response to a particularly vicious beanball was exemplified by
a play Jackie Robinson made in the summer of 1953.
Sal Maglie of the New
York Giants was “Sal the Barber,” mostly because his high inside fast balls
“shaved” hitters’ chins.
Maglie was candid and friendly when he wasn’t
pitching. “You have to make the batter afraid of the ball or, anyway, aware
that he can get hurt,” Maglie told me matter-of-factly one afternoon over
drinks at his apartment in Riverdale. “A lot of pitchers think they do that by
throwing at a hitter when the count is two strikes and no balls. The trouble
there
is that the knockdown is expected. You don’t scare a guy by knocking
him down when he knows he’s going to be knocked down.” “Then when,
Sal?” I asked. “A good time is when the count is two and two. He’s looking
to swing. You knock him down then and he gets up shaking. Now
curve him
and you have your out. Of course, to do that you have to be able to get your
curve over the plate on a three-and-two
count. Not every pitcher can.”
Maglie could break three different curves over the plate, three and two. He
had particular success against such free-swinging sluggers as Roy
Campanella and Gil Hodges. But it is simplistic to say
Maglie intimidated
Campanella and Hodges. Rather, his unpredictable patterns disrupted their
timing and concentration. He
had less success with Pee Wee Reese and
Jackie Robinson, and one day in Ebbets Field, by throwing a shoulder-high
fast ball
behind Robinson, Maglie brought matters to detonation.The
knockdowns thrown at [Cookie] Lavagetto, the fatal pitch thrown at Ray
Chapman, roared toward the temple. A batter gets away from that pitch by
ducking
backward. (Chapman’s freeze reaction, though not unknown, is
rare.) Angered or frustrated by Robinson that afternoon in Brooklyn,
Maglie threw his best fast ball behind the hitter, shoulder
high. That was
and is dangerous and inexcusable. As a batter strides forward, he loses
height. Reflex makes him duck backward.
A batter’s head moves directly
into the path of the fast ball thrown behind him shoulder high. Robinson
started to duck into Maglie’s pitch and then his phenomenal reflexes
enabled him to stop, as it were, in mid-duck.
The ball sailed just behind the
back of Robinson’s neck. Robinson glared but did not lose his poise. Maglie
threw an outside curve, and Robinson bunted toward Whitey Lockman, the
Giant’s first baseman. By making Lockman field
the bunt, Robinson was
forcing Maglie to leave the pitcher’s mound and cover first. There he would
be in Robinson’s path, and Jack, going at full and full-muscled tilt, intended
to run over
Maglie, signing his name in spikes on the pitcher’s spine.
Saturnine, Faustian, brooding Sal Maglie refused to leave the mound.
At a
critical moment, the Barber lost his nerve. Davey Williams, the Giants’
second baseman, rushed over, and as he was reaching for Lockman’s throw,
Robinson crashed into
him, a knee catching Williams in the lower back.
Robinson’s knee was so swollen a day later that he could not play. Williams
never really recovered. He dropped out of the major leagues two seasons
later, at twenty-eight. . . . “Actually,” Robinson himself said a few days
later, “I’m sorry that Williams got hurt. But when Maglie threw behind me,
he
was starting a really dangerous business, and I was going to put a stop
to it before he hit Gil or Campy or Pee Wee in the
head. . . .” After that I
saw Maglie start eight games against the Dodgers, but I never saw him
throw another fast ball behind a hitter.
The grim, intimidating beanballer
had been intimidated himself, and by a bunt.
THE HEAD GAME, ROGER KAHN, 2000
Once again Jackson retreated, but by now his plan had worked to
perfection. In three months, with only 3,600 men, he had diverted
well over
60,000 Northern troops, bought the South enough time to coordinate the
defense of Richmond, and completely altered
the course of the war.
Interpretation
The story of Stonewall Jackson in the Shenandoah Valley illustrates a
simple truth: what matters in war, as in life generally,
is not necessarily how
many men you have or how well supplied you are but how your enemies
see you. If they think you are
weak and vulnerable, they act aggressively,
which in and of itself can put you in trouble. If they suddenly think you are
strong, or unpredictable, or have hidden resources, they back off and
reassess. Getting them to change their plans and treat
you more carefully
can by itself alter the war. In any struggle, some things will be outside your
control; you may not be
able to put together a large army or defend all your
weak points, but you can always affect people’s perceptions of you.
Jackson altered Union perceptions first by his bold attack on Kerns-town,
which made Lincoln and McClellan think he had more
troops than he did—
they could not imagine that anyone would be so stupid as to send only
3,600 men against a Union stronghold.
If Jackson was stronger than they
had imagined, that meant they needed more men in the Shenandoah Valley,
which cut into the
troops available for the march on Richmond. Next
Jackson began behaving unpredictably, creating the impression of having
not
only a large army but also some strange and worrying plan. Lincoln’s
and McClellan’s inability to figure out this plan stopped
them in their
tracks, making them divide their forces to take care of the possible dangers.
Finally Jackson attacked boldly
one more time. He did not have nearly
enough men to threaten Washington, but Lincoln could not be sure of that.
Like a conjuror,
Jackson created a bogeyman out of an army that in essence
was laughably small.
You must take control over people’s perceptions of you by playing with
appearances, mystifying and misleading them. Like Jackson,
it is best to
mix audacity with unpredictability and unorthodoxy and act boldly in
moments of weakness or danger. That will
distract people from any holes in
your armor, and they’ll be afraid there may be more to you than meets the
eye. Then, if
you make your behavior hard to read, you’ll only seem more
powerful, since actions that elude interpretation attract attention,
worry, and
a bit of awe. In this way you will throw people off balance and onto their
heels. Kept at a distance, they will
be unable to tell how far you are bluffing
them. Aggressors will back off. Appearance and perception—you are not
someone to
mess with—will become reality.
2. King Edward I of England was a fierce thirteenth-century warrior-king
who was determined to conquer all of the British Isles.
First he battered the
Welsh into submission; then he set his sights on Scotland, laying siege to
towns and castles and razing
to the ground the communities that dared to
resist him. He was even more brutal with the Scots who fought back,
including
the famous Sir William Wallace: he hunted them down and had
them publicly tortured and executed.
Only one Scottish lord eluded Edward: Robert the Bruce, Earl of Carrick
(1274–1329), who had somehow escaped to the remote
fastness of northern
Scotland. So Edward captured the rebel’s family and friends, killing the
men and imprisoning the women
in cages. Bruce remained defiant. In 1306
he had himself crowned Scotland’s king; whatever it took, he vowed to
revenge himself
on Edward and throw the English out of Scotland. Hearing
this, Edward became even more determined to capture this final piece
in his
Scottish wars, but in 1307 he died, before the job was done.
Edward’s son, now Edward II, did not share his father’s lust for war.
Edward I had left the island secure. The new king did
not have to worry
about Scotland; England was far wealthier, and its armies were well
equipped, well fed, well paid, and experienced.
In fact, their recent wars
had made them the most-feared fighters in Europe. At any moment Edward
II could field a great army
against the Scots, whose weapons and armor
were primitive. He felt confident that he could handle Robert the Bruce.
A few months into the reign of Edward II, Bruce managed to take some
Scottish castles held by the English and burn them to
the ground. When
Edward sent forces against him, Bruce refused to fight and fled with his
small army into the forest. Edward
sent more men to secure his remaining
strongholds in Scotland and exact revenge on Bruce, but now Scots soldiers
suddenly
began to raid England. Highly mobile, these pirates on horseback
devastated the northern English countryside, destroying crops
and livestock.
The English campaign in Scotland had become too costly, so it was called
off—but a few years later Edward tried
again.
This time an English army penetrated farther into Scotland, but again, in
response, Scottish raiders rode south into England,
wreaking still more
havoc on farms and property. And in Scotland itself Bruce’s army burned
their own countrymen’s crops,
leaving the English invaders nothing to eat.
As before, the English wore themselves out chasing Bruce, but to no avail
—the
Scots refused battle. Bivouacked in their camps, the English soldiers
would hear bagpipes and horns out in the dark at night,
making it
impossible to sleep. Hungry, tired, and irritated to no end, they soon
retreated back to northern England, only
to find their own land barren of
crops and cattle. Morale sank. No one wanted to fight in Scotland anymore.
Slowly one castle
after another fell back into Scottish hands.
In 1314 the Scots finally engaged in direct combat with the English, at
the Battle of Bannockburn, and defeated them. It was
a most humiliating
loss for Edward II, who swore to avenge it. In 1322 he decided to finish
Bruce off once and for good with
a vigorous campaign worthy of his father.
Organizing and personally leading the largest army yet to fight the
rebellious Scots,
Edward got as far as Edinburgh Castle. At one point he
sent foragers out to look for food in the countryside; they returned
with a
single decrepit bull and an empty wagon. Dysentery swept the English
troops. Edward was forced to retreat, and when
he reached northern
England, he saw that the Scots had once again razed the fields there, and
more thoroughly than ever. Hunger
and disease finished off the remnants of
his army. The campaign was such a disaster that a rebellion broke out
among Edward’s
lords: he fled but in 1327 was captured and killed.
The following year Edward’s son, Edward III, negotiated a peace with the
Scots, granting Scotland its independence and recognizing
Robert the Bruce
as its rightful king.
Another anecdote explaining iwao-no-mi concerns an accomplished
warrior who had reached the highest stage of the art of sword fighting.
Having been enlightened as to the true meaning of the art of sword fighting,
which should be based on the promotion of well-being
of people rather than
the destruction or killing of others, this great master was not interested in
fighting any longer. His ability in the art of sword fighting was absolutely
unquestionable; he was respected and feared by everyone. He walked
the
streets with a cane like a bored old man and yet wherever he went people
looked at him with intense fear and respect.
People were careful not to
anger him and the old man was nonchalant. This is akin to having a huge
rock hanging above a mountain
path. People are afraid of the rock, which
they believe may come down at any moment, and so they walk quietly and
carefully
under the rock. But the rock is actually very stable, being planted
in the ground so deeply that it will never fall down. But people do not know
it, and they continue to fear that it will fall down if they make any kind of
loud noise as they walk
under it. The rock just sits there completely
indifferent to its surroundings and people’s fear and awe.
A WAY TO VICTORY: THEANNOTATED BOOK OF FIVE RINGS,
TRANSLATED AND COMMENTARY BY HIDY OCHIAI, 2001
Interpretation
The English thought they could move on Scotland with impunity anytime
they wanted. The Scots were poorly equipped, and their
leadership was
bitterly divided: seeing such weakness, what could prevent English
conquest? Trying to stop what seemed inevitable,
Robert the Bruce evolved
a novel strategy. When the English attacked, he did not take them on
directly; he would have lost.
Instead he hit them indirectly but where it hurt,
doing exactly to the English what they were doing to him: ruining his
country.
He continued to play tit for tat until the English understood that
every time they attacked Scotland, they would get a bloody
nose in
exchange: they would lose valuable farmland, be harassed, fight in abysmal
conditions. They slowly lost their hunger
for the fight, then finally gave up.
The essence of this deterrence strategy is the following: when someone
attacks you or threatens you, you make it clear that
he will suffer in return.
He—or she—may be stronger, he may be able to win battles, but you will
make him pay for each victory.
Instead of taking him on directly, you hurt
something he values, something close to home. You make him understand
that every
time he bothers you he can expect damage, even if on a smaller
scale. The only way to make you stop attacking him in your
irritating
fashion is for him to stop attacking you. You are like a wasp on his skin:
most people leave wasps alone.
3. One morning in 1474, King Louis XI (1423–83)—France’s infamous
“Spider King,” so named because he always wove the most intricate
and
well-conceived plots against his enemies—went into a vehement rant
against the Duke of Milan. The courtiers present that
January day listened
in amazement as the normally composed and careful king spun out his
suspicions: although the duke’s father
had been a friend, the son could not
be trusted; he was working against France, breaking the treaty between the
two countries.
On and on the king went: perhaps he would have to take
action against the duke. Suddenly, to the courtiers’ dismay, a man
slipped
quietly out of the room. It was Christopher da Bollate, the Milanese
ambassador to France. Bollate had been received
graciously by the king
earlier that morning but then had retreated into the background; Louis must
have forgotten he was there.
The king’s diatribe could cause quite a
diplomatic mess.
Once, when a group of five or six pages were traveling to the capital
together in the same boat, it happened that their boat
struck a regular ship
late at night. Five or six seamen from the ship leapt aboard and loudly
demanded that the pages give
up their boat’s anchor, in accord with the
seaman’s code. Hearing this, the pages ran forward yelling, “The seaman’s
code is something for people like you! Do you think that we samurai
are
going to let you take equipment from a boat carrying warriors? We will cut
you down and throw you into the sea to the
last man!”With that, all the
seamen fled back to their own ship. At such a time, one must act like a
samurai. For trifling occasions it is better to accomplish things simply by
yelling. By making something more significant than it really
is and missing
one’s chance, an affair will not be brought to a close and there will be no
accomplishment at all.
HAGAKURE: THE BOOK OF THE SAMURAI, YAMAMOTO
TSUNETOMO, 1659–1720
Later that day Louis invited Bollate to his private rooms and, lounging on
his bed, began an apparently casual conversation.
Drifting into politics, he
described himself as a supporter of the Duke of Milan’s: he would do
anything, he said, to help
the duke expand his power. Then he asked, “Tell
me, Christopher, has it been reported to you what I said this morning in
council?
Tell me the truth—was it not some courtier who told you?” Bollate
confessed that he had actually been in the room during the
king’s tirade and
had heard the king’s words himself. He also protested that the Duke of
Milan was a loyal friend of France.
Louis replied that he had his doubts
about the duke and had cause to be angry— but then he immediately
changed the subject
to something pleasant, and Bollate eventually left.
The next day the king sent three councilors to visit Bollate. Was he
comfortable in his lodgings? Was he happy with his treatment
from the
king? Was there anything they could do to improve his stay at the French
court? They also wanted to know if he was
going to pass on the king’s
words to the duke. The king, they said, considered Bollate a friend, a
confidant; he had merely
been venting his emotions. It meant nothing.
Bollate should forget the whole thing.
Of course, none of these men—the councilors, the courtiers, Bollate—
knew that the king had done all this deliberately. Louis
was certain that the
perfidious ambassador—whom he hardly considered a friend, let alone a
confidant—would report what he
had said in detail to the duke. He knew
that the duke was treacherous, and this was precisely how Louis wanted to
send him
a warning. And it seemed the message got through: for the next
several years, the duke was an obedient ally.
Interpretation
The Spider King was a man who always plotted several moves in advance.
In this case he knew that if he spoke politely and
diplomatically to the
ambassador of his worries about the duke, his words would carry no weight
—they would seem like whining.
If he vented his anger directly to the
ambassador, on the other hand, he would look out of control. A direct thrust
is also
easily parried: the duke would just mouth reassurances, and the
treachery would go on. By transmitting his threat indirectly,
however, Louis
made it stick. That the duke was not meant to know he was angry made his
anger truly ominous: it meant he was
planning something and wanted to
keep the duke from suspecting it and knowing his true feelings. He
delivered his threat insidiously
to make the duke ponder his intentions and
to instill an uneasy fear.
When we are under attack, the temptation is to get emotional, to tell the
aggressors to stop, to make threats as to what we’ll
do if they keep going.
That puts us in a weak position: we’ve revealed both our fears and our
plans, and words rarely deter
aggressors. Sending them a message through a
third party or revealing it indirectly through action is much more effective.
That way you signal that you are already maneuvering against them. Keep
the threat veiled: if they can only glimpse what you
are up to, they will have
to imagine the rest. Making them see you as calculating and strategic will
have a chilling effect
on their desires to harm or attack you. It is not worth
the risk to find out what you may be up to.
It was thus that, during the 1930s, the diplomacy of Mussolini’s Italy was
greatly enhanced by a stance of restless bellicosity
and by a mirage of great
military strength: an army of “eight million bayonets,” whose parades were
dashing affairs of bersaglieri on the run and roaring motorized columns;
and an air force greatly respected, not least for its spectacular long-range
flights
to the North Pole and South America; and a navy that could acquire
many impressive ships because so little of its funding
was wasted on
gunnery trials and navigation. By a military policy in which stage
management dominated over the sordid needs
of war preparation,
Mussolini sacrificed real strength for the sake of hugely magnified images
of what little strength there
was—but the results of suasion that those
images evoked were very real: Britain and France were both successfully
dissuaded
from interfering with Italy’s conquest of Ethiopia, its intervention
in Spain, and the subjection of Albania; and none dared
oppose Italy’s
claim to be accepted as a Great Power, whose interests had to be
accommodated sometimes in tangible ways such
as the licenses obtained by
Italian banks in Bulgaria, Hungary, Romania, and Yugoslavia). Only
Mussolini’s last-minute decision to enter the war in June 1940— when his
own considerable prudence
was overcome by the irresistible temptation of
sharing in the spoils of the French collapse— brought years of successful
deception
(and self-deception) to an end.
STRATEGY: THE LOGIC OF WAR AND PEACE, EDWARD N.
LUTTWAK, 1987
4. In the early 1950s, John Boyd (1927–97) served with distinction as a
fighter pilot in the Korean War. By the middle of that
decade, he was the
most respected flight instructor at Nellis Air Force Base in Nevada; he was
virtually unbeatable in practice
dogfights, so good that he was asked to
rewrite the manual on fighter-pilot tactics. He had developed a style that
would demoralize
and terrorize, get inside the opponent’s head, disrupt his
ability to react. Boyd was clever and fearless. But none of his
training and
skill, none of his brushes with death as a pilot, prepared him for the
bloodless backstabbing, political maneuvering,
and indirect warfare of the
Pentagon, where he was assigned in 1966 to help design lightweight jet
fighters.
As Major Boyd quickly discovered, Pentagon bureaucrats were more
concerned with their careers than with national defense.
They were less
interested in developing the best new fighter than in satisfying contractors,
often buying their new technological
gear regardless of its suitability. Boyd,
as a pilot, had trained himself to see every situation as a kind of strategic
combat,
and in this instance he decided to transfer his skills and style of
warfare to the jungles of the Pentagon. He would intimidate,
discourage,
and outsmart his opponents.
Boyd believed that a streamlined jet fighter of the kind he was designing
could outperform any plane in the world. But contractors
hated his design,
because it was inexpensive—it did not highlight the technology they were
trying to peddle. Meanwhile Boyd’s
colleagues in the Pentagon had their
own pet projects. Competing for the same pot of money, they did
everything they could
to sabotage or transform his design.
Boyd developed a defense: Outwardly he looked a little dumb. He wore
shabby suits, smoked a nasty cigar, kept a wild look
in his eye. He seemed
to be just another emotional fighter pilot, promoted too fast and too soon.
But behind the scenes he
mastered every detail. He made sure he knew
more than his opponents: he could quote statistics, studies, and engineering
theories
to support his own project and poke holes through theirs.
Contractors would show up in meetings with glossy presentations
delivered
by their top engineers; they would make fantastic claims to dazzle the
generals. Boyd would listen politely, seem
impressed, and then suddenly,
without warning, he would go on the offensive— deflating their optimistic
claims, showing in
detail that the numbers did not add up, revealing the
hype and the fakery. The more they protested, the more vicious Boyd
got,
bit by bit tearing their project to shreds.
Blindsided by a man they had grossly underestimated, time and again the
contractors would leave these meetings vowing revenge.
But what could
they do? He had already shot down their numbers and turned their
proposals to mush. Caught in the act of oversell,
they had lost all credibility.
They would have to accept their defeat. Soon they learned to avoid Boyd:
instead of trying
to sabotage him, they hoped he would fail on his own.
In 1974, Boyd and his team had finished the design of a jet they had been
working on, and it seemed certain to be approved.
But part of Boyd’s
strategy had been to build up a network of allies in different parts of the
Pentagon, and these men told
him that there was a group of three-star
generals who hated the project and were planning his defeat. They would let
him brief
the various officials in the chain of command, all of whom would
give him their go-ahead; then there would be a final meeting
with the
generals, who would scuttle the project as they had planned to all along.
Having gotten that far, though, the project
would look as if it had been
given a fair hearing.
In addition to his network of allies, Boyd always tried to make sure he
had at least one powerful supporter. This was usually
easy to find: in a
political environment like the Pentagon, there was always some general or
other powerful official who was
disgusted with the system and was happy
to be Boyd’s secret protector. Now Boyd called on his most powerful ally,
Secretary
of Defense James Schlesinger, and won Schlesinger’s personal
approval for the project. Then, at the meeting with the generals,
whom he
could tell were inwardly gloating that they finally had him, Boyd
announced, “Gentlemen, I am authorized by the secretary
of defense to
inform you that this is not a decision brief. This briefing is for information
purposes only.” The project,
he said, had already been approved. He went
on to deliver his presentation, making it as long as possible—twisting the
knife
in their backs. He wanted them to feel humiliated and wary of
messing with him again.
As a fighter pilot, Boyd had trained himself to think several moves ahead
of his opponents, always aiming to surprise them
with some terrifying
maneuver. He incorporated this strategy into his bureaucratic battles. When
a general gave him some order
that was clearly designed to ruin the plans
for his lightweight jet, he would smile, nod, and say, “Sir, I’ll be happy to
follow that order. But I want you to put it in writing.” Generals liked to
issue commands verbally rather than putting them
on paper as a way to
cover themselves in case things went bad. Caught off guard, the general
would either have to drop the
order or deny the request to put it in writing—
which, if publicized, would make him look terrible. Either way he was
trapped.
After several years of dealing with Boyd, generals and their minions
learned to avoid him—and his foul cigars, his verbal
abuse, his knife-
twisting tactics—like the plague. Given this wide berth, he was able to push
his designs for the F-15 and
F-16 through the Pentagon’s almost impossible
process, leaving an enduring imprint on the air force by creating two of its
most famous and effective jet fighters.
Interpretation
Boyd realized early on that his project was unpopular at the Pentagon and
that he would meet opposition and obstruction up
and down the line. If he
tried to fight everyone, to take on every contractor and general, he would
exhaust himself and go
down in flames. Boyd was a strategist of the highest
order—his thinking would later have a major influence on Operation Desert
Storm—and a strategist never hits strength against strength; instead he
probes the enemy’s weaknesses. And a bureaucracy like
the Pentagon
inevitably has weaknesses, which Boyd knew how to locate.
The people in Boyd’s Pentagon wanted to fit in and be liked. They were
political people, careful about their reputations;
they were also very busy
and had little time to waste. Boyd’s strategy was simple: over the years he
would establish a reputation
for being difficult, even nasty. To get involved
with Boyd could mean an ugly public fight that would sully your reputation,
waste your time, and hurt you politically. In essence Boyd transformed
himself into a kind of porcupine. No animal wants to
take on a creature that
can do so much damage, no matter how small it is; even tigers will leave it
alone. And being left
alone gave Boyd staying power, allowing him to
survive long enough to shepherd the F-15 and F-16 through.
Reputation, Boyd knew, is key. Your own reputation may not be
intimidating; after all, we all have to fit in, play politics,
seem nice and
accommodating. Most often this works fine, but in moments of danger and
difficulty being seen as so nice will
work against you: it says that you can
be pushed around, discouraged, and obstructed. If you have never been
willing to fight
back before, no threatening gesture you make will be
credible. Understand: there is great value in letting people know that
when
necessary you can let go of your niceness and be downright difficult and
nasty. A few clear, violent demonstrations will
suffice. Once people see you
as a fighter, they will approach you with a little fear in their hearts. And as
Machiavelli said,
it is more useful to be feared than to be loved.
Image:
The Porcupine. It seems rather stupid and slow, easy prey, but when it is
threatened or attacked, its quills stand erect.
If touched, they come out
easily in your flesh, and trying to extract them makes their hooked ends go
deeper and deeper, causing
still more damage. Those who have fought
with a porcupine learn never to repeat the experience. Even without
fighting it,
most people know to avoid it and leave it in peace.
Authority: When opponents are unwilling to fight with you, it is
because they think it is contrary to their interests, or
because
you have misled them into thinking so. —Sun-tzu (fourth
century B.C.)
REVERSAL
The purpose of strategies of deterrence is to discourage attack, and a
threatening presence or action will usually do the
job. In some situations,
though, you can more safely achieve the same thing by doing the opposite:
play dumb and unassuming.
Seem inoffensive, or already defeated, and
people may leave you alone. A harmless front can buy you time: that is how
Claudius
survived the violent, treacherous world of Roman politics on his
way to becoming emperor—he seemed too innocuous to bother
with. This
strategy needs patience, though, and is not without risk: you are deliberately
making yourself the lamb among the
wolves.
In general, you have to keep your attempts at intimidation under control.
Be careful not to become intoxicated by the power
fear brings: use it as a
defense in times of danger, not as your offense of choice. In the long run,
frightening people creates
enemies, and if you fail to back up your tough
reputation with victories, you will lose credibility. If your opponent gets
angry enough to decide to play the same game back at you, you may also
escalate a squabble into a retaliatory war. Use this
strategy with caution.
11
TRADE SPACE FOR TIME
THE NONENGAGEMENT
STRATEGY
Retreat in the face of a strong enemy is a sign not of weakness
but of strength. By resisting the temptation to respond to
an
aggressor, you buy yourself valuable time—time to recover, to
think, to gain perspective. Let your enemies advance; time
is
more important than space. By refusing to fight, you infuriate
them and feed their arrogance. They will soon overextend
themselves and start making mistakes. Time will reveal them as
rash and you as wise. Sometimes you can accomplish most by
doing nothing.
RETREAT TO ADVANCE
In the early 1930s, Mao Tse-tung (1893–1976) was a rising star in the
Chinese Communist Party. A civil war had broken out
between the
Communists and the Nationalists; Mao led campaigns against the
Nationalists, using guerrilla tactics to beat them
time and again, despite
being greatly outnumbered. He also served as the chairman of the fledgling
Chinese Communist government,
and his provocative essays on strategy
and philosophy were widely read.
Then a power struggle broke out among the Communists: a group of
Soviet-educated intellectuals known as the 28 Bolsheviks
tried to gain
control of the party. They despised Mao, seeing his taste for guerrilla
warfare as a sign of timidity and weakness
and his advocacy of a peasant
revolution backward. Instead they advocated frontal warfare, fighting the
Nationalists directly
for control of key cities and regions, as the
Communists had done in Russia. Slowly the 28B isolated Mao and stripped
him
of both political and military power. In 1934 they put him under virtual
house arrest on a farm in Hunan.
Mao’s friends and comrades felt he had suffered a dizzying fall from
grace. But more troubling than the fall itself was his
apparent acceptance of
it: he did not rally supporters to fight back, he stopped publishing, he
effectively disappeared. Perhaps
the 28B had been right: Mao was a
coward.
That same year the Nationalists—led by General Chiang Kai-shek—
launched a new campaign to destroy the Communists. Their plan
was to
encircle the Red Army in its strongholds and kill every last soldier, and this
time they seemed likely to succeed.
The 28B fought back bravely, battling
to hold on to the few cities and regions under Communist control, but the
Nationalists
outnumbered them, were better equipped, and had German
military advisers to help them. The Nationalists took city after city
and
slowly surrounded the Communists.
Thousands deserted the Red Army, but finally its remaining soldiers—
around 100,000 of them—managed to break out of the Nationalist
encirclement and head northwest. Mao joined them in their flight. Only now
did he begin to speak up and question the 28B strategy.
They were
retreating in a straight line, he complained, making it easier for the
Nationalists to chase them, and they were
moving too slowly, carrying too
many documents, file cabinets, and other trappings from their old offices.
They were acting
as if the whole army were merely moving camp and
planning to keep fighting the Nationalists in the same way, fighting over
cities and land. Mao argued that this new march should not be a momentary
retreat to safer ground, but something larger. The
whole concept of the party
needed rethinking: instead of copying the Bolsheviks, they should create a
distinctly Chinese revolution
based on the peasantry, China’s single largest
population group. To accomplish this they needed time and freedom from
attack.
They should head southwest, to the farthest reaches of China, where
the enemy could not reach them.
Red Army officers began to listen to Mao: his guerrilla tactics had been
successful before, and the 28B strategy was clearly
failing. They slowly
adopted his ideas. They traveled more lightly; they moved only at night;
they feinted this way and that
to throw the Nationalists off their scent;
wherever they went, they conducted rallies to recruit peasants to their cause.
Somehow Mao had become the army’s de facto leader. Although
outnumbered a hundred to one, under his leadership the Red Army
managed to escape the Nationalists and, in October 1935, to arrive at the
remote reaches of Shan-hsi Province, where it would
finally be safe.
After crossing twenty-four rivers and eighteen mountain ranges and
having many near misses with disaster, the army came to
the end of its
“Long March.” It was radically reduced—it now numbered only 6,000 —
but a new kind of party had been forged,
the kind Mao had wanted all
along: a hard-core group of devoted followers who believed in a peasant
revolution and embraced
guerrilla warfare. Safe from attack in Shanhsi, this
purified party was slowly able first to recover, then to spread its gospel.
In
1949 the Communists finally defeated the Nationalists for good and exiled
them from mainland China.
Six in the fourth place means: The army retreats. No blame. In face of a
superior enemy, with whom it would be hopeless to engage in battle, an
orderly retreat is the only correct procedure,
because it will save the army
from defeat and disintegration. It is by no means a sign of courage or
strength to insist upon
engaging in a hopeless struggle regardless of
circumstances.
THE I CHING, CHINA, CIRCA EIGHTH CENTURY B.C.
Interpretation
Mao was born and raised on a farm, and Chinese farm life could be harsh.
A farmer had to be patient, bending with the seasons
and the capricious
climate. Thousands of years earlier, the Taoist religion had emerged from
this hard life. A key concept
in Taoism is that of wei wu— the idea of action
through inaction, of controlling a situation by not trying to control it, of
ruling by abdicating rule.
Wei wu involves the belief that by reacting and
fighting against circumstances, by constantly struggling in life, you actually
move
backward, creating more turbulence in your path and difficulties for
yourself. Sometimes it is best to lie low, to do nothing
but let the winter
pass. In such moments you can collect yourself and strengthen your
identity.
Growing up on a farm, Mao had internalized these ideas and applied
them constantly in politics and war. In moments of danger,
when his
enemies were stronger, he was not afraid to retreat, although he knew that
many would see this as a sign of weakness.
Time, he knew, would show up
the holes in his enemies’ strategy, and he would use that time to reflect on
himself and gain
perspective on the whole situation. He made his period of
retreat in Hunan not a negative humiliation but a positive strategy.
Similarly, he used the Long March to forge a new identity for the
Communist Party, creating a new kind of believer. Once his
winter had
passed, he reemerged—his enemies succumbing to their own weaknesses,
himself strengthened by a period of retreat.
War is deceptive: you may think that you are strong and that you are
making advances against an enemy, but time may show that
you were
actually marching into great danger. You can never really know, since our
immersion in the present deprives us of
true perspective. The best you can
do is to rid yourself of lazy, conventional patterns of thinking.
Advancing is not always good; retreating is not always weak. In fact, in
moments of danger or trouble, refusing to fight is
often the best strategy: by
disengaging from the enemy, you lose nothing that is valuable in the long
run and gain time to
turn inward, rethink your ideas, separate the true
believers from the hangers-on. Time becomes your ally. By doing nothing
outwardly, you gain inner strength, which will translate into tremendous
power later, when it is time to act.
Space I can recover. Time, never.
—Napoleon Bonaparte (1769–1821)
KEYS TO WARFARE
The problem we all face in strategy, and in life, is that each of us is unique
and has a unique personality. Our circumstances
are also unique; no
situation ever really repeats itself. But most often we are barely aware of
what makes us different—in
other words, of who we really are. Our ideas
come from books, teachers, all kinds of unseen influences. We respond to
events
routinely and mechanically instead of trying to understand their
differences. In our dealings with other people, too, we are
easily infected by
their tempo and mood. All this creates a kind of fog. We fail to see events
for what they are; we do not
know ourselves.
Your task as a strategist is simple: to see the differences between yourself
and other people, to understand yourself, your
side, and the enemy as well
as you can, to get more perspective on events, to know things for what they
are. In the hubbub
of daily life, this is not easy—in fact, the power to do it
can come only from knowing when and how to retreat. If you are
always
advancing, always attacking, always responding to people emotionally, you
have no time to gain perspective. Your strategies
will be weak and
mechanical, based on things that happened in the past or to someone else.
Like a monkey, you will imitate
instead of create. Retreating is something
you must do every now and then, to find yourself and detach yourself from
infecting
influences. And the best time to do this is in moments of difficulty
and danger.
Symbolically the retreat is religious, or mythological. It was only by
escaping into the desert that Moses and the Jews were
able to solidify their
identity and reemerge as a social and political force. Jesus spent his forty
days in the wilderness,
and Mohammed, too, fled Mecca at a time of great
peril for a period of retreat. He and just a handful of his most devoted
supporters used this period to deepen their bonds, to understand who they
were and what they stood for, to let time work its
good. Then this little band
of believers reemerged to conquer Mecca and the Arabian Peninsula and
later, after Mohammed’s
death, to defeat the Byzantines and the Persian
empire, spreading Islam over vast territories. Around the world every
mythology
has a hero who retreats, even to Hades itself in the case of
Odysseus, to find himself.
Opportunities are changing ceaselessly. Those who get there too early have
gone too far, while those who get there too late cannot catch up. As the sun
and moon
go through their courses, time does not go along with people.
Therefore, sages do not value huge jewels as much as they value
a little
time. Time is hard to find and easy to lose.
HUAINANZI, CHINA, SECOND CENTURY B.C.
If Moses had stayed and fought in Egypt, the Jews would be a footnote in
history. If Mohammed had taken on his enemies in
Mecca, he would have
been crushed and forgotten. When you fight someone more powerful than
you are, you lose more than your
possessions and position; you lose your
ability to think straight, to keep yourself separate and distinct. You become
infected
with the emotions and violence of the aggressor in ways you
cannot imagine. Better to flee and use the time your flight buys
to turn
inward. Let the enemy take land and advance; you will recover and turn the
tables when the time comes. The decision
to retreat shows not weakness but
strength. It is the height of strategic wisdom.
The essence of retreat is the refusal to engage the enemy in any way,
whether psychologically or physically. You may do this
defensively, to
protect yourself, but it can also be a positive strategy: by refusing to fight
aggressive enemies, you can
effectively infuriate and unbalance them.
During World War I, England and Germany fought a side war in East
Africa, where each of them had a colony. In 1915 the English
commander,
Lieutenant General Jan Smuts, moved against the much smaller German
army in German East Africa, led by Colonel
Paul von Lettow-Vorbeck.
Smuts was hoping for a quick win; as soon as he had finished off the
Germans, his troops could move
to more important theaters of war. But von
Lettow-Vorbeck refused to engage him and retreated south. Smuts marched
in pursuit.
Time and again Smuts thought he had von Lettow-Vorbeck cornered,
only to find that the German officer had moved on just hours
earlier. As if a
drawn by a magnet, Smuts followed von Lettow-Vorbeck across rivers,
mountains, and forests. Their supply
lines extended over hundreds of miles,
his soldiers were now vulnerable to small, harassing actions from the
Germans, which
destroyed their morale. Bogged down in pestilential
jungles, as time went by, Smuts’s army was decimated by hunger and
disease,
all without ever fighting a real battle. By the end of the war, von
Lettow-Vorbeck had managed to lead his enemy on a four-year
cat-and-
mouse chase that had completely tied up valuable English forces and
yielded them nothing in return.
Smuts was a persistent, thorough, aggressive leader who liked to defeat
his opponents through maneuver in the field. Von Lettow-Vorbeck
played
on this taste: he refused to engage Smuts in frontal battle but stayed
enticingly close, just beyond reach, holding
out the possibility of
engagement so as to keep the Englishmen pushing forward into the
wilderness. Infuriated to no end,
Smuts continued the chase. Von Lettow-
Vorbeck used Africa’s vast spaces and inhospitable climate to destroy the
English.
Most people respond to aggression by in some way getting involved with
it. It is almost impossible to hold back. By disengaging
completely and
retreating, you show great power and restraint. Your enemies are desperate
for you to react; retreat infuriates
and provokes them into further attack. So
keep retreating, exchanging space for time. Stay calm and balanced. Let
them take
the land they want; like the Germans, lure them into a void of
nonaction. They will start to overextend themselves and make
mistakes.
Time is on your side, for you are not wasting any of it in useless battles.
War is notoriously full of surprises, of unforeseen events that can slow
down and ruin even the best-laid plan. Carl von Clausewitz
called this
“friction.” War is a constant illustration of Murphy’s Law: if anything can
go wrong, it will. But when you retreat,
when you exchange space for time,
you are making Murphy’s Law work for you. So it was with von Lettow-
Vorbeck: he set up Smuts
as the victim of Murphy’s Law, giving him
enough time to make the worst come to pass.
During the Seven Years’ War (1756–63), Frederick the Great of Prussia
was faced with Austrian, French, and Russian armies
on every side, all
determined to carve him up. A strategist who usually favored aggressive
attack, Frederick this time went
on the defensive, crafting his maneuvers to
buy himself time and slip the net his enemies were trying to catch him in.
Year
after year he managed to avoid disaster, though barely. Then, suddenly,
Czarina Elizabeth of Russia died. She had hated Frederick
bitterly, but her
nephew and successor to the throne, Czar Peter III, was a perverse young
boy who had not liked his aunt
and who greatly admired Frederick the
Great. He not only pulled Russia out of the war, he allied himself with the
Prussians.
The Seven Years’ War was over; the miracle Frederick needed
had come to pass. Had he surrendered at his worst point or tried
to fight his
way out, he would have lost everything. Instead he maneuvered to create
time for Murphy’s Law to do its work
on his enemies.
War is a physical affair, which takes place somewhere specific: generals
depend on maps and plan strategies to be realized
in particular locations.
But time is just as important as space in strategic thought, and knowing how
to use time will make
you a superior strategist, giving an added dimension
to your attacks and defense. To do this you must stop thinking of time
as an
abstraction: in reality, beginning the minute you are born, time is all you
have. It is your only true commodity. People
can take away your
possessions, but—short of murder—not even the most powerful aggressors
can take time away from you unless
you let them. Even in prison your time
is your own, if you use it for your own purposes. To waste your time in
battles not
of your choosing is more than just a mistake, it is stupidity of the
highest order. Time lost can never be regained.
Image: The Desert Sands. In the desert there is nothing to feed on and
nothing to use for war: just sand and empty space.
Retreat to the desert
occasionally, to think and see with clarity. Time moves slowly there, which
is what you need. When under attack, fall back into the desert, luring your
enemies into a
place where they lose all sense of time and space and fall
under your control.
Authority: To remain disciplined and calm while waiting for
disorder to appear amongst the enemy is the art of self-
possession.
—Sun-tzu (fourth century B.C.)
REVERSAL
When enemies attack you in overwhelming force, instead of retreating you
may sometimes decide to engage them directly. You
are inviting
martyrdom, perhaps even hoping for it, but martyrdom, too, is a strategy,
and one of ancient standing: martyrdom
makes you a symbol, a rallying
point for the future. The strategy will succeed if you are important enough
—if your defeat
has symbolic meaning—but the circumstances must work
to highlight the rightness of your cause and the ugliness of the enemy’s.
Your sacrifice must also be unique; too many martyrs, spread over too much
time, will spoil the effect. In cases of extreme
weakness, when facing an
impossibly large enemy, martyrdom can be used to show that your side’s
fighting spirit has not been
extinguished, a useful way to keep up morale.
But, in general, martyrdom is a dangerous weapon and can backfire, for you
may
no longer be there to see it through, and its effects are too strong to be
controlled. It can also take centuries to work.
Even when it may prove
symbolically successful, a good strategist avoids it. Retreat is always the
better strategy.
Retreat must never be an end in itself; at some point you have to turn
around and fight. If you don’t, retreat is more accurately
called surrender:
the enemy wins. Combat is in the long run unavoidable. Retreat can only be
temporary.
PART
IV
OFFENSIVE
WARFARE
The greatest dangers in war, and in life, come from the unexpected: people
do not respond the way you had thought they would,
events mess up your
plans and produce confusion, circumstances are overwhelming. In strategy
this discrepancy between what
you want to happen and what does happen is
called “friction.” The idea behind conventional offensive warfare is simple:
by
attacking the other side first, hitting its points of vulnerability, and
seizing the initiative and never letting it go, you
create your own
circumstances. Before any friction can creep in and undermine your plans,
you move to the offensive, and your
relentless maneuvers force so much
friction on the enemy that he collapses.
This is the form of warfare practiced by the most successful captains in
history, and the secret to their success is a perfect
blend of strategic
cleverness and au- dacity. The strategic element comes in the planning:
setting an overall goal, crafting
ways to reach it, and thinking the whole
plan through in intense detail. This means thinking in terms of a campaign,
not individual
battles. It also means knowing the strengths and weaknesses
of the other side, so that you can calibrate your strikes to its
vulnerabilities.
The more detailed your planning, the more confident you will feel as you
go into battle, and the easier it
will be to stay on course once the inevitable
problems arise. In the attack itself, though, you must strike with such spirit
and audacity that you put your enemies on their heels, giving irresistible
momentum to your offensive.
The following eleven chapters will initiate you into this supreme form of
warfare. They will help you to put your desires
and goals into a larger
framework known as “grand strategy.” They will show you how to look at
your enemies and uncover their
secrets. They will describe how a solid base
of planning will give you fluid options for attack and how specific
maneuvers
(the flanking maneuver, the envelopment) and styles of attack
(hitting centers of gravity, forcing the enemy into positions
of great
weakness) that work brilliantly in war can be applied in life. Finally, they
will show you how to finish off your
campaign. Without a vigorous
conclusion that meets your overall goals, everything you have done will be
worthless. Mastering
the various components of offensive warfare will give
all of your attacks in life much greater force.
12
LOSE BATTLES
BUT WIN THE WAR
GRAND STRATEGY
Everyone around you is a strategist angling for power, all
trying to promote their own interests, often at your expense.
Your
daily battles with them make you lose sight of the only
thing that really matters: victory in the end, the achievement of
greater goals, lasting power. Grand strategy is the art of
looking beyond the battle and calculating ahead. It requires
that
you focus on your ultimate goal and plot to reach it. In
grand strategy you consider the political ramifications and
long-term
consequences of what you do. Instead of reacting
emotionally to people, you take control, and make your actions
more dimensional,
subtle, and effective. Let others get caught
up in the twists and turns of the battle, relishing their little
victories. Grand
strategy will bring you the ultimate reward:
the last laugh.
Readiness is everything. Resolution is indissolubly bound up with caution.
If an individual is careful and keeps his wits
about him, he need not become
excited or alarmed. If he is watchful at all times, even before danger is
present, he is armed
when danger approaches and need not be afraid. The
superior man is on his guard against what is not yet in sight and on the
alert for what is not yet within hearing; therefore he dwells in the midst of
difficulties as though they did not exist. .
. . If reason triumphs, the passions
withdraw of themselves.
THE I CHING, CHINA, CIRCA EIGHTH CENTURY B.C.
THE GREAT CAMPAIGN
Growing up at the Macedonian court, Alexander (356–322 B.C.) was
considered a rather strange young man. He enjoyed the usual
boyish
pursuits, such as horses and warfare; having fought alongside his father,
King Philip II, in several battles, he had
proved his bravery. But he also
loved philosophy and literature. His tutor was the great thinker Aristotle,
under whose influence
he loved to argue about politics and science, looking
at the world as dispassionately as possible. Then there was his mother,
Olympias: a mystical, superstitious woman, she had had visions at
Alexander’s birth that he would one day rule the known world.
She told him
about them and filled him with stories of Achilles, from whom her family
claimed descent. Alexander adored his
mother (while hating his father) and
took her prophecies most seriously. From early on in life, he carried himself
as if he
were more than the son of a king.
Alexander was raised to be Philip’s successor, and the state he was to
inherit had grown considerably during his father’s
reign. Over the years the
king had managed to build up the Macedonian army into the supreme force
in all Greece. He had defeated
Thebes and Athens and had united all the
Greek city-states (except Sparta) into a Hellenic league under his
leadership. He
was a crafty, intimidating ruler. Then, in 336 B.C., a
disgruntled nobleman assassinated him. Suddenly seeing Macedonia as
vulnerable, Athens declared its independence from the league. The other
city-states followed suit. Tribes from the north now
threatened to invade.
Almost overnight Philip’s small empire was unraveling.
When Alexander came to the throne, he was only twenty, and many
considered him unready. It was a bad time for learning on
the job; the
Macedonian generals and political leaders would have to take him under
their wing. They advised him to go slowly,
to consolidate his position in
both the army and Macedonia and then gradually reform the league through
force and guile. That
was what Philip would have done. But Alexander
would not listen; he had another plan, or so it seemed. Without giving his
enemies in and beyond Macedonia time to organize against him, he led the
army south and reconquered Thebes in a series of
lightning maneuvers.
Next he marched on the Athenians, who, fearing his retribution, begged
forgiveness and pleaded to be
readmitted to the league. Alexander granted
their wish.
The eccentric young prince had shown himself to be a bold and
unpredictable king—attacking when he was not meant to, yet showing
Athens unexpected mercy. He was hard to read, but his first maneuvers as
king had won him many admirers. His next move, however,
was still
stranger and more audacious: instead of working to consolidate his gains
and strengthen the fragile league, he proposed
to launch a crusade against
the Persian Empire, the Greeks’ great enemy. Some 150 years earlier, the
Persians had tried to
invade Greece. They had almost succeeded, and it
remained their dream to try it again and get it right. With Persia a constant
threat, the Greeks could never rest easy, and their maritime trade was
cramped by the power of the Persian navy.
In 334 B.C., Alexander led a united army of 35,000 Greeks across the
Dardanelle Straits and into Asia Minor, the westernmost
part of the Persian
Empire. In their first encounter with the enemy, at the Battle of the
Granicus, the Greeks routed the
Persians. Alexander’s generals could only
admire his boldness: he seemed poised to conquer Persia, fulfilling his
mother’s
prophecy in record time. He succeeded through speed and by
seizing the initiative. Now soldiers and generals alike expected
him to head
straight east into Persia to finish off the enemy army, which seemed
surprisingly weak.
THE FOX AND THE MONKEY ELECTED KING
The monkey, having danced in an assembly of the animals and earned their
approval, was elected by them to be king. The fox
was jealous. So, seeing a
piece of meat one day in a snare, he led the monkey to it, saying that he had
found a treasure.
But rather than take it for himself, he had kept guard over
it, as its possession was surely a prerogative of royalty. The
fox then urged
him to take it.
The monkey approached it, taking no care, and was caught in the trap.
When he accused the fox of luring him into a trap, the fox replied:
“Monkey, you want to reign over all the animals, but look what a fool you
are!” It is thus that those who throw themselves into an enterprise without
sufficient thought not only fail, but even become a
laughing stock.
FABLES, AESOP, SIXTH CENTURY B.C.
Once again Alexander confounded expectations, suddenly deciding to do
what he had never done before: take his time. That would
have seemed wise
when he first came to power, but now it seemed likely to give the Persians
the one thing they needed: time
to recover and replenish. Yet Alexander led
his army not east but south, down the coast of Asia Minor, freeing local
towns
from Persian rule. Next he zigzagged east and then south again,
through Phoenicia and into Egypt, quickly defeating the weak
Persian
garrison there. The Egyptians hated their Persian rulers and welcomed
Alexander as their liberator. Now Alexander
could use Egypt’s vast stores
of grain to feed the Greek army and help keep the Greek economy stable,
while depriving Persia
of valuable resources.
As the Greeks advanced farther from home, the Persian navy, which
could land an army almost anywhere in the Mediterranean
to attack them
from the rear or flank, was a worrying threat. Before Alexander set out on
his expedition, many had advised
him to build up the Greek navy and take
the battle to the Persians by sea as well as land. Alexander had ignored
them. Instead,
as he passed through Asia Minor and then along the coast of
Phoenicia, he simply captured Persia’s principal ports, rendering
their navy
useless.
These small victories, then, had a greater strategic purpose. Even so, they
would have meant little had the Greeks been unable
to defeat the Persians in
battle—and Alexander seemed to be making that victory more difficult. The
Persian king, Darius,
was concentrating his forces east of the Tigris River;
he had numbers and his choice of location and could wait in ease for
Alexander to cross the river. Had Alexander lost his taste for battle? Had
Persian and Egyptian culture softened him? It seemed
so: he had begun to
wear Persian clothes and to adopt Persian customs. He was even seen
worshipping Persian gods.
As the Persian army retreated east of the Tigris, large areas of the Persian
empire had come under Greek control. Now Alexander
spent much of his
time not on warfare but on politics, trying to see how best to govern these
regions. He decided to build
on the Persian system already in place, keeping
the same titles for jobs in the governmental bureaucracy, collecting the
same
tribute that Darius had done. He changed only the harsh, unpopular
aspects of Persian rule. Word quickly spread of his generosity
and
gentleness toward his new subjects. Town after town surrendered to the
Greeks without a fight, only too glad to be part
of Alexander’s growing
empire, which transcended Greece and Persia. He was the unifying factor,
the benevolent overseeing
god.
Finally, in 331 B.C., Alexander marched on the main Persian force at
Arbela. What his generals had not understood was that,
deprived of the use
of its navy, its rich lands in Egypt, and the support and tribute of almost all
of its subjects, the Persian
Empire had already crumbled. Alexander’s
victory at Arbela merely confirmed militarily what he had already achieved
months
earlier: he was now the ruler of the once mighty Persian Empire.
Fulfilling his mother’s prophecy, he controlled almost all
of the known
world.
Epistemologically speaking, the source of all erroneous views on war lies in
idealist and mechanistic tendencies. . . . People with such tendencies are
subjective and one-sided in their approach to problems. They indulge in
groundless
and purely subjective talk, basing themselves upon a single
aspect or temporary manifestation [and] magnify it with similar subjectivity
into the whole of the problem. . . . Only by opposing idealistic and
mechanistic tendencies
and taking an objective all-sided view in making a
study of war can we draw correct conclusions on the question of war.
SELECTED MILITARY WRITINGS, MAO TSE-TUNG, 1893–1976
Interpretation
Alexander the Great’s maneuvers bewildered his staff: they seemed to have
no logic, no consistency. Only later could the Greeks
look back and really
see his magnificent achievement. The reason they could not understand him
was that Alexander had invented
a whole new way of thinking and acting in
the world: the art of grand strategy.
In grand strategy you look beyond the moment, beyond your immediate
battles and concerns. You concentrate instead on what
you want to achieve
down the line. Controlling the temptation to react to events as they happen,
you determine each of your
actions according to your ultimate goals. You
think in terms not of individual battles but of a campaign.
Alexander owed his novel style of strategizing to his mother and to
Aristotle. His mother had given him a sense of destiny
and a goal: to rule
the known world. From the age of three, he could see in his mind’s eye the
role he would play when he
was thirty. From Aristotle he learned the power
of controlling his emotions, seeing things dispassionately, thinking ahead
to
the consequences of his actions.
Trace the zigzags of Alexander’s maneuvers and you will see their grand-
strategic consistency. His quick actions against first
Thebes, then Persia,
worked psychically on his soldiers and on his critics. Nothing quiets an
army faster than battle; Alexander’s
sudden crusade against the hated
Persians was the perfect way to unite the Greeks. Once he was in Persia,
though, speed was
the wrong tactic. Had Alexander advanced, he would
have found himself controlling too much land too quickly; running it would
have exhausted his resources, and in the ensuing power vacuum, enemies
would have sprung up everywhere. Better to proceed
slowly, to build on
what was there, to win hearts and minds. Instead of wasting money on
building a navy, better simply to
make the Persian navy unusable. To pay
for the kind of extended campaign that would bring long-term success, first
seize the
rich lands of Egypt. None of Alexander’s actions were wasted.
Those who saw his plans bear fruit, in ways they themselves
had been
entirely unable to predict, thought him a kind of god—and certainly his
control over events deep in the future seemed
more godlike than human.
To become a grand strategist in life, you must follow the path of
Alexander. First, clarify your life—decipher your own personal
riddle— by
determining what it is you are destined to achieve, the direction in which
your skills and talents seem to push
you. Visualize yourself fulfilling this
destiny in glorious detail. As Aristotle advised, work to master your
emotions and
train yourself to think ahead: “This action will advance me
toward my goal, this one will lead me nowhere.” Guided by these
standards,
you will be able to stay on course.
Ignore the conventional wisdom about what you should or should not be
doing. It may make sense for some, but that does not
mean it bears any
relation to your own goals and destiny. You need to be patient enough to
plot several steps ahead—to wage
a campaign instead of fighting battles.
The path to your goal may be indirect, your actions may be strange to other
people,
but so much the better: the less they understand you, the easier they
are to deceive, manipulate, and seduce. Following this
path, you will gain
the calm, Olympian perspective that will separate you from other mortals,
whether dreamers who get nothing
done or prosaic, practical people who
accomplish only small things.
What I particularly admire in Alexander is, not so much his campaigns . . .
but his political sense. He possessed the art of winning the affection of the
people.
—Napoleon Bonaparte (1769–1821)
There is, however, much difference between the East and the West in
cultural heritages, in values, and in ways of thinking.
In the Eastern way of
thinking, one starts with the whole, takes everything as a whole and
proceeds with a comprehensive and
intuitive synthesization [combinaton].
In the Western way of thinking, however, one starts with the parts, takes
[divides] a complex matter into component parts and then deals with them
one by one, with an emphasis on logical analysis. Accordingly, Western
traditional military thought advocates a direct military approach with a
stress on the use of armed
forces.
THE STRATEGICADVANTAGE: SUN ZI & WESTERN APPROACHES TO
WAR, CAO SHAN, ED., 1997
TOTAL WARFARE
In 1967 the leaders of the American war effort in Vietnam thought they
were finally making progress. They had launched a series
of operations to
search out and destroy the Vietcong—North Vietnamese soldiers who had
infiltrated South Vietnam and had come
to control much of its countryside.
These guerrilla fighters were elusive, but the Americans had inflicted heavy
losses on
them in the few battles they had managed to force on them that
year. The new South Vietnamese government, supported by the
Americans,
seemed relatively stable, which could help to win it approval among the
Vietnamese people. To the north, bombing
raids had knocked out many of
North Vietnam’s airfields and heavily damaged its air force. Although
massive antiwar demonstrations
had broken out in the United States, polls
showed that most Americans supported the war and believed that the end
was in sight.
Since the Vietcong and the North Vietnamese army had proved rather
ineffective in head-to-head battle against the might of
American firepower
and technology, the strategy was to somehow lure them into a major
engagement. That would be the turning
point of the war. And by the end of
1967, intelligence indicated that the North Vietnamese were about to fall
into just such
a trap: their commander, General Vo Nguyen Giap, was
planning a major offensive against the U.S. marine outpost at Khe Sanh.
Apparently he wanted to repeat his greatest success, the battle at Dien Bien
Phu in 1954, in which he had defeated the French
army, driving the French
out of Vietnam for good.
Khe Sanh was a key strategic outpost. It was located a mere fourteen
miles from the demilitarized zone that separated North
from South Vietnam.
It was also six miles from the border of Laos, site of a stretch of the famous
Ho Chi Minh Trail, the
North Vietnamese supply route to the Vietcong in
the South. General William C. Westmoreland, the overall U.S. commander,
was
using Khe Sanh to monitor enemy activity to the north and west. Dien
Bien Phu had served a similar role for the French, and
Giap had been able
to isolate and destroy it. Westmoreland would not allow Giap to repeat that
feat. He built well-protected
airstrips around Khe Sanh, ensuring full use of
his helicopters and control of the air. He called up substantial numbers of
troops from the south to the Khe Sanh area, just in case he needed them. He
also ordered 6,000 additional marines to reinforce
the outpost. But a major
attack on Khe Sanh was nothing he wanted to discourage: in frontal battle
the enemy would finally
expose itself to severe defeat.
In the first few weeks of 1968, all eyes were on Khe Sanh. The White
House and the U.S. media were certain that the decisive
battle of the war
was about to begin. Finally, at dawn on January 21, 1968, the North
Vietnamese army launched a vicious assault.
As both sides dug in, the battle
turned into a siege.
Soon after the engagement began, the Vietnamese were to celebrate their
lunar New Year, the holiday called Tet. It was a period
of revelry, and in
time of war it was also a traditional moment to declare a truce. This year
was no different; both sides
agreed to halt the fighting during Tet. Early on
the morning of January 31, however, the first day of the New Year, reports
began to trickle in from all over South Vietnam: virtually every major town
and city, as well as the most important American
bases, had come under
Vietcong attack. An army general, tracking the assault pattern on a map,
said it “resembled a pinball
machine, lighting up with each raid.”
Parts of Saigon itself had been overrun by enemy soldiers, some of whom
had managed to blow their way through the wall of
the U.S. embassy, the
very symbol of the American presence in Vietnam. Marines regained
control of the embassy in a bloody
fight, which was widely seen on
American television. The Vietcong also attacked the city’s radio station, the
presidential
palace, and Westmoreland’s own compound at the Tan Son
Nhut air base. The city quickly descended into street fighting and
chaos.
Outside Saigon, provincial cities, too, came under siege. Most prominent
was the North Vietnamese capture of Hue, the ancient
Vietnamese capital
and a city revered by Buddhists. Insurgents managed to take control of
virtually the whole city.
When dark inertia increases, obscurity and inactivity, negligence and
delusion, arise. When lucidity prevails, the self whose body dies enters the
untainted worlds of those who know reality. When he dies in passion, he is
born among lovers of action; so when he dies in dark inertia, he is born
into wombs of folly. The fruit of good conduct is pure and untainted, they
say, but suffering is the fruit of passion, ignorance the fruit of
dark inertia.
From lucidity knowledge is born; from passion comes greed; from dark
inertia come negligence, delusion, and ignorance. Men who are lucid go
upward; men of passion stay in between; men of dark inertia, caught in vile
ways, sink low.
THE BHAGAVAD GITA: KRISHNA’S COUNSEL IN TIME OF WAR,
CIRCA FIRST CENTURY A.D.
Meanwhile the attacks on Khe Sanh continued in waves. It was hard for
Westmoreland to tell what the main target was: were
the battles to the south
merely a means of drawing forces away from Khe Sanh, or was it the other
way around? Within a few
weeks, in all parts of South Vietnam, the
Americans regained the upper hand, retaking control of Saigon and securing
their
air bases. The sieges at Hue and Khe Sanh took longer, but massive
artillery and air bombardments eventually doomed the insurgents,
as well as
leveling entire sections of Hue.
After what later became known as the Tet Offensive was over, West-
moreland likened it to the Battle of the Bulge, near the
end of World War II.
There the Germans had managed to surprise the Allies by staging a bold
incursion into eastern France.
In the first few days, they had advanced
rapidly, creating panic, but once the Allies recovered, they had managed to
push
the Germans back—and eventually it became apparent that the battle
was the German military’s death knell, their last shot.
So it was,
Westmoreland argued, with the North Vietnamese army at Khe Sanh and
the Vietcong throughout the South: they had
suffered terrible casualties, far
more than the Americans had—in fact, the entire Vietcong infrastructure
had been wiped out.
They would never recover; at long last the enemy had
revealed itself and had been badly mauled.
The Americans thought Tet had been a tactical disaster for the North. But
another viewpoint began to trickle in from home:
the drama at the U.S.
embassy, the siege of Hue, and the attacks on air bases had kept millions of
Americans glued to their
television sets. Until then the Vietcong had
operated mostly in the countryside, barely visible to the American public.
Now,
for the first time, they were apparent in major cities, wreaking havoc
and destruction. Americans had been told the war was
winding down and
winnable; these images said otherwise. Suddenly the war’s purpose seemed
less clear. How could South Vietnam
remain stable in the face of this
ubiquitous enemy? How could the Americans ever claim a clear victory?
There was really no
end in sight.
American opinion polls tracked a sharp turn against the war. Antiwar
demonstrations broke out all over the country. President
Lyndon Johnson’s
military advisers, who had been telling him that South Vietnam was coming
under control, now confessed that
they were no longer so optimistic. In the
New Hampshire Democratic primary that March, Johnson was stunned by
his defeat by
Senator Eugene McCarthy, who had galvanized the growing
antiwar sentiment. Shortly thereafter Johnson announced that he would
not
run for reelection in the upcoming presidential race and that he would
slowly disengage American forces from Vietnam.
The Tet Offensive was indeed the turning point in the Vietnam War, but
not in the direction that Westmoreland and his staff
had foreseen.
At this the grey-eyed goddess Athena smiled, and gave him a caress, her
looks being changed now, so she seemed a woman, tall
and beautiful and no
doubt skilled at weaving splendid things. She answered briskly: “Whoever
gets around you [Odysseus] must be sharp and guileful as a snake; even a
god might bow to you in ways of dissimulation. You! You chameleon!
Bottomless bag of tricks! Here in your own country would you not give your
stratagems a rest or stop spellbinding for an instant?
. . . Two of a kind, we
are, contrivers, both. Of all men now alive you are the best in plots and
story telling. My own fame is for wisdom among the gods—deceptions, too.
THE ODYSSEY, HOMER, CIRCA NINTH CENTURY B.C.
Interpretation
For the American strategists, the success of the war depended mostly on the
military. By using their army and superior weaponry
to kill as many
Vietcong as possible and gain control of the countryside, they would ensure
the stability of the South Vietnamese
government. Once the South was
strong enough, North Vietnam would give up the fight.
The North Vietnamese saw the war very differently. By nature and
practice, they viewed conflict in much broader terms. They
looked at the
political situation in the South, where American search-and-destroy
missions were alienating South Vietnamese
peasants. The North
Vietnamese, meanwhile, did everything they could to win the peasants over
and earned for themselves an
army of millions of silent sympathizers. How
could the South be secure when the Americans had failed to capture the
hearts
and minds of the Vietnamese farmers? The North Vietnamese also
looked to the American political scene, where, in 1968, there
was to be a
presidential election. And they looked at American culture, where support
for the war was wide but not deep. The
Vietnam War was the first televised
war in history; the military was trying to control information about the war,
but the
images on television spoke for themselves.
On and on the North Vietnamese went, continually broadening their
outlook and analyzing the war’s global context. And out
of this study they
crafted their most brilliant strategy: the Tet Offensive. Using their army of
peasant sympathizers in the
South, they were able to infiltrate every part of
the country, smuggling in arms and supplies under the cover of the Tet
holiday.
The targets they hit were not only military but televisual: their
attacks in Saigon, base of most of the American media (including
the CBS
newsman Walter Cronkite, visiting at the time) were spectacular; Hue and
Khe Sanh were also places heavily covered
by American reporters. They
also struck symbolic locations—embassies, palaces, air bases—that would
suck in media attention.
On television all this would create the dramatic
(and deceptive) impression that the Vietcong were everywhere while
American
bombing raids and pacification programs had gotten nowhere. In
effect, the goal of the Tet Offensive was not a military target
but the
American public in front of its televisions. Once Americans lost faith—and
in an election year—the war was doomed.
The North Vietnamese did not
have to win a single pitched battle on the field, and in fact they never did.
But by extending
their vision beyond the battlefield to politics and culture,
they won the war.
We always tend to look at what is most immediate to us, taking the most
direct route toward our goals and trying to win the
war by winning as many
battles as we can. We think in small, microlevel terms and react to present
events—but this is petty
strategy. Nothing in life happens in isolation;
everything is related to everything else and has a broader context. That
context
includes people outside your immediate circle whom your actions
affect, the public at large, the whole world; it includes
poli- tics, for every
choice in modern life has political ramifications; it includes culture, the
media, the way the public
sees you. Your task as a grand strategist is to
extend your vision in all directions—not only looking further into the future
but also seeing more of the world around you, more than your enemy does.
Your strategies will become insidious and impossible
to thwart. You will be
able to harness the relationships between events, one battle setting up the
next, a cultural coup setting
up a political coup. You will bring the war to
arenas your enemies have ignored, catching them by surprise. Only grand
strategy
can yield grand results.
War is the continuation of politics by other means.
—Carl von Clausewitz (1780–1831)
KEYS TO WARFARE
Thousands of years ago, we humans elevated ourselves above the animal
world and never looked back. Figuratively speaking,
the key to this
evolutionary advance was our powers of vision: language, and the ability to
reason that it gave us, let us
see more of the world around us. To protect
itself from a predator, an animal depended on its senses and instincts; it
could
not see around the corner or to the other end of the forest. We
humans, on the other hand, could map the entire forest, study
the habits of
dangerous animals and even nature itself, gaining deeper, wider knowledge
of our environment. We could see dangers
coming before they were here.
This expanded vision was abstract: where an animal is locked in the
present, we could see into
the past and glimpse as far as our reason would
take us into the future. Our sight expanded further and further into time
and
space, and we came to dominate the world.
Somewhere along the line, however, we stopped evolving as rational
creatures. Despite our progress there is always a part
of us that remains
animal, and that animal part can respond only to what is most immediate in
our environment—it is incapable
of thinking beyond the moment. The
dilemma affects us still: the two sides of our character, rational and animal,
are constantly
at war, making almost all of our actions awkward. We reason
and plan to achieve a goal, but in the heat of action we become
emotional
and lose perspective. We use cleverness and strategy to grab for what we
want, but we do not stop to think about
whether what we want is necessary,
or what the consequences of getting it will be. The extended vision that
rationality brings
us is often eclipsed by the reactive, emotional animal
within—the stronger side of our nature.
More than we are today, the ancient Greeks were close to the passage of
the human race from animal to rational. To them our
dual nature made us
tragic, and the source of tragedy was limited vision. In classical Greek
tragedies such as Oedipus Rex, the protagonist may think he knows the truth
and knows enough about the world to act in it, but his vision is limited by
his emotions and desires. He has only a partial perspective on life and on
his own actions and identity, so he acts imprudently
and causes suffering.
When Oedipus finally understands his own role in all his misfortunes, he
tears out his eyes—symbols
of his tragic limitation. He can see out into the
world but not inward into himself.
Then he saw Odysseus and asked: “Now tell me about this one, dear child,
Shorter than Agamemnon by a head But broader in the shoulders and chest.
His armor is lying on the ground And he’s roaming the ranks like a ram,
That’s it, just like a thick-fleeced ram Striding
through a flock of silvery
sheep.” And Helen, Zeus’ child: “That is Laertes’ son, The master
strategist Odysseus, born and bred In the rocky hills of Ithaca. He knows
Every trick there
is, and his mind runs deep.” Antenor turned to her and
observed astutely: “Your words are not off the mark there, madam.
Odysseus came here once before, on an embassy For your sake along with
Menelaus. I entertained them courteously in the great hall And learned
each man’s character and depth of mind. Standing in a crowd of Trojans,
Menelaus, With his wide shoulders, was more prominent, But when both
were seated Odysseus
was lordlier. When it came time for each to speak in
public And weave a spell of wisdom with their words, Menelaus spoke
fluently enough,
to the point And very clearly, but briefly, since he is not A
man of many words. Being older, he spoke first. Then Odysseus, the master
strategist, rose quickly, But just stood there, his eyes fixed on the ground.
He did not move his staff forward or backward But held it steady. You would
have thought him A dull, surly lout without any
wit. But when he Opened
his mouth and projected his voice The words fell down like snowflakes in a
blizzard. No mortal could have vied with Odysseus then, And we no longer
held his looks against him.” 
THE ILIAD, HOMER, CIRCA NINTH CENTURY B.C.
The Greeks, however, also recognized the potential for a higher human
possibility. Far above the sphere of mortals were the
gods on Mount
Olympus, who had perfect vision of the world and of both the past and the
future; and the human race shared
something with them as well as with
animals—we were not only part animal but part divine. Further more, those
able to see
further than others, to control their animal nature and think
before they acted, were humans of the most deeply human kind—the
ones
best able to use the reasoning powers that separate us from animals. As
opposed to human stupidity (limited vision),
the Greeks imagined an ideal
human prudence. Its symbol was Odysseus, who always thought before he
acted. Having visited Hades,
the land of the dead, he was in touch with
ancestral history and the past; and he was also always curious, eager for
knowledge,
and able to view human actions, his own and other people’s,
with a dispassionate eye, considering their long-term consequences.
In other
words, like the gods, if to a lesser extent, he had the skill of looking into the
future. The consummate realist,
the man of vision, Odysseus was a
character in the epic poetry of Homer, but there were also historical
versions of the ideal:
the political figure and military leader Themistocles,
for example, and Alexander the Great, raised to heights of combined
intellect and action by Aristotle.
The prudent man might seem cold, his rationality sucking pleasure out of
life. Not so. Like the pleasure-loving gods on Mount
Olympus, he has the
perspective, the calm detachment, the ability to laugh, that come with true
vision, which gives everything
he does a quality of lightness— these traits
comprising what Nietzsche calls the “Apollonian ideal.” (Only people who
can’t
see past their noses make things heavy.) Alexander, the great strategist
and man of action, was also famous for revelry and
festivity. Odysseus
loved adventure; no one was better at the experience of pleasure. He was
simply more reasonable, more
balanced, less vulnerable to his own
emotions and moods, and he left less tragedy and turmoil in his wake.
This calm, detached, rational, far-seeing creature, called “prudent” by the
Greeks, is what we shall call the “grand strategist.”
We are all of us to some extent strategists: we naturally want control over
our lives, and we plot for power, consciously
or unconsciously angling to
get what we want. We use strategies, in other words, but they tend to be
linear and reactive and
are often fractured and struck off course by
emotional responses. Clever strategists can go far, but all but a few make
mistakes.
If they are successful, they get carried away and overreach; if
they face setbacks—and setbacks are inevitable over a lifetime—they
are
easily overwhelmed. What sets grand strategists apart is the ability to look
more deeply into both themselves and others,
to understand and learn from
the past and to have a clear sense of the future, to the extent that it can be
predicted. Simply,
they see more, and their extended vision lets them carry
out plans over sometimes-long periods of time— so long that those
around
them may not even realize that they have a plan in mind. They strike at the
roots of a problem, not at its symptoms,
and hit their mark cleanly. In
moving toward becoming a grand strategist, you follow in the path of
Odysseus and rise toward
the condition of the gods. It is not so much that
your strategies are more clever or manipulative as that they exist on a
higher plane. You have made a qualitative leap.
In a world where people are increasingly incapable of thinking
consequentially, more animal than ever, the practice of grand
strategy will
instantly elevate you above others.
To become a grand strategist does not involve years of study or a total
transformation of your personality. It simply means
more effective use of
what you have—your mind, your rationality, your vision. Having evolved
as a solution to the problems
of warfare, grand strategy is a military
concept. And an examination of its historical development will reveal the
key to
making it work for you in daily life.
In the early history of warfare, a ruler or general who understood strategy
and maneuver could exercise power. He could win
battles, carve out an
empire, or at the very least defend his own city or state. But problems came
with strategy on this level.
More than any other human activity, war plays
havoc with emotion, stirs the animal within. In plotting war a king would
depend
on things like his knowledge of the terrain and his understanding of
both the enemy’s forces and his own; his success would
depend on his
ability to see these things clearly. But this vision was likely to be clouded.
He had emotions to respond to,
desires to realize; he could not think his
goals through. Wanting to win, he would underestimate the enemy’s
strength or overestimate
his own. When Xerxes of Persia invaded Greece in
480 B.C., he thought he had a perfectly rational plan. There was much he
had not taken into account, and disaster followed.
Other rulers actually won their battles only to grow drunk on victory and
not know when to stop, stirring up implacable hatred,
distrust, and the
desire for revenge all around them, culminating in war on several fronts and
total defeat—as in the destruction
of the warlike Assyrian Empire, its
capital of Nineveh eternally buried in the sand. In cases like that, victory in
battle
brought only danger, exposing the conqueror to ruinous cycles of
attack and counterattack.
In ancient times, strategists and historians from Sun-tzu to Thucy-dides
became conscious of this recurring self-destructive
pattern in warfare and
began to work out more rational ways to fight. The first step was to think
beyond the immediate battle.
Supposing you won victory, where would it
leave you—better off or worse? To answer that question, the logical step
was to
think ahead, to the third and fourth battles on, which connected like
links in a chain. The result was the concept of the
campaign, in which the
strategist sets a realistic goal and plots several steps ahead to get there.
Individual battles matter
only in the way they set up the next ones down the
line; an army can even deliberately lose a battle as part of a long-term
plan.
The victory that matters is that of the overall campaign, and everything is
subordinated to that goal.
Forgetting our objectives.—During the journey we commonly forget its
goal. Almost every profession is chosen and commenced as a means to an
end but
continued as an end in itself. Forgetting our objectives is the most
frequent of all acts of stupidity.
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, 1844–1900
This kind of strategy represented a qualitative advance. Think of chess,
where the grand master, instead of focusing only
on the move at hand and
making it solely in reaction to what the other player has just done, must
visualize the entire chessboard
deep into the future, crafting an overall
strategy, using the moves of the pawns now to set up those of the more
powerful
pieces later on. Thinking in terms of the campaign gave strategy a
new depth. The strategist used more and more of the map.
War on this level required that the strategist think deeply in all directions
before launching the campaign. He had to know
the world. The enemy was
just one part of the picture; the strategist also had to anticipate the reactions
of allies and neighboring
states—any missteps with them and the entire plan
could unravel. He had to imagine the peace after the war. He had to know
what his army was capable of over time and ask no more of it than that. He
had to be realistic. His mind had to expand to
meet the complexities of the
task—and all this before a single blow was exchanged.
Yet strategic thinking on this level yielded limitless benefits. A victory on
the battlefield would not seduce the leader
into an unconsidered move that
might ultimately set the campaign back, nor would a defeat unnerve him.
When something unexpected
happened—and the unexpected is to be
expected in war—the solution he improvised to meet it would have to suit
goals far on
the horizon. His subordination of his emotions to strategic
thought would give him more control during the course of the campaign.
He
would keep his perspective in the heat of battle. He would not get caught up
in the reactive and self-destructive pattern
that had destroyed so many
armies and states.
This principle of campaigning was only relatively recently christened
“grand strategy,” but it has existed in various forms
since ancient times. It is
clearly visible in Alexander’s conquest of Persia, in the Roman and
Byzantine empires’ control
of vast territories with small armies, in the
disciplined campaigns of the Mongols, in Queen Elizabeth I’s defeat of the
Spanish
Armada, in the Duke of Marlborough’s brilliantly conceived
campaigns against the Hapsburgs. In modern times North Vietnam’s
defeat
first of the French, then of the United States—in the latter case without
winning a single major battle—must be considered
a consummate use of the
art.
Military history shows that the key to grand strategy—the thing that
separates it from simple, garden-variety strategy—is
its particular quality of
forethought. Grand strategists think and plan further into the future before
taking action. Nor
is their planning simply a matter of accumulating
knowledge and information; it involves looking at the world with a
dispassionate
eye, thinking in terms of the campaign, planning indirect,
subtle steps along the way whose purpose may only gradually become
visible to others. Not only does this kind of planning fool and disorient the
enemy; for the strategist it has the psychological
effects of calm, a sense of
perspective, flexibility to change in the moment while keeping the ultimate
goal in mind. Emotions
are easier to control; vision is farseeing and clear.
Grand strategy is the apex of rationality.
Grand strategy has four main principles, distilled below from case
histories of the most successful practitioners of the art.
The more you can
incorporate these principles into your plans, the better the results.
Plot against the difficult while it remains easy, Act against the great while it
is still minute. Difficult affairs throughout the realm invariably commence
with the easy, Great affairs throughout the realm inevitably commence
with
the small. For this reason the Sage never acts against the great and is thus
able to complete greatness. What is tranquil remains easily grasped, What
has not yet betrayed signs is easy to plot against. The brittle is easily split,
The minute is easily scattered. Act upon them before they attain being,
Control them before they become chaotic. Trees that require both arms to
embrace Are born from insignificant saplings. A nine-story tower
commences with a little accumulated earth, A journey of a thousand
kilometers begins beneath one’s feet.
TAO TE CHING, LAO–TZU, CIRCA 551–479 B.C.
Focus on your greater goal, your destiny. The first step toward becoming
a grand strategist—the step that will make everything else fall into place—
is to begin with
a clear, detailed, purposeful goal in mind, one rooted in
reality. We often imagine that we generally operate by some kind
of plan,
that we have goals we are trying to reach. But we’re usually fooling
ourselves; what we have are not goals but wishes.
Our emotions infect us
with hazy desire: we want fame, success, security— something large and
abstract. This haziness unbalances
our plans from the beginning and sets
them on a chaotic course. What have distinguished all history’s grand
strategists and
can distinguish you, too, are specific, detailed, focused goals.
Contemplate them day in and day out, and imagine how it will
feel to reach
them and what reaching them will look like. By a psychological law
peculiar to humans, clearly visualizing them
this way will turn into a self-
fulfilling prophecy.
Having clear objectives was crucial to Napoleon. He visualized his goals
in intense detail—at the beginning of a campaign,
he could see its last battle
clearly in his mind. Examining a map with his aides, he would point to the
exact spot where it
would end—a ridiculous prediction, it might seem, since
not only is war in any period subject to chance and to whatever the
enemy
comes up with to surprise you, but the maps of Napoleon’s era were
notoriously unreliable. Yet time and again his predictions
would prove
uncannily correct. He would also visualize the campaign’s aftermath: the
signing of the treaty, its conditions,
how the defeated Russian czar or
Austrian emperor would look, and exactly how the achievement of this
particular goal would
position Napoleon for his next campaign.
As a young man, Lyndon B. Johnson, despite his limited education, was
determined to become president one day. Dream turned
into obsession: he
could picture himself as president, strutting the world’s stage. As he
advanced in his career, he never
did anything without one eye on this
ultimate objective. In 1957, Johnson, by that time a Texas senator,
supported a civil
rights bill. That damaged him in Texas but elevated him
nationally: apparently a senator from the South had stuck his neck
out,
risking his job. Johnson’s vote caught the attention of John F. Kennedy,
who, in the campaign of 1960, nominated him
for vice president—the job
that was ultimately Johnson’s stepping-stone to the presidency.
THE WILD BOAR AND THE FOX
A wild boar was sharpening his tusks on a tree trunk one day. A fox asked
him why he did this when there was neither huntsman
nor danger
threatening him. “I do so for a good reason,” he replied. “For if I am
suddenly surprised by danger I wouldn’t have the time to sharpen my tusks.
But now I will find them ready to do their duty.”
The fable shows that it is no good waiting until danger comes to be ready.
FABLES, AESOP, SIXTH CENTURY B.C.
Clear long-term objectives give direction to all of your actions, large and
small. Important decisions become easier to make.
If some glittering
prospect threatens to seduce you from your goal, you will know to resist it.
You can tell when to sacrifice
a pawn, even lose a battle, if it serves your
eventual purpose. Your eyes are focused on winning the campaign and
nothing
else.
Your goals must be rooted in reality. If they are simply beyond your
means, essentially impossible for you to realize, you
will grow discouraged,
and discouragement can quickly escalate into a defeatist attitude. On the
other hand, if your goals
lack a certain dimension and grandeur, it can be
hard to stay motivated. Do not be afraid to be bold. In the large sense,
you
are working out for yourself what Alexander experienced as his destiny and
what Friedrich Nietzsche called your “life’s
task”—the thing toward which
your natural leanings and aptitudes, talents and desires, seem to point you.
Assigning yourself
a life task will inspire and guide you.
The goal’s nature is critical: some objectives, if realized, will hurt you in
the long run. The objectives of grand strategy
in the true sense are to build a
solid foundation for future expansion, to make you more secure, to increase
your power. When
Israel seized the Sinai Desert during the Six-Day War in
1967, what seemed to make sense was creating a kind of buffer zone
between itself and Egypt. In fact, this just meant more territory to patrol and
control, and it created a cause to motivate
enduring hostility in the Egyptian
populace. The Sinai was also vulnerable to surprise attack, which is what
ended up happening
in the Yom Kippur War of 1973. Since holding on to
the desert, though seductive, ultimately disserved the needs of security,
in
the terms of grand strategy it was probably a mistake. It is sometimes hard
to know what the long-term effects of achieving
a goal will be, but the more
seriously and realistically you examine the possibilities downwind, the less
likely you are to
miscalculate.
Widen your perspective. Grand strategy is a function of vision, of seeing
further in time and space than the enemy does. The process of foresight
is
unnatural: we can only ever live in the present, which is the ground for our
consciousness, and our subjective experiences
and desires narrow the scope
of our vision—they are like a prison we inhabit. Your task as a grand
strategist is to force
yourself to widen your view, to take in more of the
world around you, to see things for what they are and for how they may
play out in the future, not for how you wish them to be. Every event has a
reason, a causal chain of relationships that made
it happen; you have to dig
deep into that reality, instead of seeing only the surfaces of things. The
closer you get to objectivity,
the better your strategies and the easier the
path to your goals.
You can take a step in this direction by always trying to look at the world
through the eyes of other people—including, most
definitely, your enemy—
before engaging in war. Your own cultural preconceptions are a major
hindrance to seeing the world
objectively. Looking through other people’s
eyes is not a question of political correctness or of some soft, hazy
sensitivity;
it makes your strategies more effective. During the Vietnam
War, the North Vietnamese intensely studied the American cultural
scene.
They looked for shifts in public opinion and strained to understand the U.S.
political system and the social effects
of television. American strategists, on
the other hand, revealed an absolutely minimal understanding of the alien
cultures
of Vietnam—whether the South Vietnamese culture they were
supporting or the North Vietnamese culture they were trying to fight.
Blinded by their obsession with stopping the spread of communism, they
failed to note the far deeper influences of culture
and religion on the North
Vietnamese way of fighting. Theirs was a grand-strategic blunder of the
highest order.
Grand strategists keep sensitive antennae attuned to the politics of any
situation. Politics is the art of promoting and protecting
your own interests.
You might think it was largely a question of parties and factions, but every
individual is, among other
things, a political creature seeking to secure his
or her own position. Your behavior in the world always has political
consequences,
in that the people around you will analyze it in terms of
whether it helps or harms them. To win the battle at the cost of
alienating
potential allies or creating intractable enemies is never wise.
Taking politics into account, you must figure out your grand strategy with
a mind to gaining support from other people—to
creating and strengthening
a base. In the Roman Civil War in 49 B.C., Julius Caesar faced off against
Pompey, who was then
the more experienced military man. Caesar gained
the edge by planning his maneuvers with an eye to their effect on public
opinion in Rome. Lacking support in the Senate, he built support among the
general public. Caesar was a brilliant political
animal, and what made him
so was his grasp of the public psyche: he understood their self-interest and
shaped his strategies
accordingly. Being political means understanding
people—seeing through their eyes.
Sever the roots. In a society dominated by appearances, the real source of a
problem is sometimes hard to grasp. To work out a grand strategy
against an
enemy, you have to know what motivates him or is the source of his power.
Too many wars and battles drag on because
neither side knows how to
strike at the other’s roots. As a grand strategist, you must expand your
vision not only far and
wide but under. Think hard, dig deep, do not take
appearances for reality. Uncover the roots of the trouble and you can
strategize
to sever them, ending the war or problem with finality.
When the Carthaginian general Hannibal invaded Italy in 218 B.C.,
various Roman generals strained to defeat him, but none
was effective. The
Roman general later called Scipio Africanus looked at the situation
differently: the problem wasn’t Hannibal
himself, or his base in Spain, or
his ability to restock his supplies by sea from Carthage; the problem was
Carthage itself.
This was a country with an intractable hatred of Rome, and
a long power struggle had endured between the two. Instead of taking
on
Hannibal, a brilliant military man, in Italy, then, Scipio invaded Carthage,
forcing Hannibal to leave Italy to defend
his homeland. The attack on
Carthage was more than a mere feint to draw Hannibal away; it was a
sizable invasion. Scipio’s
grand strategy worked to perfection: not only did
he defeat Hannibal in battle, he destroyed Carthage as a rival power,
permanently
ending its ability to stand up to Rome.
A part of grand strategy related to severing the roots is seeing dangers as
they start to sprout, then cutting them down before
they get too big to
handle. A grand strategist knows the value of preemptive action.
This is as it should be. No major proposal required for war can be worked
out in ignorance of political factors; and when people talk, as they often
do,
about harmful political influence on the management of war, they are not
really saying what they mean. Their quarrel should be with the policy itself,
not with its influence. If the policy is right—that is, successful—any
intentional
effect it has on the conduct of war can only be to the good. If it
has the opposite effect the policy itself is wrong. Only if statesmen look to
certain military moves and actions to produce effects that are foreign to
their nature do political
decisions influence operations for the worse. In the
same way as a man who has not fully mastered a foreign language
sometimes
fails to express himself correctly, so statesmen often issue orders
that defeat the purpose they are meant to serve. Time and again that has
happened, which demonstrates that a certain grasp of military affairs is
vital for those in charge
of general policy. Before continuing, we must
guard against a likely misinterpretation. We are far from believing that a
minister of war immersed
in his files, an erudite engineer or even an
experienced soldier would, simply on the basis of their particular
experience, make the best director of policy—always assuming that the
prince himself is not in control.
Far from it. What is needed in the post is
distinguished intellect and strength of character. He can always get the
necessary military
information somehow or other. The military and political
affairs of France were never in worse hands than when the brothers Belle-
Isle and the Duc de Choiseul
were responsible— good soldiers though they
all were.
ON WAR, CARL VON CLAUSEWITZ, 1780–1831
Take the indirect route to your goal. The greatest danger you face in
strategy is losing the initiative and finding yourself constantly reacting to
what the other
side does. The solution, of course, is to plan ahead but also
to plan subtly—to take the indirect route. Preventing your opponent
from
seeing the purpose of your actions gives you an enormous advantage.
So make your first move merely a setup, designed to extract a response
from your opponent that opens him up to what comes
next. Hit him directly
and he reacts, taking a defensive pose that may allow him to parry your next
blow; but if he can’t
see the point of your strike, or if it misleads him as to
where the next one will come from, he is defenseless and blind.
The key is
to maintain control of your emotions and plot your moves in advance,
seeing the entire chessboard.
The film director Alfred Hitchcock made this strategy a life principle. His
every action a setup designed to yield results
down the road, he calmly
thought ahead and moved step by step. His goal was to make a film that
matched his original vision,
uncorrupted by the influence of the actors,
producers, and other staff who necessarily came along later. By controlling
every
detail of the film’s screenplay, he made it almost impossible for the
producer to interfere. Should the producer try to meddle
during the actual
shooting, Hitchcock would have a camera ready on set with no film in it.
He could pretend to take the extra
shots that the producer wanted, letting
the producer feel powerful without risk to the end result. Hitchcock did the
same
with actors: instead of telling them directly what to do, he would
infect them with the emotion he wanted— fear, anger, desire—by
the way
he treated them on set. Every step on the campaign trail fit perfectly into the
next one.
In working on the level not of the battle but of the campaign, your first
step is crucial. It should usually be deceptively
soft and indirect, making it
harder to read. The Japanese bombing of Pearl Harbor during World War II
was a devastating surprise,
but as the first move of a campaign it was a
disaster. The Japanese showed their hand too quickly; rallying American
public
opinion to an intense level of anger, they ensured that the Americans
would prosecute the war to the bitter end— and it was
the Americans who
had the greater military resources. Always pay attention to the first step of
the campaign. It sets the
tempo, determines the enemy’s mind-set, and
launches you in a direction that had better be the right one.
The Prussian military theoretician Carl von Clausewitz famously argued
that war is the continuation of politics by other means.
He meant that every
nation has goals—security, well-being, prosperity—that it ordinarily
pursues through politics, but when
another nation or internal force thwarts
their achievement through politics, war is the natural result. War is never
merely
about victory on the battlefield or the simple conquest of land; it is
about the pursuit of a policy that cannot be realized
in any other way than
through force.
When a war is lost, however, all fingers usually point at the military. We
may sometimes go over the generals’ heads, to the
politicians who declared
war in the first place; during and after the Vietnam War, for example, some
blamed the loss on the
government’s failure to commit to the war with full
effort. More often, though, the postgame analysis is military—we pore
over
the war’s battles, critiquing the officers’ moves. And of course it is the
military that has planned and fought the war,
but even so, the real problem
is a problem of grand strategy. According to von Clausewitz, failure in war
is a failure of
policy. The goals of the war, and the policies that drove it,
were unrealistic, inappropriate, blind to other factors.
This idea is the philosophy of the grand strategist. Whenever anything
goes wrong, it is human nature to blame this person
or that. Let other
people engage in such stupidity, led around by their noses, seeing only what
is immediately visible to
the eye. You see things differently. When an action
goes wrong—in business, in politics, in life—trace it back to the policy
that
inspired it in the first place. The goal was misguided.
This means that you yourself are largely the agent of anything bad that
happens to you. With more prudence, wiser policies,
and greater vision, you
could have avoided the danger. So when something goes wrong, look deep
into yourself—not in an emotional
way, to blame yourself or indulge your
feelings of guilt, but to make sure that you start your next campaign with a
firmer
step and greater vision.
Image:
The Mountaintop. Down on the battlefield, everything is smoke and
confusion. It is hard to tell friend from foe, to see who
is winning, to
foresee the enemy’s next move. The general must climb high above the
fray, to the mountaintop, where everything
becomes clearer and more in
focus. There he can see beyond the battlefield—to the movements of
reserves, to the enemy camp,
to the battle’s future shape. Only from the
mountaintop can the general direct the war.
Authority: It is a common mistake in going to war to begin at
the wrong end, to act first and to wait for disaster to discuss
the
matter. —Thucydides (between 460 and 455 B.C.–circa 400
B.C.)
REVERSAL
Grand strategy involves two dangers that you must consider and combat.
First, the successes it brings you in your first campaigns
may have the same
effect on you that easy victory on the battlefield gives a general: drunk on
triumph, you may lose the sense
of realism and proportion on which your
future moves depend. Even such supreme grand strategists as Julius Caesar
and Napoleon
eventually fell victim to this dynamic: losing their sense of
reality, they began to believe that their instincts were infallible.
The greater
the victory, the greater the danger. As you get older, as you move to your
next campaign, you must retrench, strain
doubly hard to rein in your
emotions, and maintain a sense of realism.
Second, the detachment necessary to grand strategy can bring you to a
point where you find it hard to act. Understanding the
world too well, you
see too many options and become as indecisive as Hamlet. No matter how
far we progress, we remain part
animal, and it is the animal in us that fires
our strategies, gives them life, animates us to fight. Without the desire to
fight, without a capacity for the violence war churns up, we cannot deal
with danger.
The prudent Odysseus types are comfortable with both sides of their
nature. They plan ahead as best they can, see far and
wide, but when it
comes time to move ahead, they move. Knowing how to control your
emotions means not repressing them completely
but using them to their best
effect.
13
KNOW YOUR ENEMY
THE INTELLIGENCE
STRATEGY
The target of your strategies should be less the army you face
than the mind of the man or woman who runs it. If you
understand
how that mind works, you have the key to deceiving
and controlling it. Train yourself to read people, picking up the
signals
they unconsciously send about their innermost thoughts
and intentions. A friendly front will let you watch them closely
and mine them for information. Beware of projecting your own
emotions and
mental habits onto them; try to think as they
think. By finding your opponents’ psychological weaknesses,
you can work to
unhinge their minds.
He who knows the enemy and himself Will never in a hundred battles be at
risk.
SUN-TZU, FOURTH CENTURY B.C.
THE MIRRORED ENEMY
In June 1838, Lord Auckland, the British governor-general of India, called a
meeting of his top officials to discuss a proposed
invasion of Afghanistan.
Auckland and other British ministers had become increasingly concerned at
Russia’s growing influence
in the area. The Russians had already made an
ally of Persia; they were now trying to do the same with Afghanistan, and if
they were successful, the British in India would find themselves potentially
cut off by land to the west and vulnerable to
more incursions by the
Russians. Instead of trying to outdo the Russians and negotiate an alliance
with the Afghan ruler,
Dost Mahomed, Auckland proposed what he thought
was a surer solution: invade Afghanistan and install a new ruler—Shah
Soojah,
a former Afghan leader forced out of power twenty-five years
earlier—who would then be indebted to the English.
[As to the second case], that of being drawn into one [a trap or ambush] . . .
you must be shrewd about not believing easily things not in accord with
reason. For example, if the enemy puts some
booty before you, you ought to
believe that within it there is a hook and that it conceals some trick. If many
of the enemy
are put to flight by your few, if a few of the enemy assail your
many, if the enemy turn in sudden flight, . . . you ought
to fear a trick. And
you should never believe that the enemy does not know how to carry on his
affairs; rather, if you hope
to be less deceived . . . and . . . run less risk, in
proportion as your enemy is weaker, in proportion as he is less cautious,
you should the more respect him.
THE ART OF WAR, NICCOLÒ MACHIAVELLI, 1521
Among the men listening to Auckland that day was William Mac-
naghten, the forty-five-year-old chief secretary of the Calcutta
government.
Macnaghten thought the invasion a brilliant idea: a friendly Afghanistan
would secure British interests in the
area and even help to spread British
influence. And the invasion could hardly fail. The British army would have
no trouble
sweeping away the primitive Afghan tribesmen; they would
present themselves as liberators, freeing the Afghans from Russian
tyranny
and bringing to the country the support and civilizing influence of England.
As soon as Shah Soojah was in power,
the army would leave, so that British
influence over the grateful shah, although powerful, would be invisible to
the Afghan
public. When it came time for Macnaghten to give his opinion
on the proposed invasion, his support of it was so sound and
enthusiastic
that Lord Auckland not only decided to go ahead, he named Macnaghten
the queen’s envoy to Kabul, the Afghan capital—the
top British
representative in Afghanistan.
Meeting little resistance along the way, in August 1839 the British army
reached Kabul. Dost Mahomed fled to the mountains,
and the shah
reentered the city. To the local inhabitants, this was a strange sight: Shah
Soojah, whom many could barely remember,
looked old and submissive
alongside Macnaghten, who rode into Kabul wearing a bright-colored
uniform topped by a cocked hat
fringed with ostrich feathers. Why had
these people come? What were they doing here?
With the shah back in power, Macnaghten had to reassess the situation.
Reports came in informing him that Dost Mahomed was
building an army
in the mountains to the north. Meanwhile, to the south, it seemed that in
invading the country the British
had insulted some local chieftains by
plundering their lands for food. These chiefs were now stirring up trouble.
It was also
clear that the shah was unpopular with his former subjects, so
unpopular that Macnaghten could not leave him and other British
interests
in the country unprotected. Reluctantly Mac-naghten ordered most of the
British army to remain in Afghanistan until
the situation was stabilized.
Time went by, and eventually Macnaghten decided to allow the officers
and soldiers of this increasingly long-standing occupying
force to send for
their families, so that life would be less harsh for them. Soon the wives and
children came, along with
their Indian servants. But where Macnaghten had
imagined that the arrival of the soldiers’ families would have a humanizing,
civilizing effect, it only alarmed the Afghans. Were the British planning a
permanent occupation? Everywhere the local people
looked, there were
representatives of British interests, talking loudly in the streets, drinking
wine, attending theaters
and horse races—strange imported pleasures that
they had introduced to the country. Now their families were making
themselves
at home. A hatred of everything English began to take root.
THE AGING LION AND THE FOX
A lion who was getting old and could no longer obtain his food by force
decided that he must resort to trickery instead. So
he retired to a cave and
lay down pretending to be ill. Thus, whenever any animals came to his cave
to visit him, he ate them
all as they appeared. When many animals had
disappeared, a fox figured out what was happening. He went to see the lion
but stood at a safe distance
outside the cave and asked him how he was.
“Oh, not very well,” said the lion. “But why don’t you come in?” But the
fox said: “I would come inside if I hadn’t seen that a lot of footprints are
pointing inwards towards your cave but
none are pointing out.” Wise men
note the indications of dangers and thus avoid them.
FABLES, AESOP, SIXTH CENTURY B.C.
There were those who warned Macnaghten about this, and to all of them
he had the same answer: everything would be forgotten
and forgiven when
the army left Afghanistan. The Afghans were childlike, emotional people;
once they felt the benefits of
English civilization, they would be more than
grateful. One matter, however, did worry the envoy: the British government
was
unhappy about the increasing expense of the occupation. Macnaghten
would have to do something to cut costs, and he knew just
where to begin.
Most of the mountain passes through which Afghanistan’s main trade
routes ran were held by the Ghilzye tribes, who for many
years, over the
lives of many different rulers of the country, had been paid a stipend to keep
the passes open. Macnaghten
decided to halve this stipend. The Ghilzyes
responded by blocking the passes, and elsewhere in the country tribes
sympathetic
to the Ghilzyes rebelled. Macnaghten, caught off guard, tried to
put these rebellions down, but he did not take them too seriously,
and
worried officers who told him to respond more vigorously were rebuked for
overreacting. Now the British army would have
to stay indefinitely.
The situation deteriorated quickly. In October 1841 a mob attacked the
home of a British official and killed him. In Kabul
local chiefs began to
conspire to expel their British overlords. Shah Soojah panicked. For months
he had begged Macnaghten
to let him capture and kill his main rivals, an
Afghan ruler’s traditional method of securing his position. Macnaghten had
told him that a civilized country did not use murder to solve its political
problems. The shah knew that the Afghans respected
strength and authority,
not “civilized” values; to them his failure to deal with his enemies made
him look weak and unrulerlike
and left him surrounded by enemies.
Macnaghten would not listen.
The rebellion spread, and Macnaghten now had to confront the fact that
he did not have the manpower to put down a general
uprising. But why
should he panic? The Afghans and their leaders were naïve; he would
regain the upper hand through intrigue
and cleverness. To that end,
Macnaghten publicly negotiated an agreement whereby British troops and
citizens would leave Afghanistan,
in exchange for which the Afghans
would supply the retreating British with food. Privately, though,
Macnaghten made it known
to a few key chiefs that he was willing to make
one of them the country’s vizier—and load with him money— in exchange
for
putting down the rebellion and allowing the English to stay.
Bait.—“Everyone has his price”—this is not true. But there surely exists for
everyone a bait he cannot help taking. Thus to win
many people over to a
cause one needs only to put on it a gloss of philanthropy, nobility,
charitableness, self-sacrifice—
and on to what cause can one not put it?—:
these are the sweetmeats and dainties for their soul; others have others.
HUMAN, ALL TOO HUMAN, FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, 1886
The chief of the eastern Ghilzyes, Akbar Khan, responded to this offer,
and on December 23, 1841, Macnaghten rode out for
a private meeting with
him to seal the bargain. After exchanging greetings Akbar asked
Macnaghten if he wanted to go ahead
with the treachery they were
planning. Thrilled to have turned the situation around, Macnaghten cheerily
answered that he
did. Without a word of explanation, Akbar signaled his
men to grab Macnaghten and throw him in prison—he had no intention
of
betraying the other chiefs. Along the way a mob developed, caught hold of
the unfortunate envoy, and with a fury built
up over years of humiliation
literally tore him to pieces. His limbs and head were paraded through the
streets of Kabul, and
his torso was hung from a meat hook in the bazaar.
In a matter of days, everything unraveled. The remaining British troops—
some 4,500 of them, along with 12,000 camp followers—were
forced to
agree to an immediate retreat from Afghanistan, despite the bitter winter
weather. The Afghans were to keep the
retreating army supplied but did not
do so. Certain that the British would never leave unless forced to, they
harassed them
relentlessly in their retreat. Civilians and soldiers alike
quickly perished in the snow.
On January 13, British forces at the fort in Jalalabad saw a single horse
struggling toward the gates. Its half-dead rider,
Dr. William Brydon, was the
sole survivor of the British army’s doomed invasion of Afghanistan.
Interpretation
The knowledge that would have averted the catastrophe was at Mac-
naghten’s fingertips long before he launched the expedition.
Englishmen
and Indians who had lived in Afghanistan could have told him that the
Afghan people were among the proudest and
most independent on the
planet. To them the image of foreign troops marching into Kabul would
constitute an unforgivable humiliation.
On top of that, they were not a
people yearning for peace, prosperity, and reconciliation. In fact, they saw
strife and confrontation
as a healthy way of life.
Macnaghten had the information but refused to see it. Instead he
projected onto the Afghans the values of an Englishman, which
he
mistakenly assumed were universal. Blinded by narcissism, he misread
every signal along the way. As a result his strategic
moves—leaving the
British army occupying Kabul, halving the Ghilzyes’ stipend, trying not to
overplay his hand in putting
down the rebellions—were exactly the
opposite of what was needed. And on that fateful day when he literally lost
his head,
he made the ultimate miscalculation, imagining that money and an
appeal to self-interest would buy loyalty among the very
people he had so
humiliated.
Blindness and narcissism like this are not so rare; we find them every
day. Our natural tendency is to see other people as
mere reflections of our
own desires and values. Failing to understand the ways they are not like us,
we are surprised when
they do not respond as we had imagined. We
unintentionally offend and alienate people, then blame them, not our
inability
to understand them, for the damage done.
Understand: if you let narcissism act as a screen between you and other
people, you will misread them and your strategies
will misfire. You must be
aware of this and struggle to see others dispassionately. Every individual is
like an alien culture.
You must get inside his or her way of thinking, not as
an exercise in sensitivity but out of strategic necessity. Only by
knowing
your enemies can you ever hope to vanquish them.
Be submissive so that he will trust you and you will thereby learn about his
true situation. Accept his ideas and respond
to his affairs as if you were
twins. Once you have learned everything, subtly gather in his power. Thus
when the ultimate
day arrives, it will seem as if Heaven itself destroyed
him.
—Tai Kung, Six Secret Teachings (circa fourth century B.C.)
Confucius’s evaluation of Yang Hu, a man who had been forced to flee from
one state to another because he proved greedy and
disloyal each time he
acquired power, provides a simple example of projecting behavior on the
basis of constancy. Based upon
this repeated behavioral pattern, Confucius
accurately predicted that Yang Hu would certainly suffer an ignominious
end. More generally, Mencius subsequently stated: “A man who ceases his
efforts where he should not will abandon them anywhere.
A man who is
parsimonious with those with whom he should be generous will be
parsimonious everywhere.” Granting that people
generally acquire fixed
habits early in life, a man’s end may therefore be foreseen by midlife:
“Someone who is still disliked at forty years of age will end by being so.”
RALPH D. SAWYER, THE TAO OF SPYCRAFT, 1998
THE CLOSE EMBRACE
In 1805, Napoleon Bonaparte humiliated the Austrians in the battles of Ulm
and Austerlitz. In the subsequent treaty, he carved
up the Austrian Empire,
taking over its lands in Italy and Germany. For Napoleon all this was one
part of a chess game. His
ultimate goal was to make Austria an ally—a
weak and subordinate ally, but one that would lend him weight in the courts
of
Europe, since Austria had been a central force in European politics. As
part of this overall strategy, Napoleon requested
a new Austrian ambassador
to France: Prince Klemens von Metternich, at the time the Austrian
ambassador to the Prussian court
in Berlin.
Metternich, then thirty-two, came from one of Europe’s most illustrious
families. A speaker of impeccable French, a staunch
conservative in
politics, he was a paragon of breeding and elegance and an inveterate
ladies’ man. The presence of this polished
aristocrat would add a sheen to
the imperial court that Napoleon was creating. More important, winning
over a man of such
power—and Napoleon could be quite seductive in
private meetings—would help in his grand strategy of making Austria a
weak
satellite. And Metternich’s weakness for women would give
Napoleon a way in.
The two men met for the first time in August 1806, when Metternich
presented his credentials. Napoleon acted coolly. He dressed
well for the
occasion but kept his hat on, which in the mores of the time was rather rude.
After Metternich’s speech—short
and ceremonious—Napoleon began to
pace the room and talk politics in a way that made it clear he was in
command. (He liked
to stand up to talk to people while they remained
seated.) He made a show of speaking pointedly and concisely; he was not
some Corsican rube for the sophisticated Metternich to play with. In the end
he was sure he had made the impression he wanted.
Coordination is less of a problem when political leaders themselves play an
active part in the intelligence effort. When he was Senate majority leader,
Lyndon Johnson cultivated an extensive intelligence system with sources all
over Washington.
At one point in the 1950s, Johnson complained to a
reporter that he was focusing on internal Democratic problems while
failing
to cover divisions in the Senate GOP. To make his point, he pulled
out a memorandum on a recent private meeting at which the
reporter and
several of his colleagues had gotten a briefing on GOP factionalism from
Senator Thurston Morton (R-KY). Rowland Evans and Robert Novak
recalled: “The Intelligence System was a marvel of efficiency. It was also
rather frightening.” Even in the White House, Johnson believed in firsthand
political intelligence. According to his aide Harry McPherson, “I guess
he
called a lot of people, but I could usually count on it in the late afternoon,
as he woke up from his nap, that I would
get a call which would usually say,
‘What do you know?’ ” McPherson would then pass along the latest news
that he picked up
from reporters and political figures.
THE ART OF POLITICAL WARFARE, JOHN J. PITNEY, JR., 2000
Over the months to come, Napoleon and Metternich had many more such
meetings. It was the emperor’s plan to charm the prince,
but the charm ran
inescapably the other way: Metternich had a way of listening attentively,
making apt comments, even complimenting
Napoleon on his strategic
insights. At those moments Napoleon would beam inside: here was a man
who could truly appreciate
his genius. He began to crave Metternich’s
presence, and their discussions of European politics became more and more
frank.
The two became friends of sorts.
Hoping to take advantage of Metternich’s weakness for women,
Napoleon set up his sister, Caroline Murat, to have an affair
with the prince.
He learned from her a few pieces of diplomatic gossip, and she told him
that Metternich had come to respect
him. In turn she also told Metter-nich
that Napoleon was unhappy with his wife, Empress Josephine, who could
not bear children;
he was considering divorce. Napoleon did not seem upset
that Metternich knew such things about his personal life.
In 1809, seeking revenge for its ignominious defeat at Austerlitz, Austria
declared war on France. Napoleon only welcomed
this event, which gave
him a chance to beat the Austrians still more soundly than before. The war
was hard fought, but the
French prevailed, and Napoleon imposed a
humiliating settlement, annexing whole sections of the Austrian Empire.
Austria’s
military was dismantled, its government was overhauled, and
Napoleon’s friend Metternich was named foreign minister—exactly
where
Napoleon wanted him.
Several months later something happened that caught Napoleon slightly
off guard but delighted him: the Austrian emperor offered
him his eldest
daughter, the Archduchess Marie Louise, in marriage. Napoleon knew that
the Austrian aristocracy hated him;
this had to be Metternich’s work.
Alliance by marriage with Austria would be a strategic tour de force, and
Napoleon happily
accepted the offer, first divorcing Josephine, then
marrying Marie Louise in 1810.
Metternich accompanied the archduchess to Paris for the wedding, and
now his relationship with Napoleon grew still warmer.
Napoleon’s marriage
made him a member of one of Europe’s greatest families, and to a Corsican,
family was everything; he had
won a dynastic legitimacy he had long
craved. In conversation with the prince, he opened up even more than
before. He was
also delighted with his new empress, who revealed a keen
political mind. He let her in on his plans for empire in Europe.
In 1812, Napoleon invaded Russia. Now Metternich came to him with a
request: the formation of an army of 30,000 Austrian soldiers
at Napoleon’s
disposal. In return Napoleon would let Austria rebuild its military.
Napoleon saw no harm in this step; he was
allied with Austria by marriage,
and rearmament there would help him in the end.
Months later the Russian invasion had turned into a disaster, and
Napoleon was forced to retreat, his army decimated. Now
Metternich
offered his services as a mediator between France and the other European
powers. Centrally placed as it is, Austria
had performed that task in the
past, and anyway Napoleon had little choice: he needed time to recoup.
Even if Austria’s role
as a mediator allowed it to reassert its independence,
he had little to fear from his in-laws.
By the spring of 1813, negotiations had broken down and a new war was
about to break out between the badly damaged France
and a powerful
alliance of Russia, Prussia, England, and Sweden. By this time the Austrian
army had grown considerably; somehow
Napoleon had to get his hands on
it—but his spies reported that Metternich had entered into secret agreement
with the Allies.
Surely this had to be some sort of ploy: how could the
Austrian emperor fight his son-in-law? Yet in a few weeks, it became
official: unless France negotiated a peace, Austria would drop its mediating
position and join the Allies.
Napoleon could not believe what he was hearing. He traveled to Dresden
for a meeting with Metternich, which took place on
June 26. The moment
he saw the prince, he felt a shock: the friendly, nonchalant air was gone. In
a rather cold tone, Metternich
informed him that France must accept a
settlement that would reduce it to its natural boundaries. Austria was
obligated to
defend its interests and the stability of Europe. Suddenly it
occurred to the emperor: Metternich had been playing him all
along, the
family ties merely a ploy to blind him to Austrian rearmament and
independence. “So I have perpetrated a very stupid
piece of folly in
marrying an archduchess of Austria?” Napoleon blurted out. “Since Your
Majesty desires to know my opinion,”
Metternich replied, “I will candidly
say that Napoleon, the conqueror, has made a mistake.”
Napoleon refused to accept Metternich’s dictated peace. In return Austria
dropped its neutrality and joined the Allies, becoming
their de facto military
leader. And with Austria leading the way, they finally defeated Napoleon in
April 1814 and exiled
him to the Mediterranean island of Elba.
In all the martial arts, in all the performing arts and still more in all the
forms of human behavior, a man’s postures or
moves are based on the
movements of his [invisible] mind. . . . In the Kage Style of swordsmanship a
swordsman reads his opponent’s mind through his postures or moves. . . .
What mind can penetrate his opponent’s mind? It is a mind that has been
trained and cultivated to the point of detachment
with perfect freedom. It is
as clear as a mirror that can reflect the motions within his opponent’s mind.
. . . When one stands
face to face with his opponents, his mind must not be
revealed in the form of moves. Instead his mind should reflect his
opponent’s mind like water reflecting the moon.
LIVES OF MASTER SWORDSMEN, MAKOTO SUGAWARA, 1988
Interpretation
Napoleon prided himself on his ability to gauge people’s psychology and
use it against them, but in this case he was outwitted
by a man far superior
at such a game. Metternich’s modus operandi was the following: he would
quietly study his enemies from
behind his smiling, elegant exterior, his own
apparent relaxation inviting them to open up. In his very first meeting with
Napoleon, he saw a man straining to impress: he noticed that the bantam
Napoleon walked on his toes, to look taller, and struggled
to suppress his
Corsican accent. Later meetings only confirmed Metternich’s impression of
a man who craved acceptance as the
social equal of Europe’s aristocracy.
The emperor was insecure.
This insight won, Metternich used it to craft the perfect counter- strategy:
the offer of marriage into the Austrian dynasty.
To a Corsican, that would
mean everything, and it would blind Napoleon to a simple reality: for
aristocrats like Metternich
and the Austrian emperor, family ties meant
nothing compared to the survival of the dynasty itself.
When Munenori was granted an audience with the shogun, he sat down, put
his hands on the tatami floor, as retainers always
did to show their respect
to their master. Suddenly, Iemitsu thrust a spear at the “unsuspecting”
Munenori—and was surprised to find himself lying flat on his back!
Munenori had sensed the shogun’s intention before a move
had been made,
and swept Iemitsu’s legs out from under him at the instant of the thrust.
LIVES OF MASTER SWORDSMEN, MAKOTO SUGAWARA, 1988
Metternich’s genius was to recognize the appropriate target for his
strategy: not Napoleon’s armies, which Austria could not
hope to defeat—
Napoleon was a general for the ages—but Napoleon’s mind. The prince
understood that even the most powerful
of men remains human and has
human weaknesses. By entering Napoleon’s private life, being deferential
and subordinate, Metternich
could find his weaknesses and hurt him as no
army could. By getting closer to him emotionally—through the emperor’s
sister
Caroline, through the Archduchess Marie Louise, through their
convivial meetings—he could choke him in a friendly embrace.
Understand: your real enemy is your opponent’s mind. His armies, his
resources, his intelligence, can all be overcome if you
can fathom his
weakness, the emotional blind spot through which you can deceive, distract,
and manipulate him. The most powerful
army in the world can be beaten by
unhinging the mind of its leader.
And the best way to find the leader’s weaknesses is not through spies but
through the close embrace. Behind a friendly, even
subservient front, you
can observe your enemies, get them to open up and reveal themselves. Get
inside their skin; think as
they think. Once you discover their vulnerability
—an uncontrollable temper, a weakness for the opposite sex, a gnawing
insecurity—you
have the material to destroy them.
War is not an act of the will aimed at inanimate matter, as it is in the
mechanical arts. . . . Rather, [it] is an act of the will aimed at a living entity
that reacts.
—Carl von Clausewitz (1780–1831)
KEYS TO WARFARE
The greatest power you could have in life would come neither from
limitless resources nor even consummate skill in strategy.
It would come
from clear knowledge of those around you—the ability to read people like a
book. Given that knowledge, you could
distinguish friend from foe,
smoking out snakes in the grass. You could anticipate your enemies’ malice,
pierce their strategies,
and take defensive action. Their transparency would
reveal to you the emotions they could least control. Armed with that
knowledge,
you could make them tumble into traps and destroy them.
This kind of knowledge has been a military goal since the dawn of
history. That is why the arts of intelligence gathering
and spying were
invented. But spies are unreliable; they filter information through their own
preconceptions and prejudices,
and since their trade places them precisely
between one side and the other and forces them to be independent
operators, they
are notoriously hard to control and can turn against you.
Then, too, the nuances that give people away—the tone in a speaker’s
voice, the look in his or her eyes—are inevitably missing from their reports.
In the end the spy’s information means nothing
unless you are adept at
interpreting human behavior and psychology. Without that skill you will see
in it what you want to
see, confirming your own prejudices.
In my opinion, there are two kinds of eyes: one kind simply looks at things
and the other sees through things to perceive their inner nature. The former
should not be
tense [so as to observe as much as possible]; the latter should
be strong [so as to discern the workings of the opponent’s mind clearly].
Sometimes a man can read another’s mind with his eyes. In fencing, it is all
right to allow your own eyes to express your
will but never let them reveal
your mind. This matter should be considered carefully and studied
diligently.
MIYAMOTO MUSASHI, 1584–1645
The leaders who have made best use of intelligence—Hannibal, Julius
Caesar, Prince Metternich, Winston Churchill, Lyndon Johnson
during his
career in the U.S. Senate—were all first and foremost great students of
human nature and superior readers of men.
They honed their skills through
personal observation of people. Only with that foundation could the use of
spies extend their
powers of vision.
The first step in the process is to get over the idea that people are
impenetrable mysteries and that only some trick will
let you peek into their
souls. If they seem mysterious, it is because almost all of us learn to
disguise our true feelings
and intentions from an early age. If we went
around showing just how we felt and telling people what we planned to do,
we
would make ourselves vulnerable to malice, and if we always spoke our
minds, we would offend a lot of people unnecessarily.
So as we grow up,
concealing much of what we are thinking becomes second nature.
This deliberate opacity makes the intelligence game difficult but not
impossible. For even as people consciously struggle
to conceal what is
going on in their minds, they unconsciously want to reveal themselves.
Hiding how we feel in social situations
is exhausting; being able to show
ourselves is a relief. We secretly want people to know us, even including
our dark side.
Even while we consciously struggle to control this hidden
yearning, unconsciously we are always sending out signals that reveal
a part
of what is going on inside—slips of the tongue, tones of voice, styles of
dress, nervous twitches, sudden irrational
actions, a look in the eye that
contradicts our words, the things we say after a drink.
Anger as spy.—Anger empties out the soul and brings even its dregs to
light. That is why, if we know no other way of discovering the truth
of the
matter, we must know how to put our acquaintances, our adherents and
opponents, into a rage, so as to learn all that
is really being thought and
undertaken against us.
HUMAN, ALL TOO HUMAN, FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, 1886
Understand: day in and day out, people emit signals that reveal their
intentions and deepest desires. If we do not pick them
up, it is because we
are not paying attention. The reason for this is simple: we are usually
locked up in our own worlds,
listening to our internal monologues, obsessed
with ourselves and with satisfying our own egos. Like William
Macnaghten, we
tend to see other people merely as reflections of ourselves.
To the extent that you can drop your self-interest and see people
for who
they are, divorced from your desires, you will become more sensitive to
their signals.
The ability to read people was a critical survival skill for Japanese
samurai and was particularly emphasized by the Shinkage
school of
swordsmanship. One of the school’s earliest masters was the seventeenth-
century samurai Yagyu Munenori. One spring
afternoon in his later years,
Munenori was taking a peaceful walk through his gardens, admiring the
cherry blossoms. He was
accompanied by a page/protector, who walked
behind him, sword raised, as was the custom. Suddenly Munenori stopped
in his
tracks. He had a feeling of danger. Looking around, he saw nothing to
warrant this feeling, but even so he was so troubled
that he returned to his
house and sat with his back against a post to prevent a surprise attack.
Then David fled from Nai’oth in Ramah, and came and said before
Jonathan, “What have I done? What is my guilt? And what is my sin before
your father, that he seeks my life?”And he said to him,“Far from it! You
shall not die. Behold, my father does nothing either great or small without
disclosing it to me; and why should my father
hide this from me? It is not
so.” But David replied, “Your father knows well that I have found favor in
your eyes; and he thinks, ‘Let not Jonathan
know this, lest he be grieved.’
But truly, as the Lord lives and as your soul lives, there is but a step
between me and death.”
Then said Jonathan to David, “Whatever you say, I
will do for you.” David said to Jonathan,“Behold, tomorrow is the new
moon,
and I should not fail to sit at table with the king; but let me go, that I
may hide myself in the field till the third day
at evening. If your father
misses me at all, then say, ‘David earnestly asked leave of me to run to
Bethlehem his city; for
there is a yearly sacrifice there for all the family.’ If
he says, ‘Good!’ it will be well with your servant; but if he is angry, then
know that evil is determined by him.” . .
. And Jonathan said to David,
“Come, let us go out into the field.” So they both went out into the field. . . .
So David hid
himself in the field; and when the new moon came, the king
sat down to eat food. The king sat upon his seat, as at other times, upon the
seat by the wall; Jonathan sat opposite, and Abner sat by Saul’s side, but
David’s place was empty. Yet Saul did not say anything that day; for he
thought, “Something has befallen him; he is not clean, surely he is not
clean.”
But on the second day, the morrow after the new moon, David’s
place was empty. And Saul said to Jonathan his son, “Why has not the son
of Jesse come to the meal, either yesterday or today?” Jonathan answered
Saul, “David earnestly asked leave of me to go to Bethlehem; he said, ‘Let
me go; for our family holds a
sacrifice in the city, and my brother has
commanded me to be there. So now, if I have found favor in your eyes, let
me get
away, and see my brothers.’ For this reason he has not come to the
king’s table.” Then Saul’s anger was kindled against Jonathan, and he said
to him, “You son of a perverse, rebellious woman, do I not know
that you
have chosen the son of Jesse to your own shame, and to the shame of your
mother’s nakedness? For as long as the son
of Jesse lives upon the earth,
neither you nor your kingdom shall be established. Therefore send and fetch
him to me, for he shall surely die.” Then Jonathan answered Saul his father,
“Why should he be put
to death? What has he done?” But Saul cast his
spear at him to smite him; so Jonathan knew that his father was determined
to put David to death.
And Jonathan rose from the table in fierce anger and
ate no food the second day of the month, for he was grieved for David,
because his father had disgraced him.
1 SAMUEL 20:1–11, 24–34
After Munenori had sat there for a while, his page asked him what was
the matter. The samurai confessed that while looking
at the cherry blossoms
he had had an intimation of imminent danger, of an enemy on the attack.
What troubled him now was that
the danger had apparently been imaginary
—he must have hallucinated it. A samurai depended on his keen instincts to
anticipate
attack. If Munenori had lost that power, his life as a warrior was
over.
Suddenly the page threw himself to the ground and confessed: as
Munenori walked in the garden, the thought had come to the
page that if he
were to strike at his master while the samurai was lost in admiration of the
cherry blossoms, not even this
gifted swordsman could have parried his
attack. Munenori had not lost his skill at all; quite the contrary—his
incomparable
sensitivity to other people’s emotions and thoughts had
allowed him to pick up sensations from someone behind his back, rather
as
a horse senses the energy of its rider or a dog the movements of its owner.
An animal has that sensitivity because it pays
complete attention. Similarly,
the Shinkage school taught warriors to empty their minds, centering
themselves in the moment
as animals did and keeping themselves from
getting derailed by any particular thought. This would allow the Shinkage
warrior
to read in his opponent’s elbow or hand the slight tension that
signaled an attack; he could look through his opponent’s eyes
and sense the
coming blow or notice the nervous shuffle of the feet that indicated fear or
confusion. A master like Munenori
could virtually read someone’s thoughts
when the other person wasn’t even visible.
The power taught by the Shinkage school—the same power possessed by
Prince Metternich—was the ability to let go of one’s ego,
to submerge
oneself temporarily in the other person’s mind. You will be amazed at how
much you can pick up about people if
you can shut off your incessant
interior monologue, empty your thoughts, and anchor yourself in the
moment. The details you
now see give you unfiltered information from
which you can put together an accurate picture of people’s weaknesses and
desires.
Be particularly attentive to their eyes: it takes a lot of effort to hide
the eyes’ message about a person’s state of mind.
According to the baseball pitcher Bob Lemon, the great player Ted
Williams “was the only hitter who you felt saw through you.”
In the
struggle between pitcher and batter, the pitcher has the advantage of
knowing what pitch he will throw. The hitter
can only guess at that, which
is why even the best of them usually connect only one out of every three or
four times. Somehow
Williams changed those odds.
Williams’s method wasn’t magic, or even intuition; it was simple enough.
He made baseball pitchers his study, watching their
patterns over the course
of a game, a season, a career. He would ask the pitchers on his own team
endless questions about
their process, trying to get a feel for how they
thought. At the plate he would empty his mind of everything but the pitcher,
noticing the slightest hitch in his windup or change in his grip—anything
that would signal his intentions. The end result
seemed uncanny: at bat,
Williams was able to think himself into the pitcher’s mind and anticipate
the pitch that was coming.
Sometimes he would even see himself as another
person—a pitcher trying to outwit the great hitter Ted Williams. As
Williams
demonstrates, the ability to mimic and get inside your enemies’
thought patterns depends on collecting as much information
on them as you
can, analyzing their past behavior for its habitual patterns, and being alert to
the signs they give off in
the present.
It is of course critical that people be unaware you are watching them so
closely. A friendly front, like Prince Metternich’s
to Napoleon, will help
disguise what you’re doing. Do not ask too many questions; the trick is to
get people to relax and
open up without prodding, shadowing them so
quietly that they never guess what you’re really up to.
Information is useless unless you know how to interpret it, how to use it
to tell appearance from reality. You must learn
how to recognize a range of
psychological types. Be alert, for instance, to the phenomenon of the
masked opposite: when someone
strikingly manifests a particular
personality trait, that trait may well be a cover-up. The oily character who is
ingratiatingly
effusive with flattery may be hiding hostility and ill will; the
aggressive bully may be hiding insecurity; the moralizer
may be making a
show of purity to hide nefarious desires. Whether they’re throwing dust in
your eyes or their own—they may
be trying to convince themselves that
they’re not what they’re afraid they are—the opposite trait lurks below the
surface.
In general, it is easier to observe people in action, particularly in
moments of crisis. Those are the times when they either
reveal their
weakness or struggle so hard to disguise it that you can see through the
mask. You can actively probe them by
doing things that seem harmless but
get a response—maybe say something bold or provocative, then see how
they react. Making
people emotional, pushing their buttons, will touch some
deep part of their nature. Either they will let slip some truth about
themselves or they will put on a mask that you, in the laboratory situation
you have created, will be able to peer behind.
A critical part of understanding people is gauging their powers of
resistance. Without that knowledge you will either over-
or underestimate
them, depending on your own levels of fear and confidence. You need to
know how much fight people have in
them. Someone hiding his cowardice
and lack of resolve can be made to surrender with a single violent push;
someone desperate
who has little to lose will fight to the bitter end. The
Mongols used to begin their campaigns with a battle whose only purpose
was to test their opponent’s strength and resolve. They would never deal
with an enemy until they had gauged his morale. This
set-up battle also had
the benefit of revealing something of his strategy and thought.
The quality of the information you gather on your enemies is more
important than the quantity. A single but crucial nugget
can be the key to
their destruction. When the Carthaginian general Hannibal saw that the
Roman general he was facing was arrogant
and hot-tempered, he would
deliberately play weak, luring the man into a rash attack. Once Churchill
saw that Hitler had a
paranoid streak, becoming irrational at the merest hint
of vulnerability, the British prime minister knew how to unhinge the
German führer: by feigning to attack some marginal area like the Balkans,
he could make him see threats on all sides and spread
out his defenses, a
critical military mistake.
In 1988, Lee Atwater was a political strategist on the team of the senior
George Bush, who was then in the race to become
that year’s Republican
presidential nominee. Discovering that Bush’s main rival, Senator Robert
Dole, had a terrible temper
that his aides had to struggle to control, Atwater
devised endless stratagems to push Dole’s buttons. Not only did an upset
Dole look unpresidential to the American public, but an emotional and
angry man rarely thinks straight. A disturbed mind is
one you can control
and unbalance at will.
Motive of attack. — One attacks someone not only so as to harm him or to
overpower him but perhaps only so as to learn how strong he is.
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, 1844–1900
There are, of course, limits to how much intelligence gathering you can
achieve by firsthand observation. A network of spies
will extend your
vision, particularly as you learn to interpret the information they bring you.
An informal network is the
best—a group of allies recruited over time to be
your eyes and ears. Try to make friends with people at or near the source
of
information on your rival; one well-placed friend will yield far more than
will a handful of paid spies. In Napoleon’s
time his intelligence network
was second to none, but his best information came from friends whom he
had carefully positioned
in diplomatic circles around Europe.
Always look for internal spies, people in the enemy camp who are
dissatisfied and have an ax to grind. Turn them to your purposes
and they
will give you better information than any infiltrator you sneak in from
outside. Hire people the enemy has fired—they
will tell you how the enemy
thinks. President Bill Clinton got his best intelligence on the Republicans
from his adviser Dick
Morris, who had worked for them for years and knew
their weaknesses, both personal and organizational. A warning: never rely
on one spy, one source of information, no matter how good. You risk being
played or getting slanted, one-sided information.
Last year at a great conference there was a certain man who explained his
dissenting opinion and said he was resolved to kill
the conference leader if
it was not accepted. His motion was passed. After the procedures were over,
the man said, “Their assent came quickly. I think that they are too weak and
unreliable to
be counselors to the master.”
HAGAKURE: THE BOOK OF THE SAMURAI, YAMAMOTO
TSUNETOMO, 1659–1720
Many people leave a paper trail of writings, interviews, and so on that is
as revealing as anything you can learn from a spy.
Well before World War
II, Adolf Hitler’s book Mein Kampf supplied a blueprint of his thinking and
intentions, not to mention endless clues to his psychology. His generals
Erwin Rommel
and Heinz Guderian also wrote about the new kind of
blitzkrieg warfare they were preparing. People reveal a lot about
themselves
in their writing, partly intentionally—they are out to explain
themselves, after all—and partly helplessly to the skilled
reader-between-
the-lines.
Finally, the enemy you are dealing with is not an inanimate object that
will simply respond in an expected manner to your
strategies. Your enemies
are constantly changing and adapting to what you are doing. Innovating and
inventing on their own,
they try to learn from their mistakes and from your
successes. So your knowledge of the enemy cannot be static. Keep your
intelligence up to date, and do not rely on the enemy’s responding the same
way twice. Defeat is a stern teacher, and your
beaten opponent today may
be wiser tomorrow. Your strategies must take this possibility into account;
your knowledge of the
enemy must be not just deep but timely.
Colonel John Cremony commented on their adeptness at seeming to
“disappear” when he wrote “an Apache can conceal his swart
body amidst
the green grass, behind brown shrubs, or gray rocks, with so much address
and judgement that any but the experienced
would pass him by without
detection at the distance of three or four yard” and noted that “they will
watch for days, scanning
your every movement, observing your every act;
taking exact note of your party and all its belongings. Let no one suppose
that these assaults are made upon the spur of the moment by bands
accidentally encountered. Far from it; they are almost invariably
the results
of long watching—patient waiting—careful and rigorous observation, and
anxious counsel.” 
WARRIORS: WARFARE AND THE NATIVE AMERICAN INDIAN,
NORMAN BANCROFT-HUNT, 1995
Image: The Shadow. Everyone has a shadow, a secret self, a dark side.
This shadow comprises everything people try to hide
from the world—
their weaknesses, secret desires, selfish intentions. This shadow is invisible
from a distance; to see it you
must get up close, physically and most of all
psychologically. Then it will come into relief. Follow close in your target’s
footsteps and he will not notice how much of his shadow he has revealed.
Authority: Thus the reason the farsighted ruler and his superior
commander conquer the enemy at every move, and achieve
successes
far beyond the reach of the common crowd, is
advance knowledge. Such knowledge cannot be had from
ghosts and spirits, educed
by comparison with past events, or
verified by astrological calculations. It must come from people
—people who know the enemy’s
situation. —Sun-tzu (fourth
century B.C.)
In principle, I should lay it down that the existence of secret agents should
not be tolerated, as tending to augment the
positive dangers of the evil
against which they are used. That the spy will fabricate his information is a
commonplace. But in the sphere of political and revolutionary action,
relying partly on violence, the professional spy has every facility
to
fabricate the very facts themselves, and will spread the double evil of
emulation in one direction, and of panic, hasty
legislation, unreflecting
hate, on the other.
THE SECRET AGENT, JOSEPH CONRAD, 1857–1924
REVERSAL
Even as you work to know your enemies, you must make yourself as
formless and difficult to read as possible. Since people
really only have
appearances to go on, they can be readily deceived. Act unpredictably now
and then. Throw them some golden
nugget of your inner self— something
fabricated that has nothing to do with who you really are. Be aware that
they are scrutinizing
you, and either give them nothing or feed them
misinformation. Keeping yourself formless and inscrutable will make it
impossible
for people to defend themselves against you and render the
intelligence they gather on you useless.
14
OVERWHELM RESISTANCE
WITH SPEED AND SUDDENNESS
THE BLITZKRIEG STRATEGY
In a world in which many people are indecisive and overly
cautious, the use of speed will bring you untold power. Striking
first, before your opponents have time to think or prepare, will
make them emotional, unbalanced, and prone to error. When
you follow with another swift and sudden maneuver, you will
induce further panic and confusion. This strategy works best
with
a setup, a lull—your unexpected action catches your
enemy off guard. When you strike, hit with unrelenting force.
Acting with
speed and decisiveness will garner you respect,
awe, and irresistible momentum.
War is such that the supreme consideration is speed. This is to take
advantage of what is beyond the reach of the enemy, to
go by way of routes
where he least expects you, and to attack where he has made no
preparations.
SUN-TZU, FOURTH CENTURY B.C.
SLOW-SLOW-QUICK-QUICK
In 1218, Muhammad II, the shah of Khwarizm, received a visit from three
ambassadors on behalf of Genghis Khan, the leader
of the Mongol Empire
to the east. The visitors bore magnificent gifts and, more important, the
offer of a treaty between the
two powers that would allow the reopening of
the lucrative Silk Road connecting China and Europe. The shah’s empire
was immense,
incorporating present-day Iran and much of Afghanistan. His
capital, Samarkand, was fabulously wealthy, a symbol of his power,
and
increased trade along the route would only add to these riches. Since the
Mongols made it clear they considered him the
superior partner in the deal,
the shah decided to sign the treaty.
A few months later, a Mongol caravan arrived in the city of Otrar, in the
northeastern corner of the shah’s empire, with the
mission to buy luxury
items for the Mongol court. The governor of Otrar suspected the men in the
caravan of being spies. He
had them killed, and he seized the goods they
had brought to barter. Hearing of this outrage, Genghis Khan dispatched an
ambassador,
escorted by two soldiers, to the shah, calling for an apology.
The demand—which presumed to put the two empires on equal footing—
incensed
the shah. He had the ambassador’s head cut off and sent back to
Genghis Khan. This, of course, meant war.
The shah was not afraid: his army, anchored by its well-trained Turkish
cavalry, numbered over 400,000, at least twice the
enemy’s size. By
defeating the Mongols in battle, the shah could finally take over their land.
He assumed the Mongols would
attack Transoxiana, the easternmost part of
the shah’s empire. Bordered to the east by the five-hundred-mile-long Syr
Dar’ya
River, to the north by the Kizil Kum Desert, and to the west by the
Amu Dar’ya River, Transoxiana’s interior was also home
to two of the most
important cities of the empire, Samarkand and Bukhara. The shah decided
to establish a cordon of soldiers
along the Syr Dar’ya, which the Mongols
would have to cross to enter his empire. They could not cross from the
north—the desert
was impassable—and to go to the south would be too
great a detour. Keeping the bulk of his army in the interior of Transoxiana,
he would be able to place reinforcements where needed. He had an
impregnable defensive position and superiority in numbers.
Let the
Mongols come. He would crush them.
In the summer of 1219, scouts reported that the Mongols were
approaching the southern end of the Syr Dar’ya, through the Fergana
Valley. The shah sent a large force, under the leadership of his son Jalal ad-
Din, to destroy the enemy. After a fierce battle,
the Mongols retreated. Jalal
ad-Din reported back to his father that the Mongol army was not nearly as
fearsome as their reputation.
The men looked haggard, their horses
emaciated, and they seemed none too eager to sustain a fight. The shah,
believing the
Mongols no match for his army, put more troops at the
southern end of the cordon and waited.
A few months later, a Mongol battalion appeared without warning in the
north, attacking the city of Otrar and capturing its
governor—the same man
responsible for the outrage against the Mongol traders. The Mongols killed
him by pouring molten silver
into his eyes and ears. Stunned by how
quickly they had managed to reach Otrar, and from an unexpected direction,
the shah
decided to shift more troops to the north. These barbarians might
move swiftly, he reasoned, but they could not overcome an
entrenched army
with such great numbers.
Next, however, two Mongol armies swept south from Otrar, running
parallel to the Syr Dar’ya. One, under General Jochi, began
to attack key
towns along the river, while the other, under General Jebe, disappeared to
the south. Like locusts, Jochi’s
army swarmed through the hills and
lowlands near the river. The shah moved a good portion of his army to the
river, keeping
some reserves in Samarkand. Jochi’s force was relatively
small, 20,000 at most; these mobile units hit one position after
another,
without warning, burning forts and wreaking havoc.
Reports from the front lines began to give the shah a picture of these
strange warriors from the east. Their army was all
cavalry. Each Mongol not
only rode a horse but was trailed by several more riderless horses, all mares,
and when his own horse
tired, he would mount a fresh one. These horses
were light and fast. The Mongols were unencumbered by supply wagons;
they
carried their food with them, drank the mares’ milk and blood, and
killed and ate the horses that had become weak. They could
travel twice as
fast as their enemy. Their marksmanship was extraordinary—facing
forward or in retreat, they could fire arrows
with remarkable dexterity,
making their attacks far deadlier than anything the shah’s army had ever
seen. Their divisions
communicated over great distances with flags and
torches; their maneuvers were precisely coordinated and nearly impossible
to anticipate.
Dealing with this constant harassment exhausted the shah’s forces. Now,
suddenly, the army under General Jebe that had disappeared
to the south
reappeared heading northwest into Transoxiana at remarkable speed. The
shah hurriedly sent south his last reserves,
an army of 50,000, to do battle
with Jebe. He still was not worried—his men had proved their superiority in
direct combat,
at the battle in the Fergana Valley.
This time, however, it was different. The Mongols unleashed strange
weapons: their arrows were dipped in burning tar, which
created smoke
screens behind which their lightning-quick horsemen advanced, opening
breaches in the lines of the shah’s army
through which more heavily armed
cavalry would advance. Chariots darted back and forth behind the Mongol
lines, bringing up
constant supplies. The Mongols filled the sky with
arrows, creating relentless pressure. They wore shirts of heavy silk. An
arrow that managed to pierce the shirt would rarely reach the flesh and
could be extracted easily by pulling at the shirt,
all of this done while
moving at great speed. Jebe’s army annihilated the shah’s forces.
The shah had one option left: retreat to the west, retrench, and slowly
rebuild his army. As he began preparations, however,
something beyond
belief occurred: an army under Genghis Khan himself suddenly stood
outside the gates of the city of Bukhara,
to the west of Samarkand. Where
had they come from? They could not have crossed the Kizil Kum Desert to
the north. Their appearance
seemed all but impossible, as if the devil
himself had conjured them up. Bukhara soon fell, and within days
Samarkand followed.
Soldiers deserted, generals panicked. The shah,
fearing for his life, fled with a handful of soldiers. The Mongols pursued
him relentlessly. Months later, on a small island in the Caspian Sea,
abandoned by one and all, wearing rags and begging for
food, the former
ruler of the wealthiest empire in the East finally died of hunger.
Interpretation
When Genghis Khan became the leader of the Mongol nation, he inherited
perhaps the fastest army on the planet, but their swiftness
had translated
into limited military success. The Mongols might have perfected the art of
fighting on horseback, but they
were too undisciplined to exploit any
advantage they gained this way or to coordinate for a large-scale attack. The
genius
of Genghis Khan was to transform the chaotic Mongol speed into
something organized, disciplined, and strategic. He achieved
this by
adapting the ancient Chinese strategy of slow-slow-quick-quick.
The first step, a “slow,” was to meticulously prepare before any
campaign, which the Mongols always did to the highest degree.
(In
planning for the attack on the shah, the Mongols learned of a guide who
knew of a chain of oases across the Kizil Kum
Desert. This man was
captured and later led Genghis Khan’s army across the forbidding territory.)
The second “slow” was a
setup, which involved getting the enemy to lower
its guard, lulling it into complacency. The Mongols, for example,
deliberately
lost the first battle in the Fergana Valley to feed the shah’s
arrogance. Then came the first “quick”: fixing the enemy’s
attention
forward with a swift frontal attack ( Jebe’s raids along the river). The final
“quick” was a doubly swift blow from
an unexpected direction. (Genghis’s
sudden appearance before the gates of Bukhara is considered by many the
greatest military
surprise in history.) A master of psychological warfare,
Genghis Khan understood that men are most terrified by the unknown
and
unpredictable. The suddenness of his attacks made the speed of them
doubly effective, leading to confusion and panic.
We live in a world in which speed is prized above almost all else, and
acting faster than the other side has itself become
the primary goal. But
most often people are merely in a hurry, acting and reacting frantically to
events, all of which makes
them prone to error and wasting time in the long
run. In order to separate yourself from the pack, to harness a speed that
has
devastating force, you must be organized and strategic. First, you prepare
yourself before any action, scanning your enemy
for weaknesses. Then you
find a way to get your opponents to underestimate you, to lower their guard.
When you strike unexpectedly,
they will freeze up. When you hit again, it is
from the side and out of nowhere. It is the unanticipated blow that makes
the
biggest impact.
The less a thing is foreseen, the more . . . fright does it cause. This is
nowhere seen better than in war, where every surprise strikes terror even
to those who are much the stronger.
—Xenophon (430?–355? B.C.)
CHEN/THE AROUSING (SHOCK, THUNDER)
The hexagram Chen represents the eldest son, who seizes rule with energy
and power. A yang line develops below two yin lines and presses upward
forcibly. This movement is so violent that it arouses terror.
It is symbolized
by thunder, which bursts forth from the earth and by its shock causes fear
and trembling.
THE JUDGEMENT SHOCK brings success. 
Shock comes—oh, oh! Laughing words— ha, ha! The shock terrifies for a
hundred miles. . . .
THE I CHING, CHINA, CIRCA EIGHTH CENTURY B.C.
KEYS TO WARFARE
In May 1940 the German army invaded France and the Low Countries
using a new form of warfare: the blitzkrieg. Advancing with
incredible
speed, the Germans coordinated tanks and airplanes in an attack that
culminated in one of the quickest and most
devastating victories in military
history. The success of the blitzkrieg was largely due to the Allies’ static,
rigid defense—similar
to the shah’s defense against the Mongols. When the
Germans breached this defense, the Allies could not adjust or react in
time.
The Germans advanced faster than their enemy could process what was
happening. By the time the Allies decided upon a
counterstrategy it was too
late—conditions had changed. They were always a step behind.
Now more than ever, we find ourselves dealing with people who are
defensive and cautious, who begin any action from a static
position. The
reason is simple: the pace of modern life is increasingly growing faster, full
of distractions, annoyances,
and interruptions. The natural response for
many is to retreat inward, to erect psychological walls against the harsh
realities
of modern life. People hate the feeling of being rushed and are
terrified of making a mistake. They unconsciously try to slow
things down
—by taking longer to make decisions, being noncommittal, defensive, and
cautious.
Blitzkrieg warfare, adapted for daily combat, is the perfect strategy for
these times. While those around you remain defensive
and immobile, you
surprise them with sudden and decisive action, forcing them to act before
they are ready. They cannot respond,
as they usually do, by being elusive or
cautious. They will most likely become emotional and react imprudently.
You have breached
their defenses, and if you keep up the pressure and hit
them again with something unexpected, you will send them into a kind
of
downward psychological spiral—pushing them into mistakes, which further
deepens their confusion, and so the cycle goes
on.
Many of those who practiced a form of blitzkrieg warfare on the
battlefield used it to great effect in daily life. Julius
Caesar—master of
speed and surprise—was a great example of this. From out of the blue, he
might form an alliance with a senator’s
bitterest enemy, forcing the senator
either to change his opposition to Caesar or to risk a dangerous
confrontation. Equally,
he might unexpectedly pardon a man who had
fought against him. Caught off guard, the man would become a loyal ally.
Caesar’s
reputation for doing the unpredictable made people all the more
cautious in his presence, further enhancing his ability to
catch those around
him unawares.
But the genius in Ali takes his limitations and makes them virtues. Let us go
step by step. I can’t think of a past heavyweight
champion whose punching
power wasn’t superior to Ali’s. Yet in his first twenty fights, Ali, then
Cassius Clay, won every
one of them, scoring seventeen knockouts. . . . So
what is Ali’s mystery? Why does a man who every expert agrees has no
punching
power knock most of his opponents out, including a one-punch
K.O. over Sonny Liston on Ali’s first defense of his title? The answer is in
speed and timing. Clay then, and Ali now, has the ability to let punches go
with extreme quickness, but most
important, at the right moment, just before
the man in front of him is able to put his boxer’s sense of anticipation to
work. When that happens, the man getting hit doesn’t see the punch. As a
result, this man’s brain can’t prepare him to receive
the impact of the blow.
The eyes couldn’t send the message back to the part of the body which
would take the shock. So we
arrive at one knockout of a conclusion: the
punch that puts you to sleep is not so much the hard punch as the punch
that you
don’t see coming.
STING LIKE A BEE, JOSÉ TORRES AND BERT RANDOLPH SUGAR,
1971
This strategy works wonders on those who are particularly hesitant and
afraid of making any kind of mistake. In similar fashion,
if you are facing
an enemy that has divided leadership or internal cracks, a sudden and swift
attack will make the cracks
larger and cause internal collapse. Half of the
success of Napoleon Bonaparte’s form of blitzkrieg warfare was that he
used
it against armies of allies in which several bickering generals were in
charge of strategy. Once his army broke through these
armies’ defenses,
dissension would break out and they would fall apart from within.
The blitzkrieg strategy can be effective in diplomacy, too, as Henry
Kissinger demonstrated. The former U.S. secretary of
state would often take
his time when beginning diplomatic negotiations, lulling the other side with
bland banter. Then, with
the deadline for the end of the talks approaching,
he would suddenly hit them with a list of demands. Without enough time
to
process what was happening, they became prone to giving in or to
becoming emotional and making mistakes. This was Kissinger’s
version of
slow-slow-quick-quick.
For their initial thrust into France during World War II, the Germans
chose to attack through the Ardennes Forest in southern
Belgium. The
forest, considered impenetrable by tank, was lightly guarded. Pushing
through this weak point, the Germans were
able to build up speed and
momentum. In launching a blitzkrieg, you must begin by finding your
enemy’s weak point. Initiating
the action where there will be less resistance
will allow you to develop crucial momentum.
The success of this strategy depends on three things: a group that is
mobile (often, the smaller the better), superior coordination
between the
parts, and the ability to send orders quickly up and down the chain of
command. Do not depend on technology to
accomplish this. During the
Vietnam War, the U.S. military might in fact have been hindered by its
superior communications—too
much information to be processed made for
slower response times. The North Vietnamese, who depended on a well-
coordinated
network of spies and informers, not gadgetry, made decisions
more quickly and as a result were more nimble on the ground.
Shortly after being elected president in 1932, Franklin D. Roosevelt
seemed to disappear from the public stage. The Depression
was at its
height, and for many Americans this was not very reassuring. Then, with
his inauguration, Roosevelt changed tempo,
giving a rousing speech that
showed he had in fact been meditating deeply on the issues facing the
country. In the weeks that
followed, he came at Congress fast and furiously,
with a series of bold legislative proposals. The intensity of this new
direction
was felt all the more because of the slow setup. More than mere
drama, the momentum built by this strategy helped Roosevelt
to convince
the public that he meant business and was leading the country in the right
direction. This momentum translated
into support for his policies, which in
turn helped spur confidence and turn the economy around.
Speed, then, is not only a powerful tool to use against an enemy, but it
can also have a bracing, positive influence on those
on your side. Frederick
the Great noted that an army that moves quickly has higher morale. Velocity
creates a sense of vitality.
Moving with speed means there is less time for
you and your army to make mistakes. It also creates a bandwagon effect:
more
and more people admiring your boldness, will decide to join forces
with you. Like Roosevelt, make such decisive action as
dramatic as
possible: a moment of quiet and suspense on the stage before you make
your startling entrance.
Veni, vidi, vici (I came, I saw, I conquered).
JULIUS CAESAR, 100–44 B.C.
Image: The Storm. The sky becomes still and calm, and a lull sets in,
peaceful and soothing. Then, out of nowhere, lightning
strikes, the wind
picks up . . . and the sky explodes. It is the suddenness of the storm that is
so terrifying.
Authority: You must be slow in deliberation and swift in
execution. —Napoleon Bonaparte (1769–1821)
REVERSAL
Slowness can have great value, particularly as a setup. To appear slow and
deliberate, even a little foolish, will lull your
enemies, infecting them with a
sleepy attitude. Once their guard is down, an unexpected blow from the side
will knock them
out. Your use of slowness and speed, then, should be
deliberate and controlled, never a natural tempo that you fall into.
In general, when facing a fast enemy, the only true defense is to be as fast
or faster. Only speed can neutralize speed. Setting
up a rigid defense, as the
shah did against the Mongols, only plays into the hands of the swift and
mobile.
15
CONTROL THE DYNAMIC
FORCING STRATEGIES
People are constantly struggling to control you—getting you to
act in their interests, keeping the dynamic on their terms.
The
only way to get the upper hand is to make your play for control
more intelligent and insidious. Instead of trying to dominate
the
other side’s every move, work to define the nature of the
relationship itself. Shift the conflict to terrain of your choice,
altering the pace and stakes to suit you. Maneuver to control
your opponents’ minds, pushing their emotional buttons, and
compelling them to make mistakes. If necessary, let them feel
they are in control in order to get them to lower their guard. If
you control the overall direction and framing of the battle,
anything they do will play into your hands.
“Pressing down the pillow” refers to one’s efforts not to let the head of
one’s opponent rise. In battles based on martial
strategy, it is taboo to let
your opponent take the initiative, thus putting yourself on the defensive. You
must try at all
costs to lead your opponent by taking complete control of
him. During combat, your opponent intends to dominate you as much
as
you want to dominate him, so it is vital that you pick up on your opponent’s
intentions and tactics so as to control him.
. . . According to the principle of
martial strategy, you must be able to control your opponent(s) at all times.
Study this
point well.
THE BOOK OF FIVE RINGS, MIYAMOTO MUSASHI, 1584–1645
THE ART OF ULTIMATE CONTROL
Control is an issue in all relationships. It is human nature to abhor feelings
of helplessness and to strive for power. Whenever
two people or groups
interact, there is a constant maneuvering between them to define the
relationship, to determine who has
control over this and that. This battle of
wills is inevitable. Your task as a strategist is twofold: First, recognize the
struggle for control in all aspects of life, and never be taken in by those who
claim they are not interested in control.
Such types are often the most
manipulative of all. Second, you must master the art of moving the other
side like pieces on
a chessboard, with purpose and direction. This art was
cultivated by the most creative generals and military strategists throughout
the ages.
War is above all else a struggle over who can control the actions of the
other side to a greater extent. Military geniuses
such as Hannibal,
Napoleon, and Erwin Rommel discovered that the best way to attain control
is to determine the overall pace,
direction, and shape of the war itself. This
means getting enemies to fight according to your tempo, luring them onto
terrain
that is unfamiliar to them and suited to you, playing to your
strengths. And, most important of all, it means gaining influence
over the
frame of mind of your opponents, adapting your maneuvers to their
psychological weaknesses.
The superior strategist understands that it is impossible to control exactly
how an enemy will respond to this move or that.
To attempt to do so will
only lead to frustration and exhaustion. There is too much in war and in life
that is unpredictable.
But if the strategist can control the mood and mind-set
of his enemies, it does not matter exactly how they respond to his
maneuvers. If he can make them frightened, panicky, overly aggressive, and
angry, he controls the wider scope of their actions
and can trap them
mentally before cornering them physically.
Control can be aggressive or passive. It can be an immediate push on the
enemy, making him back up and lose the initiative.
It can be playing
possum, getting the enemy to lower his guard, or baiting him into a rash
attack. The artist of control weaves
both of these into a devastating pattern
—hitting, backing off, baiting, overwhelming.
This art is infinitely applicable to the battles of everyday life. Many
people tend to play unconscious games of domination
or get caught up in
trying to control someone else’s every move. In trying to manage and
determine too much, they exhaust
themselves, make mistakes, push people
away, and in the end lose control of the situation. If you understand and
master the
art, you will instantly become more creative in your approach to
influencing and controlling the other side. By determining
people’s moods,
the pace at which they must move, the stakes involved, you will find that
almost anything people do in response
to your maneuvers will fit into the
overall dynamic you have shaped. They may know they are being
controlled but be helpless
to fight it, or they may move in the direction you
desire without realizing it. That is ultimate control.
The following are the four basic principles of the art.
In short, I think like Frederick [the Great], one should always be the first to
attack.
NAPOLEON BONAPARTE, 1769–1821
Keep them on their heels. Before the enemy makes a move, before the
element of chance or the unexpected actions of your opponents can ruin
your plans,
you make an aggressive move to seize the initiative. You then
keep up a relentless pressure, exploiting this momentary advantage
to the
fullest. You do not wait for opportunities to open up; you make them
yourself. If you are the weaker side, this will
often more than level the
playing field. Keeping your enemies on the defensive and in react mode
will have a demoralizing
effect on them.
Shift the battlefield. An enemy naturally wants to fight you on familiar
terrain. Terrain in this sense means all of the details of the battle—the
time
and place, exactly what is being fought over, who is involved in the
struggle, and so on. By subtly shifting your enemies
into places and
situations that are not familiar to them, you control the dynamic. Without
realizing what is happening, your
opponents find themselves fighting on
your terms.
Compel mistakes. Your enemies depend on executing a strategy that plays
to their advantages, that has worked in the past. Your task is twofold:
to
fight the battle in such a way that they cannot bring their strength or
strategy into play and to create such a level of
frustration that they make
mistakes in the process. You do not give them enough time to do anything;
you play to their emotional
weaknesses, making them as irritable as
possible; you bait them into deadly traps. It is less your action than their
missteps
that give you control.
Assume passive control. The ultimate form of domination is to make those
on the other side think they are the ones in control. Believing they are
in
command, they are less likely to resist you or become defensive. You create
this impression by moving with the energy of
the other side, giving ground
but slowly and subtly diverting them in the direction you desire. It is often
the best way to
control the overly aggressive and the passive-aggressive.
One who excels at warfare compels men and is not compelled by others.
—Sun-tzu (fourth century B.C.)
HISTORICAL EXAMPLES
1. By the end of 1940, British forces in the Middle East had been able to
secure their position in Egypt and take back a good
part of Libya that the
Italians (an ally of Germany) had seized early in World War II. Having
captured the important port
town of Benghazi, the British were poised to
advance farther west, all the way to Tripoli, allowing them to push the
Italians
out of the country for good. Then, unexpectedly, a halt was called in
their advance. General Archibald Wavell, commander in
chief of British
forces in the Middle East, was waging battle on too many fronts. Since the
Italians had proved themselves
to be rather inept in desert warfare, the
British felt they could afford to create a defensive line in Libya, build up
their
forces in Egypt, and launch a major offensive against the Italians by
April of the following year.
News that a German armored brigade under the leadership of General
Erwin Rommel had arrived in Tripoli in February 1941 did
not alter the
British plans. Rommel had been a superb commander during the blitzkrieg
in France the previous year. But here
he was under Italian command,
dependent on the incompetent Italians for supplies, and his force was too
small to make the
British nervous. In addition, intelligence reports revealed
that Hitler had sent him there with orders to do no more than
block the
British from advancing to Tripoli.
Then, without warning, at the end of March 1941, Rommel’s tanks swept
eastward. Rommel had broken up his small force into
columns, and he
hurled them in so many directions against the British defensive line that it
was hard to fathom his intentions.
These mechanized columns moved with
incredible speed; advancing at night with lights dimmed, time and again
they caught their
enemy by surprise, suddenly appearing to their flank or
rear. As their line was breached in multiple places, the British were
compelled to retreat farther and farther east. To Wavell, who was following
these events from Cairo, this was downright shocking
and humiliating:
Rommel was causing chaos with a disproportionately small number of
tanks and severe supply limitations. Within
a few weeks, the Germans had
advanced to the border of Egypt.
What was most devastating about this offensive was the novel way in
which Rommel fought. He used the desert as if it were
an ocean. Despite
supply problems and the difficult terrain, he kept his tanks in perpetual
motion. The British could not
let up their guard for a moment, and this
mentally exhausted them. But his movements, though seemingly random,
were always
for a purpose. If he wanted to take a particular city, he would
head in the opposite direction, then circle and attack from
an unexpected
side. He brought along an armada of trucks to kick up enough dust so that
the British could not see where he
was headed and to give the impression of
a much larger force than was actually on the attack.
Rommel would ride with the front line, risking death so that he could
make rapid judgments on the move, sending his columns
here and there
before the British had time to figure out the game. And he used his tanks in
the opposite way of the British,
to deadly effect. Instead of pushing them
forward to punch holes in the enemy lines, he would send out his weakest
tanks,
then have them retreat at first contact; the British tanks would
invariably swallow the bait and go in pursuit, kicking up
so much of their
own dust in the process that they would not see they were running straight
into a line of German antitank
guns. Once a sufficient number of British
tanks had been taken out, Rommel would advance again, wreaking havoc
behind the
British lines.
Kept constantly on their heels, forced to come to rapid decisions in
response to Rommel’s moves, the British made endless
mistakes. Not
knowing where he might show up next, or from what direction, they spread
their forces over dangerously vast
areas. Before long, at the mere mention
that a German column was approaching, Rommel at its head, the British
would abandon
their positions, even though they greatly outnumbered him.
In the end the only thing that stopped him was Hitler’s obsession
with
Russia, which bled Rommel of the supplies and reinforcements he needed
to conquer Egypt.
Given the same amount of intelligence, timidity will do a thousand times
more damage in war than audacity.
CARL VON CLAUSEWITZ, 1780–1831
Interpretation
This is how Rommel analyzed the situation first confronting him: The
enemy had a strong position to the east, which would
only get stronger as
more supplies and men came from Egypt. Rommel had a much smaller
force, and the longer he waited, the
more useless it would become. And so
he decided to disobey Hitler’s orders, risking his career on a truth he had
learned in
the blitzkrieg in France: making the first hit against the enemy
completely alters the dynamic. If the enemy is the stronger
side, it is
upsetting and discouraging to be suddenly put on the defensive. Being
larger and unprepared makes it harder to
organize an orderly retreat.
To get his strategy to work, Rommel had to create maximum disorder in
the enemy. In the ensuing confusion, the Germans would
seem more
formidable than they were. Speed, mobility, and surprise—as agents of such
chaos—became ends in themselves. Once
the enemy was on its heels, a
deceptive maneuver—heading one way, then attacking from another—had
double the effect. An enemy
that is in retreat and without time to think will
make endless mistakes if you keep up the pressure. Ultimately, the key to
Rommel’s success was to seize the initiative with one bold maneuver, then
exploit this momentary advantage to the fullest.
Everything in this world conspires to put you on the defensive. At work,
your superiors may want the glory for themselves
and will discourage you
from taking the initiative. People are constantly pushing and attacking you,
keeping you in react
mode. You are continually reminded of your
limitations and what you cannot hope to accomplish. You are made to feel
guilty
for this and that. Such defensiveness on your part can become a self-
fulfilling prophecy. Before anything, you need to liberate
yourself from this
feeling. By acting boldly, before others are ready, by moving to seize the
initiative, you create your
own circumstances rather than simply waiting for
what life brings you. Your initial push alters the situation, on your terms.
People are made to react to you, making you seem larger and more
powerful than may be the case. The respect and fear you inspire
will
translate into offensive power, a reputation that precedes you. Like
Rommel, you must also have a touch of madness: ready
to disorient and
confuse for its own sake, to keep advancing no matter the circumstance. It
is up to you—be constantly defensive
or make others feel it instead.
When they came to the ford of Xanthus, The eddying river that Zeus begot,
Achilles split the Trojans. Half he chased Toward the city, across the plain
where yesterday The Greeks had fled from Hector’s shining rage. Hera, to
slow this stampede of Trojans, Spread a curtain of fog between them.
The others swerved— And found themselves herded into the river. They
crashed down into the deep, silver water As it tumbled and roared through
its banks. You could hear their screams as they floundered And were
whirled around in the eddies.
Fire will sometimes cause a swarm of locusts To rise in the air and fly to a
river. The fire Keeps coming, burning them instantly,
And the insects shrink
down into the water.
Just so Achilles. And Xanthus’ noisy channel Was clogged with chariots,
horses, and men. Achilles wasted no time. Leaving his spear Propped
against a tamarisk And holding only his sword, he leapt from the bank Like
a spirit from hell bent
on slaughter. He struck over and over, in a widening
spiral. Hideous groans rose from the wounded, And the river water turned
crimson with blood.
Fish fleeing a dolphin’s huge maw Hide by the hundreds in the harbor’s
crannies, But the dolphin devours whatever it catches.
Likewise the Trojans beneath the riverbanks.
THE ILIAD, HOMER, CIRCA NINTH CENTURY B.C.
2. In 1932, Paramount Pictures, following a craze for gangster films, began
production on Night After Night. The film was to star George Raft, who had
recently made a name for himself in Scarface. Raft was cast to type as a
typical gangster. But Night After Night, in a twist, was to have a comic edge
to it. The producer, William Le Baron, was afraid that there was no one in
the cast
who had a light enough touch to pull this off. Raft, hearing of his
concern, suggested he hire Mae West.
West was a celebrity in vaudeville and on Broadway, starring in plays she
had written. She had made her reputation as a saucy,
aggressive blonde with
a devastating wit. Hollywood producers had thought of her before, but she
was too bawdy for film. And
by 1932 she was thirty-nine years old, on the
plump side, and considered too old to be making a film debut. Nevertheless,
Le Baron was willing to take a risk to liven up the picture. She would create
a splash, provide an angle for promotion, then
be sent back to Broadway,
where she belonged. Paramount offered her a two-month contract at five
thousand dollars a week,
a generous deal for the times. West happily
accepted.
At first West was a little difficult. She had been told to lose some weight,
but she hated dieting and quickly gave up. Instead
she had her hair dyed a
rather indecent platinum blond. She hated the script— the dialog was flat
and her character unimportant.
The part needed to be rewritten, and West
offered her services as a writer. Hollywood people were used to dealing
with difficult
actresses and had a panoply of tactics for taming them,
particularly those who wanted their parts rewritten. What was unusual
was
an actress who offered to rewrite her own lines. Baffled by the request, even
from someone who had written for Broadway,
the studio executives came
back with a firm refusal. Giving her that privilege would set a terrible
precedent. West countered
by refusing to continue with the film until they
let her rewrite the dialog.
Paramount boss Adolph Zukor had seen West’s screen test and liked her
look and manner. The picture needed her. Zukor had a
studio executive take
her out to dinner on her birthday to try to cajole her; the goal was to calm
her down enough so that
they could begin shooting. Once cameras were
rolling, he thought, they would find a way to get West to behave. But that
night
at dinner, West pulled out a check from her handbag and handed it to
the executive. It was for twenty thousand dollars, the
amount she had
earned to that point. She was giving the money back to the studio and,
thanking Paramount for the opportunity,
told the executive she was leaving
for New York the next morning.
Zukor, immediately apprised of this news, was caught completely off
balance. West seemed willing to lose substantial money,
risk a lawsuit for
breach of contract, and guarantee that she would never work in Hollywood
again. Zukor took another look
at the script—perhaps she was right and the
dialog was lousy. She would rather give up money and a career than be in
an inferior
picture! He decided to offer her a compromise: she could write
her own dialog, and they would shoot two versions of the movie,
one hers,
one the studio’s. That would cost a little more, but they would get West on
film. If her version was better, which
Zukor thought unlikely, that would
only improve the picture; if not, they would go with the original version.
Paramount couldn’t
lose.
West accepted the compromise and shooting began. One person,
however, was not amused: the director, Archie L. Mayo, a man
with an
extensive résumé. Not only had West changed the script to suit her
wisecracking style, she insisted on altering the
blocking and camera setups
to make the most of her lines. They fought and fought, until one day West
refused to go on. She
had demanded a shot of her disappearing up some
stairs after delivering one of her patented wisecracks. This would give the
audience time to laugh. Mayo thought it unnecessary and refused to shoot
it. West walked off the set, and production came
to a halt. Studio executives
agreed that West’s lines had lightened up the picture; let her have her way
with the direction
and shoot the shot, they told Mayo. They would edit it
out later.
Production resumed. The other actress in her scenes, Alison Skip-worth,
had the distinct impression that West was determining
the pace of the lines,
getting the camera to focus on her, stealing the scene. Protesting that West
was taking over the direction
of the movie, Skipworth, too, was told not to
worry—it would all be fixed in the editing.
When it came time to cut the film, however, West had so altered the
mood and pace of her scenes that no editing could bring
them back to the
original; more important, her sense of timing and direction were solid. She
had indeed improved the entire
picture.
The film debuted in October 1932. The reviews were mixed, but almost
all agreed that a new star was born. West’s aggressive
sexual style and wit
fascinated the men in the audience. Though she appeared in just a few
scenes, she was the only part of
the film anyone seemed to remember. Lines
she had written—“I’m a girl who lost her reputation and never missed it”—
were quoted
endlessly. As Raft later admitted, “Mae West stole everything
but the cameras.”
Audiences were soon clamoring for more Mae West—and Paramount, in
financial trouble at the time, could not ignore them. At
the age of forty, as
plump as ever, West was signed to a long-term contract at the highest salary
of any star in the studio.
For her next film, Diamond Lil, she would have
complete creative control. No other actress—or actor, for that matter—had
ever pulled off such a coup and
in so short a time.
Interpretation
When Mae West set foot in Hollywood, everything was stacked against her.
She was old and passé. The director and an army of
studio executives had
just one goal: to use her in a scene or two to animate a dull picture, then
ship her back to New York.
She had no real power, and if she had chosen to
fight on their battlefield—one in which actresses were a dime a dozen and
exploited to the fullest—she would have gotten nowhere. West’s genius, her
form of warfare, was slowly but surely to shift
the battlefield to terrain of
her choice.
She began her war by playing the part of the blond bombshell, charming
and seducing the Paramount men. Her screen test hooked
them—she was
difficult, but what actress wasn’t? Next she asked to rewrite her lines and,
receiving the expected refusal,
ratcheted up the stakes by not budging.
Returning the money she had been paid was her campaign’s key moment: it
subtly shifted
the focus from a battle with an actress to the script itself. By
showing herself ready to give up so much, she made Zukor
begin to wonder
more about the dialog than about her. After his compromise, West made her
next maneuver, fighting over the
blocking, the camera angles, the pacing of
the shots. Her writing had become an accepted part of the scenery; the
battle now
was over her directing. Another compromise, which translated
into another victory. Instead of fighting the studio executives
on their terms,
West had subtly shifted the battle to a field unfamiliar to them—fighting
with an actress over the writing
and directing of a film. On such terrain,
against a smart and seductive woman, the army of Paramount men was lost
and helpless.
Your enemies will naturally choose to fight on terrain that is to their
liking, that allows them to use their power to best
advantage. Cede them
such power and you end up fighting on their terms. Your goal is to subtly
shift the conflict to terrain
of your choice. You accept the battle but alter its
nature. If it is about money, shift it to something moral. If your opponents
want to fight over a particular issue, reframe the battle to encompass
something larger and more difficult for them to handle.
If they like a slow
pace, find a way to quicken it. You are not allowing your enemies to get
comfortable or fight in their
usual way. And an enemy who is lured onto
unfamiliar terrain is one who has lost control of the dynamic. Once such
control
slips from his hands, he will compromise, retreat, make mistakes,
and effect his own destruction.
3. By early 1864 the American Civil War had settled into a stalemate.
Robert E. Lee’s Army of Northern Virginia had managed to
keep the Union
forces away from Richmond, capital of the Confederacy. To the west the
Confederates had established an impregnable
defensive position at the town
of Dalton, Georgia, blocking any Union advance on Atlanta, the key
industrial city of the South.
President Abraham Lincoln, facing reelection
that year and gravely worried about his chances if the stalemate continued,
decided
to name Ulysses S. Grant overall commander of the Union forces.
Here was a man who would go on the offensive.
Let us admit that boldness in war even has its own prerogatives. It must be
granted a certain power over and above successful
calculations involving
space, time, and magnitude of forces, for wherever it is superior, it will take
advantage of its opponent’s
weakness. In other words, it is a genuinely
creative force. This fact is not difficult to prove even scientifically.
Whenever
boldness encounters timidity, it is likely to be the winner, because
timidity in itself implies a loss of equilibrium. Boldness will be at a
disadvantage only in an encounter with deliberate caution, which may be
considered bold in its own
right, and is certainly just as powerful and
effective; but such cases are rare. Timidity is the root of prudence in the
majority
of men. . . . The higher up the chain of command, the greater is the
need for boldness to be supported by a reflective mind, so that boldness
does not degenerate into purposeless bursts of blind passion.
ON WAR, CARL VON CLAUSEWITZ, 1780–1831
Grant’s first move was to appoint his chief lieutenant, General William
Tecumseh Sherman, to command the Union forces in Georgia.
When
Sherman arrived on the scene, he realized that any attempt to take Dalton
was doomed from the start. The Confederate
commander, General John
Johnston, was a master at defensive warfare. With mountains to his rear and
a solid position to his
front, Johnston could simply stay put. A siege would
take too long, and a frontal attack would be too costly. The situation
seemed hopeless.
Sherman decided, then, that if he could not seize Dalton, he would take
hold of Johnston’s mind, striking fear in a man notorious
for being
conservative and cautious. In May 1864, Sherman sent three-fourths of his
army into a direct attack on Dalton. With
Johnston’s attention held by this
attack, Sherman then sneaked the Army of the Tennessee around the
mountains to the town
of Resaca, fifteen miles to the south of Dalton,
blocking Johnston’s only real route of retreat and only supply line. Terrified
to find himself suddenly surrounded, Johnston had no choice but to give up
his position at Dalton. He would not, however,
play into Sherman’s hands:
he simply retreated to another defensive position that gave him maximum
security, again inviting
Sherman to attack him straight on. This quickly
turned into a dance: Sherman would feint going one way, then would
somehow
divert a part of his army to the south of Johnston, who kept
backing up . . . all the way to Atlanta.
The Confederate president, Jefferson Davis, disgusted by Johnston’s
refusal to fight, replaced him with General John Hood.
Sherman knew that
Hood was an aggressive commander, often even reckless. He also knew that
neither the time nor the men were
available to lay siege to Atlanta—Lincoln
needed a quick victory. His solution was to send detachments to threaten
Atlanta’s
defenses, but he made these forces temptingly small and weak.
Hood could not resist the temptation to leave his stronghold
in the city and
move to the attack, only to find himself rushing into an ambush. This
happened several times, and with each
defeat, Hood’s army became smaller
and the morale of his men quickly deteriorated.
Now, with Hood’s army tired and expecting disaster, Sherman played yet
another trick. At the end of August, he marched his
army southeast, past
Atlanta, abandoning his supply lines. To Hood this could only mean that
Sherman had given up the fight
for Atlanta. Wild celebration broke out
throughout the city. But Sherman had cunningly timed this march to
coincide with the
ripening of the corn, and with his men well fed and Hood
unsuspecting, he cut off the final railway line still open to Atlanta
and
wheeled back to attack the unguarded city. Hood was forced to abandon
Atlanta. This was the great victory that would ensure
Lincoln’s reelection.
Next came Sherman’s strangest maneuver of all. He divided his army into
four columns and, completely cutting himself loose
from his supply lines,
began a march east from Atlanta to Savannah and the sea. His men lived off
the land, destroying everything
in their path. Unencumbered by supply
wagons, they moved with incredible speed. The four parallel columns were
far enough
apart that the southern forces could not tell where they were
headed. The southern column seemed headed for Macon, the northern
for
Augusta. Confederate forces scrambled to cover both places, leaving the
center open—which was exactly where Sherman planned
to advance.
Keeping the South on what he called “the horns of a dilemma,” off balance
and mystified as to his intentions,
Sherman marched all the way to
Savannah with hardly a battle.
The effect of this march was devastating. For the Confederate soldiers
still fighting in Virginia, the ruin of Georgia—where
many had left behind
homes—was a terrible blow to their morale. Sherman’s march cast a mood
of deep gloom over the entire
South. Slowly but surely it was losing its will
to keep up the fight, Sherman’s goal all along.
The Olympians could now join battle with the giants. Heracles let loose his
first arrow against Alcyoneus, the enemy’s leader.
He fell to the ground, but
sprang up again revived, because this was his native soil of Phlegra.
“Quick, noble Heracles!”
cried Athene. “Drag him away to another
country!” Heracles caught Alcyoneus up on his shoulders, and dragged him
over the
Thracian border, where he despatched him with a club.
THE GREEK MYTHS, VOL. 1, ROBERT GRAVES, 1955
Interpretation
In any conflict it is often the weaker side that in fact controls the dynamic.
In this case the South was in control in both
the strategic and the grand-
strategic sense. In their immediate, local strategy, the Confederates had
entrenched themselves
in powerful defensive positions in Georgia and
Virginia. The temptation for the North was to fight on the enemy’s terms, to
hurl division after division against these positions, at tremendous loss of life
and with little chance of advancing. In the
South’s grand strategy, the longer
this stalemate prevailed, the more likely Lincoln was to be thrown out of
office. Then
the war would end through negotiation. The South set the
tempo for the battle (slow and grinding) and controlled the stakes.
As Sherman saw it, his goal was not to capture a city or to defeat the
Confederates in battle. In his view the only way to
win the war was to
regain control of the dynamic. Instead of brutal, frontal attacks against
Dalton or Atlanta, which would
play into the South’s hands, he operated
indirectly. He frightened the timid Johnston into abandoning his stronghold
and goaded
the rash Hood into senseless attacks, in both instances playing
upon the psychology of the opponent to force the issue. By
constantly
putting his enemy on the horns of a dilemma, where both staying put and
moving were equally dangerous, he took
control of the situation without
having to waste men in battle. Most important, by demonstrating to the
South with his destructive
march that the longer the war dragged on, the
worse it would be for them, he regained grand-strategic control of the war.
For the Confederates, to keep fighting was slow suicide.
The worst dynamic in war, and in life, is the stalemate. It seems that
whatever you do only feeds the stagnation. Once this
happens, a kind of
mental paralysis overcomes you. You lose the ability to think or respond in
different ways. At such a point,
all is lost. If you find yourself falling into
such a dynamic—dealing with a defensive, entrenched opponent or trapped
in
a reactive relationship—you must become as creative as General
Sherman. Deliberately shake up the pace of the slow waltz by
doing
something seemingly irrational. Operate outside the experience of the
enemy, as Sherman did when he cut himself loose
from his supplies. Move
fast here and slow there. One major jolt given to the stale dynamic will
shake it up, force the enemy
to do something different. With the slightest
change, you have room for greater change and taking control. Injecting
novelty
and mobility is often enough to unbalance the minds of your rigid
and defensive opponents.
4. In 1833, Mr. Thomas Auld, the slaveholding owner of a plantation on
Maryland’s Eastern Shore, summoned back his slave Frederick
Douglass,
fifteen years old at the time, from Baltimore, where Douglass had just spent
seven years serving Auld’s brother.
Now he was needed to work the fields
of the plantation. But life in the city had changed Douglass in many ways,
and to his
chagrin he found it quite hard to disguise this from Auld. In
Baltimore he had secretly managed to teach himself how to read
and write,
something no slave was allowed to do, for that would stimulate dangerous
thoughts. On the plantation Douglass tried
to teach as many slaves as
possible to read; these efforts were quickly squashed. But what was worse
for him was that he had
developed a rather defiant attitude, what the
slaveholder called impudence. He talked back to Auld, questioned some of
his
orders, and played all kinds of tricks to get more food. (Auld was
notorious for keeping his slaves near starvation.)
One day Auld informed Douglass that he was hiring him out for a year to
Mr. Edward Covey, a nearby farm renter who had earned
a reputation as a
consummate “breaker of young Negroes.” Slaveholders would send him
their most difficult slaves, and in exchange
for their free labor Covey would
beat every last ounce of rebellion out of them. Covey worked Douglass
especially hard, and
after a few months he was broken in body and spirit.
He no longer desired to read books or engage in discussions with his
fellow
slaves. On his days off, he would crawl under the shade of a tree and sleep
off his exhaustion and despair.
One especially hot day in August 1834, Douglass became ill and fainted.
The next thing he knew, Covey was hovering over him,
hickory slab in
hand, ordering him back to work. But Douglass was too weak. Covey hit
him on the head, opening a deep wound.
He kicked him a few times, but
Douglass could not move. Covey finally left, intending to deal with him
later.
Douglass managed to get to his feet, staggered to the woods, and
somehow made his way back to Auld’s plantation. There he
begged with
Master Auld to keep him there, explaining Covey’s cruelty. Auld was
unmoved. Douglass could spend the night but
then must return to Covey’s
farm.
Well, my dear reader, this battle with Mr. Covey,—undignified as it was, and
as I fear my narration of it is—was the turning point in my “life as a slave.”
It rekindled in my breast the smouldering embers of liberty; it brought up
my Baltimore dreams, and revived a sense of my
own manhood. I was a
changed being after that fight. I was nothing before; I WAS A MAN NOW. It
recalled to life my crushed self-respect and my self-confidence, and inspired
me with a renewed
determination to be A FREEMAN. A man, without force,
is without the essential dignity of humanity. Human nature is so constituted,
that it cannot honor a helpless man, although it can pity him; and even this
it cannot do long, if the signs of power do not arise. He only can understand
the effect of this combat on my spirit, who has himself incurred something,
hazarded something, in
repelling the unjust and cruel aggressions of a
tyrant. Covey was a tyrant, and a cowardly one, withal. After resisting him,
I felt as I had never felt before. It was a resurrection from the dark and
pestiferous tomb of slavery, to the heaven of comparative
freedom. I was no
longer a servile coward, trembling under the frown of a brother worm of the
dust, but, my long-cowed spirit was roused to an attitude of manly
independence. I had reached a point, at which I was not afraid to die. This
spirit made me a freeman in fact, while I remained a slave in form. When a
slave cannot be flogged he is more than half free. He has a domain as broad
as his own manly heart to defend, and
he is really “a power on earth.”
While slaves prefer their lives, with flogging, to instant death, they will
always find christians enough, like unto Covey,
to accommodate that
preference. From this time, until that of my escape from slavery, I was never
fairly whipped. Several
attempts were made to whip me, but they were
always unsuccessful. Bruises I did get, as I shall hereafter inform the
reader; but the case I have been describing, was the end of the brutification
to which slavery had subjected me.
MY BONDAGE AND MY FREEDOM, FREDERICK DOUGLASS, 1818–
1895
Making his way back to the farm, Douglass feared the worst. He told
himself that he would do his best to obey Covey and somehow
survive the
weeks ahead. Arriving at the stables where he was supposed to work that
day, he began his chores, when out of
nowhere, like a snake, Covey
slithered in, rope in hand. He lunged at Douglass, trying to get a slipknot on
his leg and tie
him up. He was clearly intending the thrashing to end all
thrashings.
Risking an even more intense beating, Douglass pushed Covey away and,
without hitting him, kept him from getting the rope
around his leg. At that
moment something clicked in Douglass’s head. Every defiant thought that
had been suffocated by his
months of brutal labor came back to him. He
was not afraid. Covey could kill him, but it was better to go down fighting
for
his life.
Suddenly a cousin came to Covey’s aid, and, finding himself surrounded,
Douglass did the unthinkable: he swung hard at the
man and knocked him
to the ground. Hitting a white man would most likely lead to his hanging. A
“fighting madness” came over
Douglass. He returned Covey’s blows. The
struggle went on for two hours until, bloodied, exhausted, and gasping for
breath,
Covey gave up and slowly staggered back to his house.
Douglass could only assume that Covey would now come after him with
a gun or find some other way to kill him. It never happened.
Slowly it
dawned on Douglass: to kill him, or punish him in some powerful way,
posed too great a risk. Word would get out
that Covey had failed to break a
Negro this one time, had had to resort to a gun when his terror tactics did
not work. The
mere hint of that would ruin his reputation far and wide, and
his job depended on his perfect reputation. Better to leave
the wild sixteen-
year-old slave alone than risk the kind of crazy or unpredictable response
Douglass had showed himself capable
of. Better to let him calm down and
go quietly away when his time of service there was over.
For the rest of Douglass’s stay with Covey, the white man did not lay a
hand on him. Douglass had noticed that slaveholders
often “prefer to whip
those who are most easily whipped.” Now he had learned the lesson for
himself: never again would he
be submissive. Such weakness only
encouraged the tyrants to go further. He would rather risk death, returning
blow for blow
with his fists or his wits.
Interpretation
Reflecting on this moment years later in his book My Bondage and My
Freedom, after he had escaped to the North and become a leading advocate
of the abolitionist movement, Douglass wrote, “This battle
with Mr. Covey .
. . was the turning point in my ‘life as a slave.’ . . . I was a changed being
after that fight. . . . I had reached the point at which I was not afraid to die.
This spirit made me a freeman in fact, while I remained a slave in form.”
For the rest of his life, he adopted this fighting stance: by being unafraid of
the consequences, Douglass gained a degree
of control of his situation both
physically and psychologically. Once he had rooted fear out of himself, he
opened up possibilities
for action—sometimes fighting back overtly,
sometimes being clever and deceitful. From a slave with no control, he
became
a man with some options and some power, all of which he
leveraged into real freedom when the time came.
To control the dynamic, you must be able to control yourself and your
emotions. Getting angry and lashing out will only limit
your options. And
in conflict, fear is the most debilitating emotion of all. Even before anything
has happened, your fear
puts you on your heels, cedes the initiative to the
enemy. The other side has endless possibilities for using your fear to
help
control you, keep you on the defensive. Those who are tyrants and
domineering types can smell your anxiety, and it makes
them even more
tyrannical. Before anything else you must lose your fear—of death, of the
consequences of a bold maneuver,
of other people’s opinion of you. That
single moment will suddenly open up vistas of possibilities. And in the end
whichever
side has more possibilities for positive action has greater control.
5. Early in his career, the American psychiatrist Milton H. Erickson (1901–
80) noticed that patients had countless ways of controlling
the relationship
between patient and therapist. They might withhold information from him
or resist entering into a hypnotic
trance (Erickson often used hypnosis in his
therapy); they might question the therapist’s abilities, insist he do more of
the talking, or emphasize the hopelessness of their problems and the futility
of therapy. These attempts at control in fact
mirrored whatever their
problem was in daily life: they resorted to all kinds of unconscious and
passive games of domination
while denying to themselves and to others
they were up to such tricks. And so, over the years, Erickson developed
what he
called his “Utilization Technique” — literally using these patients’
passive aggression, their clever manipulations, as instruments
to change
them.
Erickson often dealt with patients whom someone else—a partner, a
parent—had forced to seek his help. Resentful of this, they
would get
revenge by deliberately withholding information about their lives. Erick-son
would begin by telling these patients
that it was natural, even healthy, not to
want to reveal everything to the therapist. He would insist they withhold
any sensitive
information. The patients would then feel trapped: by keeping
secrets they were obeying the therapist, which was just the
opposite of what
they wanted to do. Usually by the second session, they would open up,
rebelling to such an extent that they
revealed everything about themselves.
One man, on his first visit to Erickson’s office, began anxiously pacing
the room. By refusing to sit down and relax, he was
making it impossible
for Erickson to hypnotize him or work with him at all. Erickson began by
asking him, “Are you willing
to cooperate with me by continuing to pace
the floor as you are doing now?” The patient agreed to this strange request.
Then
Erickson asked if he could tell the patient where to pace and how fast.
The patient could see no problem with this. Minutes
later Erickson began to
hesitate in giving his directions; the patient waited to hear what he was to
do next with his pacing.
After this happened a few times, Erickson finally
told him to sit in a chair, where the man promptly fell into a trance.
It is not the same when a fighter moves because he wants to move, and
another when he moves because he has to.
JOE FRAZIER, 1944
With those who were patently cynical about therapy, Erickson would
deliberately try a method of hypnosis that would fail,
and then he would
apologize for using that technique. He would talk about his own
inadequacies and the many times he had failed.
Erickson knew that these
types needed to one-up the therapist, and that once they felt they had gained
the advantage, they
would unconsciously open themselves up to him and
fall easily into a trance.
A woman once came to Erickson complaining that her husband used his
supposedly weak heart to keep her on constant alert and
dominate her in
every way. The doctors had found nothing wrong with him, yet he
genuinely seemed weak and always believed
that a heart attack was
imminent. The woman felt concerned, angry, and guilty all at the same
time. Erickson advised her to
continue being sympathetic to his condition,
but the next time he talked about a heart attack, she was to tell him politely
she needed to tidy the house. She was then to place brochures she had
collected from morticians all around the house. If he
did it again, she was to
go to the desk in the living room and begin adding up the figures in his life-
insurance policies.
At first the husband was furious, but soon he came to
fear seeing those brochures and hearing the sound of the adding machine.
He stopped talking about his heart and was forced to deal with his wife in a
more direct manner.
Interpretation
In some relationships you may have a gnawing feeling that the other person
has gained control of the dynamic, yet you find
it hard to pinpoint how or
when this occurred. All that can be said for certain is that you feel unable to
move the other
person, to influence the course of the relationship.
Everything you do only seems to feed the power of the controller. The
reason for this is that the other person has adopted subtle, insidious forms of
control that are easily disguised and yet
all the more effective for being
unconscious and passive. Such types exert control by being depressed,
overly anxious, overburdened
with work—they are the victims of constant
injustice. They cannot help their situation. They demand attention, and if
you
fail to provide it, they make you feel guilty. They are elusive and
impossible to fight because they make it appear at each
turn that they are
not at all looking for control. They are more willful than you, but better at
disguising it. In truth,
you are the one who feels helpless and confused by
their guerrilla-like tactics.
To alter the dynamic, you must first recognize that there is far less
helplessness in their behavior than they let on. Second,
these people need to
feel that everything takes place on their terms; threaten that desire and they
fight back in underhanded
ways. You must never inadvertently feed their
rebelliousness by arguing, complaining, trying to push them in a direction.
This makes them feel more under attack, more like a victim, and
encourages passive revenge. Instead move within their system
of control,
applying Erickson’s Utilization Technique. Be sympathetic to their plight,
but make it seem that whatever they
do, they are actually cooperating with
your own desires. That will put them off balance; if they rebel now, they are
playing
into your hands. The dynamic will subtly shift, and you will have
room to insinuate change. Similarly, if the other person
wields a
fundamental weakness as a weapon (the heart-attack tactic), make that
threat impossible to use against you by taking
it further, to the point of
parody or painfulness. The only way to beat passive opponents is to outdo
them in subtle control.
Image: The Boxer. The superior fighter does not rely on his powerful
punch or quick reflexes. Instead he creates a rhythm
to the fight that suits
him, advancing and retreating at a pace he sets; he controls the ring,
moving his opponent to the
center, to the ropes, toward or away from him.
Master of time and space, he creates frustration, compels mistakes, and
engenders
a mental collapse that precedes the physical. He wins not with
his fists but by controlling the ring.
Authority: In order to have rest oneself it is necessary to keep
the enemy occupied. This throws them back on the defensive,
and once they are placed that way they cannot rise up again
during the entire campaign. —Frederick the Great (1712–1786)
REVERSAL
This strategy has no reversal. Any effort to seem not to control a situation,
to refuse to influence a relationship, is in fact a form of control. By ceding
power to others, you
have gained a kind of passive authority that you can
use later for your own purposes. You are also the one determining who
has
control by relinquishing it to the other side. There is no escape from the
control dynamic. Those who say they are doing
so are playing the most
insidious control game of all.
16
HIT THEM WHERE IT HURTS
THE CENTER-OF-GRAVITY
STRATEGY
Everyone has a source of power on which he or she depends.
When you look at your rivals, search below the surface for that
source, the center of gravity that holds the entire structure
together. That center can be their wealth, their popularity,
a key
position, a winning strategy. Hitting them there will inflict
disproportionate pain. Find what the other side most cherishes
and protects—that is where
you must strike.
Man depends on his throat for fluent breathing and the maintenance of life.
When his throat is strangled, his five sense organs will lose their sensibility
and no longer function normally. He will
not be able to stretch his limbs,
which become numb and paralyzed. The man can therefore rarely survive.
Thus, when the banners of the enemy come into sight and the beating of its
battle drums
can be heard, we must first ascertain the positions of its back
and throat. Then we can attack it from the back and strangle its throat. This
is an excellent strategy to crush the enemy.
THE WILES OF WAR: 36 MILITARY STRATEGIES FROM ANCIENT
CHINA, TRANSLATED BY SUN HAICHEN, 1991
PILLARS OF COLLAPSE
In 210 B.C. a young Roman general named Publius Scipio the Younger
(later called Scipio Africanus) was sent to northeastern
Spain with a simple
mission: to hold the Ebro River against the powerful Carthaginian armies
that were threatening to cross
it and take control of the peninsula. This was
Scipio’s first assignment as commander, and as he looked out on the river
and
plotted his strategy, he felt a strange mix of emotions.
Eight years earlier the great Carthaginian commander Hannibal had
crossed this river heading north. Onward he had gone into
Gaul and then,
catching the Romans by surprise, had crossed the Alps into Italy. Scipio,
only eighteen at the time, had fought
alongside his father, a general, in the
first battles against Hannibal on Italian soil. He had seen the North
African’s battlefield
skills with his own eyes: Hannibal had maneuvered his
small army brilliantly, made maximum use of his superior cavalry, and
through inexhaustible creativity had constantly managed to surprise the
Romans and inflict on them a series of humiliating
defeats, culminating in
the virtual annihilation of the Roman legions at the Battle of Cannae in 216
B.C. Matching wits with
Hannibal, Scipio knew, was futile. It had seemed
back then that Rome itself was doomed.
Scipio also recalled two events after Cannae that had had an
overwhelming effect on him. First, a Roman general named Fabius
had
finally conceived a strategy to keep Hannibal at bay. Keeping his legions in
the hills and avoiding direct battle, Fabius
had launched hit-and-run raids
designed to wear down the Carthaginians, who were fighting far from their
home, in what is
now Tunisia. The campaign had worked as a holding
action, but to Scipio it had seemed equally exhausting for the Romans to
fight so long and still have the enemy at their doorstep. Also, since the plan
could not lead to any real defeat of Hannibal,
it was basically flawed.
Second, a year into Hannibal’s invasion, the Romans had sent Scipio’s
father to Spain to try to knock out the Carthaginian
bases there. Carthage
had had colonies in Spain for many years and earned wealth from Spanish
mines. It used Spain as a training
ground for its soldiers and as the base for
its war on Rome. For six years Scipio’s father had fought the Carthaginians
on
the Spanish peninsula, but the campaign had ended in his defeat and
death in 211 B.C.
As Scipio studied the reports coming in about the situation beyond the
Ebro, a plan took root in his mind: with one bold maneuver,
he could
avenge his father’s death the year before, demonstrate the effectiveness of a
strategy he thought far better than
Fabius’s, and set in motion the eventual
collapse not just of Hannibal but of Carthage itself. Along the coast to the
south
of him was the city of New Carthage (present-day Cartagena), the
Carthaginians’ capital in Spain. There they stored their
vast wealth, their
army’s supplies, and the hostages they had taken from different Spanish
tribes to be held as ransom in
case of rebellion. At this moment the
Carthaginian armies—which outnumbered the Romans two to one—were
scattered about the
country, trying to gain further domination over the
Spanish tribes, and were all several days’ march from New Carthage. Their
commanders, Scipio learned, had been quarreling among themselves over
power and money. Meanwhile New Carthage was garrisoned
with only
1,000 men.
The third shogun Iemitsu was fond of sword matches. Once, when he
arranged to see some of his outstanding swordsmen display
their skills, he
spotted among the gathering a master equestrian by the name of Suwa
Bunkuro, and impulsively asked him to
take part. Bunkuro responded by
saying that he would be pleased to if he could fight on horseback, adding
that he could defeat
anyone on horseback. Iemitsu was delighted to urge the
swordsmen to fight Bunkuro in the style he preferred. As it turned
out,
Bunkuro was right in his boasting. Brandishing a sword on a prancing
horse wasn’t something many swordsmen were used
to, and Bunkuro easily
defeated everyone who dared face him on horseback. Somewhat
exasperated, Iemitsu told Munenori to give
it a try. Though a bystander on
this occasion, Munenori at once complied and mounted a horse. As his
horse trotted up to Bunkuro’s,
Munenori suddenly stopped his horse and
slapped the nose of Bunkuro’s horse with his wooden sword. Bunkuro’s
horse reared, and while the famed equestrian was trying to restore his
balance, Munenori struck him off his horse.
THE SWORD AND THE MIND, TRANSLATED BY HIROAKI SATO,
1985
Disobeying his orders to take his stand at the Ebro, Scipio advanced
south by ship and led a daring raid on New Carthage.
This walled city was
considered impregnable, but he timed his attack for the ebbing of the tide in
a lagoon on the city’s
north side; there his men were able to scale the walls
relatively easily, and New Carthage was taken. In one move, Scipio
had
produced a dramatic turnaround. Now the Romans commanded the central
position in Spain; they had the money and supplies
on which the
Carthaginians in Spain depended; and they had Carthage’s hostages, whom
they now could use to stir revolt among
the conquered tribes. Over the next
few years, Scipio exploited this position and slowly brought Spain under
Roman control.
In 205 B.C., Scipio returned to Rome a hero—but Hannibal was still a
menace in Italy’s interior. Scipio now wanted to take
the war to Africa, by
marching on Carthage itself. That was the only way to get Hannibal out of
Italy and finally erase Carthage
as a threat. But Fabius was still the
commander in charge of Rome’s strategy, and few saw the point of fighting
Hannibal by
waging war so far from him, and from Rome. Yet Scipio’s
prestige was high, and the Roman Senate finally gave him an army—a
small, low-quality army—to use for his campaign.
Wasting no time on arguing his case, Scipio proceeded to make an
alliance with Masinissa, king of the Massyles, Carthage’s
neighbors.
Masinissa would supply him with a large and well-trained cavalry. Then, in
the spring of 204 B.C., Scipio sailed
for Africa and landed near Utica, not
far from Carthage. Initially surprised, the Carthaginians rallied and were
able to pin
Scipio’s troops on a peninsula outside the town. The situation
looked bleak. If Scipio could somehow advance past the enemy
troops that
blocked his path, he would enter the heart of the enemy state and gain
control of the situation, but that seemed
an impossible task— he could not
hope to fight his way past the tight Carthaginian cordon; trapped where he
was, his supplies
would eventually run out, forcing him to surrender. Scipio
bargained for peace but used the negotiations as a way to spy on
the
Carthaginian army.
Scipio’s ambassadors told him that the enemy had two camps, one for its
own army and the other for its main ally, the Numidians,
whose camp was
rather disorganized, a swarm of reed huts. The Carthaginian camp was more
orderly but made of the same combustible
materials. Over the next few
weeks, Scipio seemed indecisive, first breaking off negotiations, then
reopening them, confusing
the Carthaginians. Then one night he made a
sneak attack on the Numidian camp and set it on fire. The blaze spread
quickly,
and the African soldiers panicked, scattering in every direction.
Awakened by the hubbub, the Carthaginians opened the gates
to their own
camp to come to their allies’ rescue—but in the confusion the Romans were
able to steal in and set fire to their
camp as well. The enemy lost half their
army in this battle by night, the rest managing to retreat to Numidia and
Carthage.
Heracles did not return to Mycenae by a direct route. He first traversed
Libya, whose King Antaeus, son of Poseidon and Mother
Earth, was in the
habit of forcing strangers to wrestle with him until they were exhausted,
whereupon he killed them; for
not only was he a strong and skilful athlete,
but whenever he touched the earth, his strength revived. He saved the skulls
of his victims to roof a temple of Poseidon. It is not known whether
Heracles, who was determined to
end this barbarous practice, challenged
Antaeus, or was challenged by him. Antaeus, however, proved no easy
victim, being a giant who lived in a cave beneath a towering cliff, where he
feasted on
the flesh of lions, and slept on the bare ground in order to
conserve and increase his already colossal strength. Mother Earth,
not yet
sterile after her birth of the Giant, had conceived Antaeus in a Libyan cave,
and found more reason to boast of him
than even of her monstrous elder
children, Typhon,Tityus, and Briareus. It would have gone ill with the
Olympians if he had
fought against them on the Plains of Phlegra. In
preparation for the wrestling match, both combatants cast off their lion
pelts, but while Heracles rubbed himself with
oil in the Olympian fashion,
Antaeus poured hot sand over his limbs lest contact with the earth through
the soles of his feet alone should prove insufficient. Heracles planned
to
preserve his strength and wear Antaeus down, but after tossing him full
length on the ground, he was amazed to see the
giant’s muscles swell and a
healthy flush suffuse his limbs as Mother Earth revived him. The
combatants grappled again, and
presently Antaeus flung himself down of
his own accord, not waiting to be thrown; upon which, Heracles, realizing
what he
was at, lifted him high into the air, then cracked his ribs and,
despite the hollow groans of Mother Earth, held him aloft
until he died.
THE GREEK MYTHS, VOL. 2, ROBERT GRAVES, 1955
Suddenly the Carthaginian interior lay open to Scipio’s army. He
proceeded to take town after town, advancing much as Hannibal
had in
Italy. Then he landed a contingent of troops at the port of Tunis, within
sight of Carthage’s walls. Now it was the
Carthaginians’ turn to panic, and
Hannibal, their greatest general, was immediately recalled. In 202 B.C.,
after sixteen years
of fighting on Rome’s doorstep, Hannibal was finally
compelled to leave Italy.
Hannibal landed his army to Carthage’s south and made plans to fight
Scipio. But the Roman general retreated west, to the
Bagradas Valley—the
most fertile farmlands of Carthage, its economic base. There he went on a
rampage, destroying everything
in sight. Hannibal had wanted to fight near
Carthage, where he had shelter and material reinforcements. Instead he was
compelled
to pursue Scipio before Carthage lost its richest territory. But
Scipio kept retreating, refusing battle until he had lured
Hannibal to the
town of Zama, where he secured a solid position and forced Hannibal to
camp in a place without water. Now
the two armies finally met in battle.
Exhausted by their pursuit of Scipio, their cavalry neutralized by
Masinissa’s, the
Carthaginians were defeated, and with no refuge close
enough to retreat to, Hannibal was forced to surrender. Carthage quickly
sued for peace, and under the harsh terms imposed by Scipio and the
Senate, it was reduced to a client state of Rome. As a
Mediterranean power
and a threat to Rome, Carthage was finished for good.
Interpretation
Often what separates a mediocre general from a superior one is not their
strategies or maneuvers but their vision—they simply
look at the same
problem from a different angle. Freed from the stranglehold of convention,
the superior general naturally
hits on the right strategy.
The Romans were dazzled by Hannibal’s strategic genius. They came to
so fear him that the only strategies they could use against
him were delay
and avoidance. Scipio Africanus simply saw differently. At every turn he
looked not at the enemy army, nor
even at its leader, but at the pillar of
support on which it stood—its critical vulnerability. He understood that
military
power was located not in the army itself but in its foundations, the
things that supported it and made it possible: money,
supplies, public
goodwill, allies. He found those pillars and bit by bit knocked them down.
Scipio’s first step was to see Spain, not Italy, as Hannibal’s center of
gravity. Within Spain the key was New Carthage. He
did not chase the
various Roman armies but took New Carthage and turned the war around.
Now Hannibal, deprived of his main
military base and source of supply,
would have to lean more heavily on his other support base: Carthage itself,
with its wealth
and resources. So Scipio took the war to Africa. Trapped
near Utica, he examined what gave the enemy its power in this situation,
and saw that it was not the armies themselves but the position they had
taken: get them to move out of that position without
wasting men in a
frontal battle and Carthage’s soft underbelly would be exposed. By burning
the camps, Scipio moved the armies.
Then, instead of marching on the city
of Carthage—a glittering prize that would have drawn most generals like a
magnet—he
hit what would hurt the Carthaginian state most: the fertile
farming zone that was the source of its wealth. Finally, instead
of chasing
Hannibal, he made Hannibal come after him, to an area in the middle of the
country where he would be deprived of
reinforcements and support. Now
that Scipio had unbalanced the Carthaginians so completely, their defeat at
Zama was definitive.
Power is deceptive. If we imagine the enemy as a boxer, we tend to focus
on his punch. But still more than he depends on his
punch, he depends on
his legs; once they go weak, he loses balance, he cannot escape the other
fighter, he is subject to grueling
exchanges, and his punches gradually
diminish in force until he is knocked out. When you look at your rivals, do
not be distracted
by their punch. To engage in any exchange of punches, in
life or in war, is the height of stupidity and waste. Power depends
on
balance and support; so look at what is holding your enemy up, and
remember that what holds him up can also make him fall.
A person, like an
army, usually gets his or her power from three or four simultaneous sources:
money, popularity, skillful
maneuvering, some particular advantage he has
fostered. Knock out one and he will have to depend more on the others;
knock
out those and he is lost. Weaken a boxer’s legs and he will reel and
stagger, and when he does, be merciless. No power can
stand without its
legs.
When the vanes are removed from an arrow, even though the shaft and tip
remain it is difficult for the arrow to penetrate
deeply.
—Ming dynasty strategist Chieh Hsüan (early seventeenth century A.D.)
The people of Israel cried out to the Lord their God, for their courage
failed, because all their enemies had surrounded them
and there was no
way of escape from them. The whole Assyrian army, their infantry, chariots,
and cavalry, surrounded them
for thirty-four days, until all the vessels of
water belonging to every inhabitant of Bethulia were empty. . . . Their
children
lost heart, and the women and young men fainted from thirst and
fell down in the streets of the city and in the passages through the gates;
there was no strength left in them any longer. . . . When Judith had ceased
crying out to the God of Israel, and had ended all these words, she rose
from where she lay
prostrate and called her maid and went down into the
house where she lived on sabbaths and on her feast days; and she removed
the sackcloth which she had been wearing, and took off her widow’s
garments, and bathed her body with water, and anointed
herself with
precious ointment, and combed her hair and put on a tiara, and arrayed
herself in her gayest apparel, which she
used to wear while her husband
Manasseh was living. And she put sandals on her feet, and put on her
anklets and bracelets and rings, and her earrings and all her ornaments,
and made herself very beautiful, to entice the eyes of all men who might see
her. . . . . . . The women went straight on through the valley; and an
Assyrian patrol met her and took her into custody, and asked
her, “To what
people do you belong, and where are you going?” She replied, “I am a
daughter of the Hebrews, but I am fleeing
from them, for they are about to
be handed over to you to be devoured. I am on my way to the presence of
Holofernes the commander
of your army, to give him a true report; and I
will show him a way by which he can go and capture all the hill country
without losing
one of his men, captured or slain.” When the man heard her
words, and observed her face—she was in their eyes marvelously beautiful
—they said to her “. . . Go
at once to his tent. . . . And when you stand
before him, do not be afraid in your heart, but tell him just what you have
said, and he will treat you well.” . . . Her words pleased Holofernes and all
his servants, and they marveled at her wisdom and said, “There is no such
a woman
from one end of the earth to the other, either for beauty of face or
wisdom of speech!” . . . On the fourth day Holofernes held a banquet for
his slaves only, and did not invite any of his officers. And he said
to Bagoas,
the eunuch who had charge of all his personal affairs, “Go now and
persuade the Hebrew woman who is in your care
to join us and eat and
drink with us.” . . . So Bagoas went out from the presence of Holofernes,
and approached her . . . And Judith said, “Who am I, to refuse my lord?
Surely whatever pleases him I will do at once, and it will be a joy to me
until the day of my death!” So she got up and arrayed
herself in all her
woman’s finery. Then Judith came in and lay down, and olofernes’ heart
was ravished with her and he was moved with great desire to possess her;
for he had been waiting for an opportunity
to deceive her, ever since the
day he first saw her. So Holofernes said to her, “Drink now, and be merry
with us!” Judith
said, “I will drink now, my lord, because my life means
more to me today than in all the days since I was born.” . . . And
Holofernes was greatly pleased with her, and drank a great quantity of
wine, much more than he had ever drunk in any one day
since he was born.
When evening came, his slaves quickly withdrew, and Bagoas closed the
tent from outside and shut out the attendants from
his master’s presence;
and they went to bed. . . . So Judith was left alone in the tent, with
Holofernes stretched out on
his bed, for he was overcome with wine. . . .
[Judith] went to the post at the end of the bed, above Holofernes’ head, and
took down his sword that hung there. She came close to
his bed and took
ahold of the hair on his head. . . . And she struck his neck twice with all her
might and severed his head from his body. Then she tumbled his body off
the bed and pulled the canopy from the posts; after a moment she went out,
and gave Holofernes’
head to her maid, who placed it in her food bag. . . .
So Bagoas . . . went into the bedchamber and found him thrown down on
the platform dead, with his head cut off and missing.
And he cried out with
a loud voice and wept and groaned. . . . Then he went to the tent where
Judith had stayed, and when
he did not find her he rushed out to the people
and shouted, “The slaves have tricked us! One Hebrew woman has brought
disgrace
upon the house of Nebuchadnezzar! For look, here is Holofernes
lying on the ground, and his head is not on him!” When the leaders of the
Assyrian army heard this, they rent their tunics and were greatly dismayed,
and their loud cries and
shouts arose in the midst of the camp. . . . When the
men in the tents heard it, they were amazed at what had happened. Fear
and trembling came over them, so that
they did not wait for one another,
but with one impulse all rushed out and fled by every path across the plain
and through
the country. . . . Then the men of Israel, every one that was a
soldier, rushed out upon them. . . . And when the Israelites heard it, with
one accord they fell upon the enemy, and cut them down as far as Choba.
JUDITH 7:19–15:7
KEYS TO WARFARE
It is natural in war to focus on the physical aspect of conflict—bodies,
equipment, matériel. Even an enlightened strategist
will tend to look first at
the enemy’s army, firepower, mobility, reserves. War is a visceral,
emotional affair, an arena
of physical danger, and it takes great effort to rise
above this level and ask different questions: What makes the enemy army
move? What gives it impetus and endurance? Who guides its actions? What
is the underlying source of its strength?
Most people have the problem of seeing war as a separate activity
unrelated to other realms of human life. But in fact war
is a form of power
—Carl von Clausewitz called it “politics by other means”—and all forms of
power share the same essential
structures.
The most visible thing about power is its outward manifestation, what its
witnesses see and feel. An army has its size, its
weaponry, its shows of
discipline, its aggressive maneuvers; individuals have many ways of
showing their position and influence.
It is the nature of power to present a
forceful front, to seem menacing and intimidating, strong and decisive. But
this outward
display is often exaggerated or even downright deceptive,
since power does not dare show its weaknesses. And beneath the display
is
the support on which power rests—its “center of gravity.” The phrase is von
Clausewitz’s, who elaborated it as “the hub
of all power and movement, on
which everything depends.” This is the part that governs the whole, a kind
of nerve center.
To attack this center of gravity, to neutralize or destroy it, is the ultimate
strategy in war, for without it the whole structure
will collapse. The enemy
may have great generals and strong armies, like Hannibal and his invincible
army in Italy, but without
a center of gravity those armies cannot move and
have no force or coherence. Hitting the center will have devastating
psychological
effects, throwing the enemy off balance and inducing a
creeping panic. If conventional generals look at the physical aspect
of the
enemy army, focusing on its weaknesses and trying to exploit them,
superior strategists look behind and beyond, to
the support system. The
enemy’s center of gravity is where an injury will hurt him most, his point of
greatest vulnerability.
Hitting him there is the best way to end a conflict
definitively and economically.
The key is analyzing the enemy force to determine its centers of gravity.
In looking for those centers, it is crucial not
to be misled by the intimidating
or dazzling exterior, mistaking the outward appearance for what sets it in
motion. You will
probably have to take several steps, one by one, to
uncover this ultimate power source, peeling away layer after layer.
Remember
Scipio, who saw first that Hannibal depended on Spain, then
that Spain depended on Carthage, then that Carthage depended on
its
material prosperity, which itself had particular sources. Strike at Carthage’s
prosperity, as Scipio eventually did, and
the whole thing would fall apart.
To find a group’s center of gravity, you must understand its structure and
the culture within which it operates. If your enemies
are individuals, you
must fathom their psychology, what makes them tick, the structure of their
thinking and priorities.
In crafting a strategy to defeat the United States in the Vietnam War,
General Vo Nguyen Giap determined that the real center
of gravity in the
American democracy was the political support of its citizens. Given that
support—the kind of support the
military had had during World War II—the
country could prosecute a war with the utmost effectiveness. Without that
support,
though, the effort was doomed. Through the Tet Offensive of 1968,
Giap was able to undermine the American public’s support
for the war. He
had gained an understanding of American culture that allowed him to aim at
the right target.
The more centralized the enemy, the more devastating becomes a blow at
its leader or governing body. Hernán Cortés was able
to conquer Mexico
with a handful of soldiers by capturing Moctezuma, the Aztec emperor.
Moctezuma was the center around which
everything revolved; without him
Aztec culture quickly collapsed. When Napoleon invaded Russia in 1812,
he assumed that by
taking Moscow, the capital, he could force the Russians
to surrender. But the true center of gravity in this authoritarian
nation was
the czar, who was determined to continue the war. The loss of Moscow only
steeled his resolve.
A more decentralized enemy will have several separate centers of gravity.
The key here is to disorganize them by cutting off
communication between
them. That was what General Douglas MacArthur did in his remarkable
campaign in the Pacific during World
War II: he skipped some islands but
took key ones, keeping the Japanese extended over a vast area and making
it impossible
for them to communicate with each other. It is almost always
strategically wise to disrupt your enemy’s lines of communication;
if the
parts cannot communicate with the whole, chaos ensues.
Your enemy’s center of gravity can be something abstract, like a quality,
concept, or aptitude on which he depends: his reputation,
his capacity to
deceive, his unpredictability. But such strengths become critical
vulnerabilities if you can make them unattractive
or unusable. In fighting
the Scythians in what is now modern-day Iran, a tribe that no one could
figure out how to defeat,
Alexander the Great saw the center of gravity as
their complete mobility on horseback and their fluid, almost chaotic style
of
fighting. He simply plotted to neutralize the source of this power by luring
them on to enclosed ground in which they could
not use their cavalry and
pell-mell tactics. He defeated them with ease.
To find an enemy’s center of gravity, you have to erase your own
tendency to think in conventional terms or to assume that
the other side’s
center is the same as your own. When Salvador Dalí came to the United
States in 1940, intent on conquering
the country as an artist and making his
fortune, he made a clever calculation. In the European art world, an artist
had to
win over the critics and make a name as “serious.” In America,
though, that kind of fame would doom an artist to a ghetto,
a limited circle.
The real center of gravity was the American media. By wooing the
newspapers, he would gain access to the
American public, and the
American public would make him a star.
Again, in the civil war between Communists and Nationalists for control
of China in the late 1920s and early ’30s, most of
the Communists focused
on taking cities, as the Bolsheviks had done in Russia. But Mao Tse-tung,
an outsider within the dogmatic
Chinese Communist Party, was able to look
at China in a clear light and see China’s center of gravity as its vast peasant
population. Win them to his side, he believed, and the revolution could not
fail. That single insight proved the key to the
Communists’ success. Such is
the power of identifying the center of gravity.
We often hide our sources of power from view; what most people
consider a center of gravity is often a front. But sometimes
an enemy will
reveal his center of gravity by what he protects the most fervently. In
bringing the Civil War into Georgia,
General William Tecumseh Sherman
discovered that the South was particularly anxious to protect Atlanta and
the areas around
it. That was the South’s industrial center of gravity. Like
Sherman, attack what the enemy most treasures, or threaten it
to make the
enemy divert forces to defend itself.
In any group, power and influence will naturally devolve to a handful of
people behind the scenes. That kind of power works
best when it is not
exposed to the light of day. Once you discover this coterie holding the
strings, win it over. As president
during the Depression, Franklin Roosevelt
faced problems from so many sides that it was difficult for him to know
where his
energy should go. In the end he decided that the key to enacting
his reforms was winning over Congress. Then, within Congress,
there were
particular leaders who held the real power. He concentrated on wooing and
seducing these leaders with his great
charm. It was one of the secrets to his
success.
What ultimately guides a group is the command-and-control center, the
operational brain that takes in information, then makes
the crucial
decisions. Disrupting the functioning of that brain will cause dislocation
throughout the enemy army. Before almost
every battle, Alexander the
Great would examine the enemy’s organization, pinpointing as best he
could the location of the
command structure, then either attacking it or
isolating it, making it impossible for the brain to communicate with the
body.
Even in a sport as physical as boxing, Muhammad Ali, in crafting a
strategy to defeat his archnemesis Joe Frazier, took aim
at Frazier’s mind,
the ultimate center of gravity for any individual. Before every fight, Ali
would get under Frazier’s skin,
riling him up by calling him an Uncle Tom,
a tool of the white man’s media. He would keep going during the fight
itself, taunting
Frazier mercilessly in the ring. Frazier became obsessed with
Ali, could not think about him without bursting with anger.
Controlling
Frazier’s mind was the key to controlling his body.
In any interaction with people, you must train yourself to focus on their
strength, the source of their power, whatever it
is that gives them their most
crucial support. That knowledge will afford you many strategic options,
many angles from which
to attack, subtly or not so subtly undermining their
strength rather than hitting it head-on. You can create no greater sense
of
panic in your enemies than that of being unable to use their strengths.
Image: The Wall. Your opponents stand behind a wall, which protects them
from strangers and intruders. Do not hit your head against the wall
or lay
siege to it; find the pillars and supports that make it stand and give it
strength. Dig under the wall, sapping its
foundations until it collapses on
its own.
Authority: The first principle is that the ultimate substance of
enemy strength must be traced back to the fewest possible
sources, and ideally to one alone. The attack on these sources
must be compressed into the fewest possible actions. . . .
By
constantly seeking out the center of his power, by daring all to
win all, will one really defeat the enemy.
—Carl von Clausewitz, On War (1780– 1831)
REVERSAL
Every living creature has a center of gravity. Even the most decentralized
group has to communicate and depends on a network
that is vulnerable to
attack. There is no reversal to this principle.
17
DEFEAT THEM IN DETAIL
THE DIVIDE-AND-CONQUER
STRATEGY
When you look at your enemies, do not be intimidated by their
appearance. Instead look at the parts that make up the whole.
By separating the parts, sowing dissension and division from
within, you can weaken and bring down even the most
formidable
foe. In setting up your attack, work on their minds to
create internal conflict. Look for the joints and links, the things
that connect the people in a group or connect one group to
another. Division is weakness, and the joints are the weakest
part
of any structure. When you are facing troubles or enemies,
turn a large problem into small, eminently defeatable parts.
There were, however, many occasions when the French were faced not by
one but by two or a whole series of enemy armies within
supporting
distance of one another. Faced with such a difficult situation, Napoleon
often adopted a second system of maneuver—
the “strategy of the central
position.”Very often under these circumstances the French found
themselves operating at a numerical
disadvantage against the combined
strength of their opponents, but could procure superior numbers against
any one part of
their adversaries’ forces. It was this second factor that the
system was designed to exploit to the full. “The art of generalship
consists
in, when actually inferior in numbers to the enemy (overall), being superior
to him on the battlefield.” In brief,
Napoleon set himself the task of
isolating one part of the enemy armament, concentrating a stronger force to
ensure its defeat
and if possible its destruction, and then turning with his
full strength to attack the second enemy army; that is to say,
instead of a
single decisive blow, he planned a series of smaller blows against scattered
adversaries and set out to destroy
them in detail. How could this be done?
Once again, the sequence of the Napoleonic attack reveals the formula.
First of all the Emperor would accumulate as much information about the
forces facing him from captured newspapers, deserters
and most especially
from the indications brought in by his probing cavalry patrols. From the
data thus provided, he would carefully plot the known dispositions of his
foes on the map, and then select the place
where their respective army
boundaries converged. This was the “hinge” or “joint” of the enemy’s
strategic dispositions, and as such was vulnerable to attack. This point
would be selected by Napoleon for his initial blitzkrieg attack, carried out
as often as not in full strength.
Shielded by the cavalry screen, the French
army would perform a crash concentration and fall like a thunderbolt on
the handful
of troops defending this central point. Invariably this initial
onslaught would be successful. Immediately Napoleon had massed
his army
at this newly captured point, he was master of the “central position”— that
is to say, he had successfully interposed his concentrated army between the
forces of his enemies who, ideally, would
have staggered back under the
impact of the surprise blow in such a way as to increase the distance
between their respective armies. This would inevitably mean that the foe
would have to operate on “exterior lines”
(i.e., have greater distances to
march from one flank to the other) while the better-positioned French would
have a shorter
distance to travel to reach either enemy.
THE CAMPAIGNS OF NAPOLEON, DAVID G. CHANDLER, 1966
THE CENTRAL POSITION
One day in early August of 490 B.C., the citizens of Athens received word
that a massive Persian fleet had just landed some
twenty-four miles to the
north, along the coastal plains of Marathon. A mood of doom quickly
spread. Every Athenian knew Persia’s
intentions—to capture their city;
destroy its young democracy and restore a former tyrant, Hip-pias, to the
throne; and sell
many of its citizens into slavery. Some eight years earlier,
Athens had sent ships to support the Greek cities of Asia Minor
in a
rebellion against King Darius, ruler of the Persian Empire. The Athenians
had sailed home after a few battles—they soon
saw that this business was
hopeless—but they had participated in burning down the city of Sardis, an
unforgivable outrage,
and Darius wanted revenge.
The Athenians’ predicament seemed desperate. The Persian army was
enormous, some 80,000 men strong, transported by hundreds
of ships; it
had excellent cavalry and the best archers in the world. The Athenians,
meanwhile, had only infantry, some 10,000
strong. They had sent a runner
to Sparta urgently requesting reinforcements, but the Spartans were
celebrating their moon
festival and it was taboo to fight during such a time.
They would send troops as soon as they could, within a week—but that
would probably be too late. Meanwhile a group of Persian sympathizers
within Athens—mostly from wealthy families— despised
the democracy,
looked forward to Hippias’s return, and were doing their best to sow
dissension and betray the city from within.
Not only would the Athenians
have to fight the Persians alone, but they were divided into factions among
themselves.
The leaders of democratic Athens gathered to discuss the alternatives, all
of which seemed bad. The majority argued for concentrating
the Athenian
forces outside the city in a defensive cordon. There they could wait to fight
the Persians on terrain they knew
well. The Persian army, however, was
large enough to surround the city by both land and sea, choking it off with a
blockade.
So one leader, Miltiades, made a very different proposal: to
march the entire Athenian army immediately toward Marathon, to
a place
where the road to Athens passed through a narrow pass along the coast.
That would leave Athens itself unprotected;
in trying to block the Persian
advance on land, it would open itself to an attack by sea. But Miltiades
argued that occupying
the pass was the only way to avoid being surrounded.
He had fought the Persians in Asia Minor and was the Athenians’ most
experienced soldier. The leaders voted for his plan.
And so a few days later, the 10,000 Athenian infantrymen began the
march north, slaves carrying their heavy body armor, mules
and donkeys
transporting their food. When they reached the pass looking down on the
plains of Marathon, their hearts sank:
as far as the eye could see, the long
strip of land was filled with tents, horses, and soldiers from all over the
Persian
Empire. Ships cluttered the coast.
For several days neither side moved. The Athenians had no choice but to
hold their position; without cavalry and hopelessly
outnumbered, how could
they do battle at Marathon? If enough time went by, perhaps the Spartans
would arrive as reinforcements.
But what were the Persians waiting for?
Before dawn on August 12, some Greek scouts ostensibly working for the
Persians slipped across to the Athenian side and reported
startling news:
under cover of darkness, the Persians had just sailed for the Bay of Phaleron
outside Athens, taking most
of their cavalry with them and leaving a
holding force of some 15,000 soldiers in the plains of Marathon. They
would take
Athens from the sea, then march north, squeezing the Athenian
army at Marathon between two larger forces.
Of the Athenian army’s eleven commanders, Miltiades alone seemed
calm, even relieved: this was their opportunity. As the sun
was getting
ready to rise, he argued for an immediate attack on the Persians at
Marathon. Some of the other commanders resisted
this idea: the enemy still
had more men, some cavalry, and plenty of archers. Better to wait for the
Spartans, who would surely
arrive soon. But Miltiades countered that the
Persians had divided their forces. He had fought them before and knew that
the
Greek infantryman was superior in discipline and spirit. The Persians at
Marathon now only slightly outnumbered the Greeks;
they could fight them
and win.
Meanwhile, even with a good wind, it would take the Persian ships ten to
twelve hours to round the coast and arrive at the
Bay of Phaleron. Then they
would need more time to disembark the troops and horses. If the Athenians
defeated the Persians
at Marathon quickly, they would have just enough
time to run back to Athens and defend the city the same day. If instead they
opted to wait, the Spartans might never arrive; the Persians would surround
them, and, more ominously, the Persian sympathizers
within Athens would
probably betray the city from within and open its walls to the barbarians. It
was now or never. By a vote
of six to five, the commanders decided to
attack at dawn.
At six in the morning, the Athenians began their charge. A hail of arrows
from the Persian archers rained down on them, but
they closed in on the
enemy so quickly that the battle now had to be fought hand-to-hand—and,
as Miltiades had foreseen, in
close combat the Athenians were superior.
They pushed the Persians back into the marshes at the north end of the
plain, where
thousands drowned. The waters reddened with blood. By nine
in the morning, the Athenians had control of the plains, having
lost fewer
than two hundred men.
Although emotionally spent by this battle, the Athenians now had only
around seven hours to make the twenty-four miles back
to Athens in time to
stop the Persians. There was simply no time to rest; they ran, as fast their
feet could take them, loaded
down in their heavy armor, impelled by the
thought of the imminent dangers facing their families and fellow citizens.
By four
in the afternoon, the fastest among them had straggled to a point
overlooking the Bay of Phaleron. The rest soon followed.
Within a matter
of minutes after their arrival, the Persian fleet sailed into the bay to see a
most unwelcome sight: thousands
of Athenian soldiers, caked in dust and
blood, standing shoulder to shoulder to fight the landing.
The Persians rode at anchor for a few hours, then headed out to sea,
returning home. Athens was saved.
Interpretation
The victory at Marathon and race to Athens were perhaps the most decisive
moments in Athenian history. Had the soldiers not
come in time, the
Persians would have taken the city, then certainly all of Greece, and
eventually they would have expanded
throughout the Mediterranean, for no
other power in existence at the time could have stopped them. History
would have been
altered irrevocably.
Miltiades’ plan worked by the narrowest of margins, but it was based on
sound and timeless principles. When a powerful foe
attacks you in strength,
threatening your ability to advance and take the initiative, you must work to
make the enemy divide
its forces and then defeat these smaller forces one
by one—“in detail,” as the military say.
The key to Miltiades’ strategy was his intuition to take the battle to
Marathon. By placing himself at the pass that led to
Athens, he occupied the
central position in the war instead of the southern periphery. With the entire
army holding the pass,
the Persians would have a bloody time forcing their
way through, so they decided to divide their forces before the Spartan
reinforcements arrived. Once divided, and with their cavalry diluted, they
lost their advantage and the central position from
which they could
dominate the war.
For the Athenians it was imperative to fight the smallest force first, the
one they faced at Marathon. That done, and having
taken the central
position, they had the shorter route to Athens, while the invaders had to
round the coast. Arriving first
at Phaleron, the Athenians allowed no safe
place to disembark. The Persians could have returned to Marathon, but the
arrival
of the bloodied Athenian soldiers from the north must have told
them they had already lost the battle there, and their spirits
were broken.
Retreat was the only option.
There will be times in life when you face a powerful enemy—a
destructive opponent seeking your undoing, a slew of seemingly
insurmountable problems hitting you at once. It is natural to feel
intimidated in these situations, which may paralyze you
into inaction or
make you wait in the vain hope that time will bring a solution. But it is a
law of war that by allowing the
larger force to come to you, at full strength
and unified, you increase the odds against you; a large and powerful army
on
the move will gain an irresistible momentum if left unchecked. You will
find yourself quickly overwhelmed. The wisest course
is to take a risk, meet
the enemy before it comes to you, and try to blunt its momentum by forcing
or enticing it to divide.
And the best way to make an enemy divide is to
occupy the center.
Think of battle or conflict as existing on a kind of chessboard. The
chessboard’s center can be physical—an actual place like
Marathon—or
more subtle and psychological: the levers of power within a group, the
support of a critical ally, a troublemaker
at the eye of the storm. Take the
center of the chessboard and the enemy will naturally break into parts,
trying to hit you
from more than one side. These smaller parts are now
manageable, can be defeated in detail or forced to divide yet again.
And
once something large is divided, it is prone to further division, to being
splintered into nothingness.
As your army faces the enemy and the enemy appears powerful, try to
attack the enemy in one particular spot. If you are successful
in crumbling
that one particular spot, leave that spot and attack the next, and so on and
so forth, as if you were going down
a winding road.
—Miyamoto Musashi (1584–1645)
ATTACKING THE JOINTS
As a young man, Samuel Adams (1722–1803) of colonial-era Boston
developed a dream: the American colonies, he believed, should
one day win
complete independence from England and establish a government based on
the writings of the English philosopher
John Locke. According to Locke, a
government should reflect the will of its citizens; a government that did not
do so had
lost its right to exist. Adams had inherited a brewery from his
father, but he did not care about business, and while the
brewery veered
toward bankruptcy, he spent his time writing articles on Locke and the need
for independence. He was an excellent
writer, good enough to get his
articles published, but few took his ideas seriously: he seemed to rant, to be
somewhat out
of touch with the world. He had that obsessive glint in the
eye that makes people think you’re a crackpot. The problem was
that the
ties between England and America were strong; the colonists did have their
grievances, but there was hardly a clamor
for independence. Adams began
to have bouts of depression; his self-appointed mission seemed hopeless.
The British desperately needed money from the colonies, and in 1765
they passed a law called the Stamp Act: to make any document
legal,
American businesses would be required to purchase and affix to it a stamp
of the British crown. The colonists were
growing ticklish about the taxes
they paid to England; they saw the Stamp Act as a new kind of tax in
disguise, and a few
disgruntled voices were raised in urban taverns. Even
so, for most the issue seemed minor—but Adams saw the Stamp Act as the
opportunity he had been waiting for his whole life. It gave him something
tangible to attack, and he flooded newspapers throughout
the colonies with
editorials, all fulminating against the act. Without consulting the colonies,
he wrote, England was imposing
a new kind of tax, and this, in a
memorable phrase, was taxation without representation, the first step
toward tyranny.
A novice chess player soon learns that it is a good idea to control the center
of the board. This recognition will recur, in novel disguises, in situations far
from the chessboard. It may help to seek the equivalent
of the center of the
board in any situation, or to see that the role of the center has migrated to
the flanks, or to realize
that there is no board and no singular topology. . . .
CLAUSEWITZ ON STRATEGY, TIHA VON GHYZY, BOLKO VON
OETINGER, CHRISTOPHER BASSFORD, EDS., 2001
These editorials were so well written and so audacious in their criticisms
that many began to take a closer look at the Stamp
Act, and they did not
like what they saw. Adams had never previously gone beyond writing
articles, but now that he had lit
this fire of discontent, he saw the urgency in
stoking it further with action. For many years he had fraternized with
working-class
people considered riffraff by polite society— dockworkers
and the like; now he banded these men into an organization called
the Sons
of Liberty. The group marched through the streets of Boston shouting a
slogan Adams had coined: “Liberty, property,
and no stamps!” They burned
effigies of political figures who had promoted the Stamp Act. They
distributed pamphlets containing
Adams’s arguments against the act. They
also worked to intimidate the future distributors of the stamps, even going
so far
as to destroy one of their offices. The more dramatic the action, the
more publicity Adams would earn, publicity into which
he could insert
arguments against the act.
Having gained momentum, the relentless Adams would not stop. He
organized a statewide work stoppage for the day the act was
to become law:
shops would close, the courts would be empty. Since no business would be
conducted in Massachusetts, no stamps
would be purchased. The boycott
was massively successful.
Adams’s articles, demonstrations, and boycott made a splash in England,
and there were members of Parliament who sympathized
with the colonists
and spoke out against the Stamp Act. Finally King George III had had
enough, and in April 1766 the act
was repealed. Americans rejoiced at their
first show of power. The British were smarting from their defeat, however,
and the
following year they sneaked in another series of indirect taxes
known as the Townshend System.
Clearly they had underestimated their enemy: Adams went to war. As he
had with the Stamp Act, he wrote countless articles
on the nature of the
taxes the English had tried to disguise, once again stirring up anger. He also
organized further demonstrations
by the Sons of Liberty, now more
menacing and violent than ever—in fact, the English were forced to send
troops to Boston
to keep the peace. This had been Adams’s goal all along;
he had ratcheted up the tension. Belligerent encounters between the
Sons of
Liberty and the English troops put the soldiers on edge, and finally a
nervous group of them fired into a crowd, killing
several Bostonians.
Adams called this the Boston Massacre and spread fiery word of it
throughout the colonies.
With the people of Boston now bubbling with anger, Adams organized
another boycott: no citizen of Massachusetts, not even
a prostitute, would
sell anything to British soldiers. No one would rent them lodgings. They
were shunned in the streets and
taverns; even eye contact was avoided. All
of this had a demoralizing effect on the British soldiers. Feeling isolated
and
antagonized, many of them began to desert or find ways to be sent
home.
Every kingdom divided against itself is laid waste, and a divided household
falls. And if Satan also is divided against himself,
how will his kingdom
stand?
LUKE 11:14
News of the problems in Massachusetts spread north and south; colonists
everywhere began to talk about Britain’s actions in
Boston, its use of force,
its hidden taxes, its patronizing attitude. Then, in 1773, Parliament passed
the Tea Act, on the
surface a rather harmless attempt to solve the economic
problems of the East India Company by giving it a virtual monopoly
on the
sale of tea in the colonies. The law also levied a nominal tax, but, even so,
it would have made tea cheaper in the
colonies, because the middlemen—
the colonial importers—were to be cut out. The Tea Act, however, was
deceptive in its effect,
and confusing, and Adams saw in it a chance to
apply the coup de grâce: it would ruin many colonial tea importers, and it
did include a hidden tax, yet another form of taxation without
representation. In exchange for cheaper tea, the English were
making a
mockery of democracy. In language more fiery than ever, Adams began to
turn out articles opening up the old wounds
from the Stamp Act and the
Boston Massacre.
When East India Company ships began to arrive in Boston at the end of
that year, Adams helped to organize a nationwide boycott
of their tea. No
dockworker would unload the cargo, no warehouse would store it. Then,
one night in mid-December, after Adams
had addressed a town meeting
about the Tea Act, a group of members of the Sons of Liberty— disguised
as Mohawk Indians, body
paint and all—erupted in war whoops, charged to
the wharves, boarded the tea ships, and destroyed their cargo, cutting open
the cases of tea and pouring them into the harbor, all of this done with great
revelry.
This provocative act, which later became known as the Boston Tea Party,
was the turning point. The British could not tolerate
it and quickly closed
down Boston harbor and imposed military law on Massachusetts. Now all
doubt vanished: pushed into a
corner by Adams, the British were acting just
as tyrannically as he had prophesied they would. The heavy military
presence
in Massachusetts was predictably unpopular, and it was only a
matter of months before violence erupted: in April 1775, English
soldiers
fired on Massachusetts militiamen in Lexington. This “shot heard ’round
the world” became the spark for the war that
Adams had so diligently
worked to kindle out of nothing.
Interpretation
Before 1765, Adams labored under the belief that well-reasoned arguments
would be enough to convince the colonists of the
rightness of his cause. But
as the years of failure piled up, he confronted the reality that the colonists
retained a deep
emotional attachment to England, as children do to a parent.
Liberty meant less to them than did England’s provision of protection
and a
sense of belonging in a threatening environment. When Adams realized
this, he reformulated his goals: instead of preaching
independence and the
ideas of John Locke, he set to work to sever the colonists’ ties with
England. He made the children distrust
the parent, whom they came to see
not as a protector but as a domineering overlord exploiting them for its
profit. The bond
with England loosened, Adams’s arguments for
independence began to resonate. Now the colonists began to look for their
sense
of identity not to Mother England but to themselves.
With the Stamp Act campaign, then, Adams discovered strategy, the
bridge between his ideas and reality. His writings now aimed
at stirring up
anger. The demonstrations he organized—pure theater—were also designed
to create and build anger among the
middle and lower classes, key
components of the future revolution. Adams’s innovative use of boycotts
was calibrated to infuriate
the British and bait them into rash action. Their
violent response contrasted brilliantly with the relatively peaceful methods
of the colonists, making them seem as tyrannical as he had said they were.
Adams also worked to stir dissension among the
English themselves,
weakening the bond on all sides. The Stamp Act and Tea Act were actually
rather trivial, but Adams strategically
manipulated them to manufacture
outrage, making them into wedges driven between the two sides.
Understand: rational arguments go in one ear and out the other. No one is
changed; you are preaching to the converted. In
the war to win people’s
attention and influence them, you must first separate them from whatever
ties them to the past and
makes them resist change. You must realize that
these ties are generally not rational but emotional. By appealing to people’s
emotions, you can make your targets see the past in a new light, as
something tyrannical, boring, ugly, immoral. Now you have
room to
infiltrate new ideas, shift people’s vision, make them respond to a new
sense of their self-interest, and sow the
seeds for a new cause, a new bond.
To make people join you, separate them from their past. When you size up
your targets,
look for what connects them to the past, the source of their
resistance to the new.
A joint is the weakest part of any structure. Break it and you divide
people internally, making them vulnerable to suggestion
and change. Divide
their minds in order to conquer them.
Make the enemy believe that support is lacking; . . . cut off, flank, turn, in a
thousand ways make his men believe themselves
isolated. Isolate in like
manner his squadrons, battalions, brigades and divisions; and victory is
yours.
—Colonel Ardant du Picq (1821–1870)
KEYS TO WARFARE
Thousands of years ago, our primitive ancestors were prone to feelings of
great weakness and vulnerability. To survive in
the hostile environment of
our early world, animals had speed, teeth and claws, fur against winter cold,
and other advantages
of power and protection. Humans had none of this and
must have felt terrifyingly exposed and alone. The only way to compensate
for such weakness was to form groups.
THE THREE OXEN AND THE LION
There were three oxen who always grazed together. A lion had his designs
upon them and wanted to eat them, but he could never
get at one of them
because they were always together. So he set them against each other with
slanderous talk and managed to
get them separated, whereupon they were
isolated and he was able to eat them one after the other.
FABLES, AESOP, SIXTH CENTURY B.C.
The group or tribe offered a defense against predators and greater
effectiveness in the hunt. In the group there were enough
people to watch
your back. The larger the group, the more it allowed its members to refine
that great human invention, the
division of labor, and the more different
individuals in the group were freed from the immediate needs of survival,
the more
time and energy they could devote to higher tasks. These different
roles were mutually supportive and reinforcing, and the
result was a net
increase in human strength.
Over the centuries groups became ever larger and more complex. By
learning to live in towns and settlements, people found
that they could
escape the feeling of imminent danger and need. Living with others also
offered more subtle psychological
protections. In time humans began to
forget the fear that had made them form tribes in the first place. But in one
group—the
army—that primal terror remained as strong as ever.
The standard mode of ancient warfare was hand-to-hand combat, a
frightening drama in which individuals were at all times exposed
to death
from behind and to each side. Military leaders learned early on to form their
soldiers into tight, cohesive ranks.
Trusting his fellows on either side of him
not to retreat and leave him exposed, a soldier could fight the man in front
of
him with more spirit and confidence. The Romans extended this strategy
by placing the youngest, most impetuous fighters in
the front ranks, the
most experienced and best fighters in the rear, and everyone else in the
center. This meant that the
weakest soldiers—the ones most prone to panic
—were surrounded by those who were braver and steadier, giving them a
powerful
sense of security. No army went into battle with more cohesion
and trust than the Roman legions.
In studying ancient warfare, the great nineteenth-century military writer
Colonel Ardant du Picq noticed a peculiar phenomenon:
in some of the
most celebrated battles (Hannibal’s victory over the Romans at Cannae and
Julius Caesar’s over Pompey at Pharsalus,
for example), the losses on each
side were fantastically disproportionate—a few hundred for the victors,
thousands upon thousands
among the vanquished. According to du Picq,
what had happened in these cases was that through maneuver the ultimately
victorious
army had managed to surprise the enemy and splinter its lines
into parts. Seeing their ranks breaking up, losing their sense
of solidarity
and support, and feeling isolated, soldiers panicked, dropped their weapons,
and fled—and a soldier who turned
his back on the enemy was an easy
soldier to kill. Thousands were slaughtered this way. These great victories,
then, were
essentially psychological. Hannibal was vastly outnumbered at
Cannae, but by making the Romans feel vulnerable and isolated,
he made
them overreact and retreat in confusion: easy pickings.
Roosevelt . . . disliked being completely committed to any one person. He
enjoyed being at the center of attention and action,
and the system made
him the focus through which the main lines of action radiated. . . . . . . The
main reason for Roosevelt’s methods, however, involved a tenacious effort
to keep control of the executive branch
in the face of the centrifugal forces
of the American political system. By establishing in an agency one power
center that
counteracted another, he made each official more dependent on
White House support; the President in effect became the necessary
ally and
partner of each. He lessened bureaucratic tendencies toward self-
aggrandizement; he curbed any attempt to gang up
on him. He was, in
effect, adapting the old method of divide and conquer to his own purposes. .
. . . . . His technique was curiously like that of Joseph Stalin, who used the
overlapping delegation of function, a close student
of his methods has said,
to prevent “any single chain of command from making major decisions
without confronting other arms
of the state’s bureaucracy and thus bringing
the issues into the open at a high level.” Roosevelt, like Stalin, was a
political
administrator in the sense that his first concern was power— albeit
for very different ends.
ROOSEVELT: THE LION AND THE FOX, JAMES MACGREGOR
BURNS, 1956
The phenomenon is timeless: the soldier who feels he is losing the
support of those around him is borne back into an intolerable
primitive
terror. He fears he will face death alone. Many great military leaders have
turned this terror into strategy. Genghis
Khan was a master at it: using the
mobility of his Mongol cavalry to cut off his enemies’ communications, he
would isolate
parts of their armies to make them feel alone and unprotected.
He worked consciously to instill terror. The divide-and-isolate
strategy was
also used to great effect by Napoleon and the guerrilla forces of Mao Tse-
tung, among many others.
Our nature has not changed. Lurking deep in even the most civilized
among us is the same basic fear of being alone, unsupported,
and exposed
to danger. People today are more dispersed and society is less cohesive than
ever before, but that only increases
our need to belong to a group, to have a
strong network of allies—to feel supported and protected on all sides. Take
away
this feeling and we are returned to that primitive sensation of terror at
our own vulnerability. The divide-and-conquer strategy
has never been
more effective than it is today: cut people off from their group—make them
feel alienated, alone, and unprotected—and
you weaken them enormously.
That moment of weakness gives you great power to maneuver them into a
corner, whether to seduce
or to induce panic and retreat.
Throughout the 1960s, one of Mao Tse-tung’s most loyal and trusted
followers was his minister of defense, Lin Biao. No one
praised the Chinese
ruler more fulsomely than Lin. And yet by 1970 Mao had come to suspect
that the flattery was a ruse to
disguise his intentions: Lin was plotting to be
his successor. And what made Lin particularly dangerous was that, as
minister
of defense, he had accumulated allies in the military.
Mao went to work with great subtlety. In public he went out of his way to
support Lin, as if he, too, saw the minister as
his successor. That soothed
the natural wariness of the plotter. At the same time, however, Mao also
attacked and demoted
some of Lin’s most important supporters in the
military. Lin was a bit of a radical, veering left on most issues; Mao urged
him to propose some of his more extreme ideas for restructuring the
military, secretly knowing that these ideas would prove
unpopular. Lin’s
support among the higher branches of the military slowly began to thin.
Lin finally realized what Mao was up to, but it was too late. He had lost
his power base. Frustrated and scared, he resorted
to plotting a coup d’état,
a desperate act that played straight into Mao’s hands. In 1971, Lin died
under suspicious circumstances
in a plane crash.
As Mao understood, in political environments people depend on their
connections even more than on their talents. In such a
world, a person
whose career seems to be waning is one whom few will want to know. And
people who feel isolated will often
overreact and do something desperate—
which of course just makes them more isolated. So Mao created the
impression that Lin
was losing his connections. Had he attacked Lin
directly, he would have gotten bogged down in an ugly fight. Dividing the
minister from his power base, and in the process making him appear to be
on the decline, was much more effective.
Before you launch an outright attack on your enemies, it is always wise
first to weaken them by creating as much division
in their ranks as possible.
One good place to drive a wedge is between the leadership and the people,
whether soldiers or
citizenry; leaders function poorly when they lose their
support among the people. So work to make them look authoritarian
or out
of touch. Or steal their foundation, as the Republican president Richard
Nixon did in 1972 by wooing the blue-collar
types who had traditionally
voted Democrat: he split the Democrats’ base. (The Republicans have been
doing the same thing
ever since.) Remember: once your enemy begins to
splinter in any way, the rupture will tend to gain momentum. Division
usually
leads to more division.
In 338 B.C., Rome defeated its greatest enemy at the time, the Latin
League—a confederation of Italian cities that had formed
to block Rome’s
expansion. With this victory, however, the Romans faced a new problem:
how to govern the region. If they crushed
the league’s members, they would
leave a power vacuum, and down the road another enemy would emerge
that might prove a still-greater
threat. If they simply swallowed up the cities
of the league, they would dilute the power and prestige of Rome, giving
themselves
too large an area to protect and police.
The solution the Romans came up with, which they would later call
divide et impera (divide and rule), was to become the strategy by which
they forged their empire. Essentially they broke up the league but
did not
treat all of its parts equally. Instead they created a system whereby some of
its cities were incorporated into Roman
territory and their residents given
full privileges as Roman citizens; others were deprived of most of their
territory but
granted near-total independence; and others still were broken
up and heavily colonized with Roman citizens. No single city
was left
powerful enough to challenge Rome, which retained the central position.
(As the saying goes, all roads led to Rome.)
The key to the system was that if an independent city proved itself loyal
enough to Rome or fought well enough for Rome, it
won the chance of
being incorporated into the empire. The individual cities now saw it as more
in their interest to gain Rome’s
favor than to ally themselves elsewhere.
Rome held out the prospect of great power, wealth, and protection, while
isolation
from Rome was dangerous. And so the once proud members of the
Latin League now competed against one another for Rome’s attention.
Divide and rule is a powerful strategy for governing any group. It is
based on a key principle: within any organization people
naturally form
smaller groups based on mutual self-interest—the primitive desire to find
strength in numbers. These subgroups
form power bases that, left
unchecked, will threaten the organization as a whole. The formation of
parties and factions can
be a leader’s greatest threat, for in time these
factions will naturally work to secure their own interests before those of
the
greater group. The solution is to divide to rule. To do so you must first
establish yourself as the center of power; individuals
must know they need
to compete for your approval. There has to be more to be gained by
pleasing the leader than by trying
to form a power base within the group.
When Elizabeth I became queen, England was a nation divided. The
remnants of feudalism entailed many competing power centers,
and the
court itself was full of factions. Elizabeth’s solution was to weaken the
nobility by deliberately pitting one family
against another. At the same
time, she occupied the center, making herself a symbol of England itself,
the hub around which
everything revolved. Within the court, too, she made
sure that no individual—except of course herself—gained ascendancy.
When
she saw that first Robert Dudley and then the Earl of Essex believed
themselves her favorites, she quickly cut them loose.
“Do not think that I have come to bring peace on earth; I have not come to
bring peace, but a sword. For I have come to set
a man against his father,
and a daughter against her mother, and a daughter-in-law against her
mother-in-law; and a man’s
foes will be those of his own household. He
who loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me; and he who
loves
son or daughter more than me is not worthy of me; and he who does
not take his cross and follow me is not worthy of me.”
MATTHEW 10:34
The temptation to maintain a favorite is understandable but dangerous.
Better to rotate your stars, occasionally making each
one fall. Bring in
people with different viewpoints and encourage them to fight it out. You
can justify this as a healthy
form of democracy, but the effect is that while
those below you fight to be heard, you rule.
The film director Alfred Hitchcock faced enemies on all sides— writers,
set designers, actors, producers, marketers—any of
them quite capable of
putting their egos before the quality of the film. Writers wanted to show off
their literary skills,
actors wanted to look like stars, producers and
marketers wanted the movie to be commercial—the whole crew had
competing interests.
Hitchcock’s solution, like Queen Elizabeth’s, was to
take the central position, in a variant of divide and rule. His carefully
crafted role as a public celebrity was part of this: his movies’ publicity
campaigns always involved him as spokesperson,
and he made bit-part
appearances in most of his films, becoming an instantly recognizable,
endearingly humorous figure. He
put himself in the middle of every aspect
of production, from writing the script before the shoot began to editing the
film
when the shoot was finished. At the same time, he kept all the
filmmaking departments, even that of the producer, a little
out of the loop;
information about every detail of the film was kept in his head, his
drawings, and his notes. No one could
bypass him; every decision went
through him. Before the film was shot, for example, Hitchcock would set
out in detail the
look of the leading lady’s costumes. If the costume designer
wanted to change anything, she would have to go through him or
be caught
out in rank insubordination. In essence, he was like Rome: all roads led to
Hitchcock.
Within your group, factions may emerge quite subtly by virtue of the fact
that people who are experts in their area may not
tell you everything they’re
doing. Remember: they see only the small picture; you are in charge of the
whole production. If
you are to lead, you must occupy the center.
Everything must flow through you. If information is to be withheld, you are
the
one to do it. That is divide and rule: if the different parts of the
operation lack access to all the information, they will
have to come to you
to get it. It is not that you micromanage but that you keep overall control of
everything vital and isolate
any potential rival power base.
Throughout the 1950s and ’60s, Major General Edward Lansdale was
considered America’s principal expert in counterinsurgency.
Working with
President Ramon Magsaysay of the Philippines, he had crafted a plan that
had defeated the country’s Huk guerrilla
movement in the early 1950s.
Counterinsurgency requires a deft hand, more political than military, and for
Lansdale the key
to success was to stamp out government corruption and
bring the people close to the government through various popular programs.
That would deny the insurgents their cause, and they would die of isolation.
Lansdale thought it folly to imagine that leftist
rebels could be defeated by
force; in fact, force just played into their hands, giving them a cause they
could use to rally
support. For insurgents, isolation from the people is death.
Think of the people in your group who are working primarily for their
own interests as insurgents. They are Cassius types
who thrive on
discontent in the organization, fanning it into dissension and factionalism.
You can always work to divide such
factions once you know about them,
but the better solution is to keep your soldiers satisfied and contented,
giving the insurgents
nothing to feed on. Bitter and isolated, they will die
off on their own.
The divide-and-rule strategy is invaluable in trying to influence people
verbally. Start by seeming to take your opponents’
side on some issue,
occupying their flank. Once there, however, create doubt about some part of
their argument, tweaking and
diverting it a bit. This will lower their
resistance and maybe create a little inner conflict about a cherished idea or
belief.
That conflict will weaken them, making them vulnerable to further
suggestion and guidance.
Japan’s great seventeenth-century swordsman Miyamoto Musashi on
several occasions faced bands of warriors determined to kill
him. The sight
of such a group would intimidate most people, or at least make them
hesitate—a fatal flaw in a samurai. Another
tendency would be to lash out
violently, trying to kill as many of the attackers as possible all at once, but
at the risk
of losing control of the situation. Musashi, however, was above
all else a strategist, and he solved these dilemmas in the
most rational way
possible. He would place himself so that the men would have to come at
him in a line or at an angle. Then
he would focus on killing the first man
and move swiftly down the line. Instead of being overwhelmed or trying too
hard, he
would break the band into parts. Then he just had to kill opponent
number one, while leaving himself in position to deal with
opponent
number two and preventing his mind from being clouded and confused by
the other attackers awaiting him. The effect
was that he could retain his
focus while keeping his opponents off balance, for as he proceeded down
the line, they would
become the ones who were intimidated and flustered.
Whether you are beset by many small problems or by one giant problem,
make Musashi the model for your mental process. If you
let the complexity
of the situation confuse you and either hesitate or lash out without thought,
you will lose mental control,
which will only add momentum to the
negative force coming at you. Always divide up the issue at hand, first
placing yourself
in a central position, then proceeding down the line, killing
off your problems one by one. It is often wise to begin with
the smallest
problem while keeping the most dangerous one at bay. Solving that one will
help you create momentum, both physical
and psychological, that will help
you overwhelm all the rest.
The most important thing is to move quickly against your enemies, as the
Athenians did at Marathon. Waiting for troubles to
come to you will only
multiply them and give them a deadly momentum.
Image: The Knot. It is large, hopelessly entangled, and seemingly
impossible to unravel. The knot consists of thousands of
smaller knots, all
twisted and intertwined. Let time go by and the knot will get only worse.
Instead of trying to pick it
apart from this side or that, take up your sword
and cut it in half with one blow. Once divided, it will come undone on its
own.
Authority: In antiquity those who were referred to as excelling
in the employment of the army were able to keep the enemy’s
forward and rear forces from connecting; the many and few
from relying on each other; the noble and lowly from coming to
each
other’s rescue; the upper and lower ranks from trusting
each other; the troops to be separated, unable to reassemble, or
when
assembled, not to be well-ordered. —Sun-tzu (fourth
century B.C.)
REVERSAL
Dividing your forces as a way of creating mobility can be a powerful
strategy, as Napoleon demonstrated with his flexible
system of corps, which
let him hit his enemy unpredictably from many different angles. But to
make his system work, Napoleon
needed precise coordination of its parts
and overall control over their movements—and his goal was ultimately to
bring the
parts together to strike a major blow. In guerrilla warfare a
commander will disperse his forces to make them harder to hit,
but this, too,
demands coordination: a guerrilla army cannot succeed if the parts are
unable to communicate with each other.
In general, any division of your
forces must be temporary, strategic, and controlled.
In attacking a group in order to sow division, be careful that your blow is
not too strong, for it can have the opposite effect,
causing people to unite in
times of great danger. That was Hitler’s miscalculation during the London
Blitz, his bombing campaign
designed to push England out of World War II.
Intended to demoralize the British public, the Blitz only made them more
determined:
they were willing to suffer short-term danger in order to beat
him in the long run. This bonding effect was partly the result
of Hitler’s
brutality, partly the phenomenon of a culture willing to suffer for the greater
good.
Finally, in a divided world, power will come from keeping your own
group united and cohesive, and your own mind clear and
focused on your
goals. The best way to maintain unity may seem to be the creation of
enthusiasm and high morale, but while
enthusiasm is important, in time it
will naturally wane, and if you have come to depend on it, you will fail. Far
greater
defenses against the forces of division are knowledge and strategic
thinking. No army or group can be divided if it is aware
of the enemy’s
intentions and makes an intelligent response. As Samuel Adams discovered,
strategy is your only dependable
sword and shield.
THE PLOUGHMAN’S QUARRELSOME SONS
A ploughman’s sons were always quarrelling. He scolded them to no avail—
his words did nothing to change their ways. So he
decided to teach them a
practical lesson. He asked them to bring him a load of firewood. As soon as
they had done this he gave a bundle to each and told them to break it all up
for him. But, in spite of all their
efforts, they were unable to do so. The
ploughman therefore undid the bundles and handed each of his sons a stick
at a time. These they broke without any trouble. “So!” said the father, “you
too, my children, if you stay bound together, can be invincible to your
enemies. But if you are divided you will be easy to defeat.”
FABLES, AESOP, SIXTH CENTURY B.C.
18
EXPOSE AND ATTACK
YOUR OPPONENT’S SOFT FLANK
THE TURNING STRATEGY
When you attack people directly, you stiffen their resistance and
make your task that much harder. There is a better way: distract
your opponents’ attention to the front, then attack them from the
side, where they least
expect it. By hitting them where they are
soft, tender, and unprotected, you create a shock, a moment of
weakness for you
to exploit. Bait people into going out on a
limb, exposing their weakness, then rake them with fire from the
side. The only
way to get stubborn opponents to move is to
approach them indirectly.
The Emperor [Napoleon Bonaparte], while he was quite prepared “to break
eggs to make omelettes,” as von Clausewitz puts it, was always eager to
gain total
victory for a minimum expenditure of manpower and effort.
Consequently he disliked having to force a full-scale, fully arrayed frontal
battle— that is to say, marching directly against
the enemy to fight him on
ground of his (the adversary’s) choosing, for such battles were inevitably
expensive and rarely
conclusive (Borodino in 1812 is a case in point).
Instead, whenever possible, after pinning the foe frontally by a feint attack,
he marched his main army by the quickest possible “safe” route, hidden by
the cavalry screen and natural obstacles, to place himself on the rear or
flank of his opponent. Once this
move had been successfully achieved, he
occupied a natural barrier or “strategical curtain” (usually a river line or
mountain range), ordered the blocking of all crossings, and thus isolated his
intended victim from
his rear depots and reduced his chances of
reinforcement. Thereafter, Napoleon advanced relentlessly toward the foe’s
army,
offering him only two alternatives—to fight for survival on ground
not of his own choosing, or to surrender. The advantages afforded by such a
strategy are obvious. The enemy army would be both taken by surprise and
almost certainly demoralized by the sudden apparition of the enemy army
in
its rear, cutting its communications.
THE CAMPAIGNS OF NAPOLEON, DAVID G. CHANDLER, 1966
TURNING THE FLANK
In 1793, Louis XIV and his wife, Marie Antoinette, the king and queen of
France, were beheaded by order of the new government
put in place after
the French Revolution. Marie Antoinette was the daughter of Maria
Theresa, the empress of Austria, and
as a result of her death the Austrians
became determined enemies of France. Early in 1796 they prepared to
invade the country
from northern Italy, which at the time was an Austrian
possession.
In April of that year, the twenty-six-year-old Napoleon Bonaparte was
given command of the French army in Italy and charged
with a simple
mission: to prevent these Austrian armies from entering France. Under
Napoleon, for the first time since the
revolution not only were the French
able to hold a defensive position, but they successfully went on the
offensive, pushing
the Austrians steadily east. Shocking as it was to lose to
the revolutionary army, it was downright humiliating to be defeated
by an
unknown general on his first campaign. For six months the Austrians sent
armies to defeat Napoleon, but he forced each
one to retreat into the fortress
of Mantua, until finally this stronghold was crammed with Austrian
soldiers.
Leaving a force at Mantua to pin down the Austrians, Napoleon
established his base to the north, in the pivotal city of Verona.
If the
Austrians were to win the war, they would somehow have to push him out
of Verona and free up the starving soldiers
trapped in Mantua. And they
were running out of time.
In October 1796, Baron Joseph d’Alvintzi was given command of some
50,000 Austrian soldiers and the urgent mission of expelling
the French
from Verona. An experienced commander and clever strategist, d’Alvintzi
studied Napoleon’s Italian campaign carefully
and came to respect his
enemy. To defeat this brilliant young general, the Austrians would have to
be more flexible, and d’Alvintzi
thought he had the solution: he would
divide his army into two columns, one under himself, the other under the
Russian general
Paul Davidovich. The columns would separately march
south, converging at Verona. At the same time, d’Al-vintzi would launch
a
campaign of deception to make Napoleon think that Davidovich’s army was
small (it was in fact 18,000 men strong), merely
a holding force to protect
the Austrian lines of communication. If Napoleon underestimated
Davidovich, the Russian general
would face less opposition and his way to
Verona would be smooth. D’Alvintzi’s plan was to trap Napoleon between
the jaws
of these two armies.
The Austrians entered northern Italy in early November. To d’Al-vintzi’s
delight, Napoleon seemed to have fallen for their
trick; he sent a relatively
light force against Davidovich, who promptly gave the French in Italy their
first real defeat
and began his advance toward Verona. Meanwhile
d’Alvintzi himself advanced all the way to a point not far from Verona and
was poised to fall on the city from the east. As he pored over his maps,
d’Alvintzi took pleasure in his plan. If Napoleon
sent more men to stop
Davidovich, he would weaken Verona against d’Al-vintzi. If he tried to
block d’Alvintzi’s entrance from
the east, he would weaken Verona against
Davidovich. If he sought reinforcements from his troops at Mantua, he
would free
up the 20,000 Austrian soldiers trapped there and they would
gobble him up from the south. D’Alvintzi also knew that Napoleon’s
men
were exhausted and hungry. Having fought for six months without rest, they
were at a breaking point. Not even a young
genius like Napoleon could
escape this trap.
A few days later, d’Alvintzi advanced to the village of Caldiero, at
Verona’s doorstep. There he inflicted another defeat
on the French troops
sent to stop him. After a string of victories, Napoleon had now lost two
battles in a row; the pendulum
had swung against him.
As d’Alvintzi prepared for his final pounce on Verona, he received
confusing news: against all prediction Napoleon had in
fact divided his
army in Verona, but instead of sending parts of it against either d’Al-vintzi
or Davidovich, he had marched
a sizable force somewhere to the southeast.
The next day this army appeared outside the town of Arcola. If the French
crossed
the river to Arcola and advanced a few miles north, they would
directly cross d’Alvintzi’s line of communications and of retreat,
and they
would be able to seize his supply depots at Villa Nova. Having this large
French army to his rear was more than alarming;
d’Alvintzi was forced to
forget about Verona for the moment and hastily marched east.
He had retreated in the nick of time and was able to halt the French
before they could cross the river and attack Villa Nova.
For several days the
two armies settled into a fiercely contested battle for the bridge at Arcola.
Napoleon himself led several
charges and was nearly killed. A portion of
the troops blocking Mantua were dispatched north to reinforce the French at
Arcola,
but d’Alvintzi’s army hunkered down, and the battle turned into a
stalemate.
Now came the critical problem of judging the correct moment for the
enveloping force to reveal its disconcerting position
on the enemy flank. For
maximum effect, it was important that this should not occur before the
enemy had committed all or
most of his reserves to the frontal battle, and
this need for accurate timing of the flank attack called for the greatest
judgment on the part of Napoleon and his key subordinates. The former had
to judge the moment when all the enemy troops were
indeed committed to
the frontal battle (and with the billowing clouds of black-powder smoke
obliterating the scene this was
no easy matter); the latter had the task of
keeping their eager troops “on the leash” so as to avoid any premature
attack disclosing their presence. Then, when the exact moment came,
Napoleon would give the signal. . . . Then the attaque débordante would
spring to life. A roar of cannon away on his hitherto secure flank would
cause the enemy to look apprehensively over
his shoulder, and before long
the spyglasses of his anxious staff would be able to detect a line of dust and
smoke crawling
ever nearer from the flank or rear. This threat to his
communications and line of retreat could not be ignored. The enemy
general might now theoretically adopt one of two courses (but in practice
only one). He could either order an immediate general
retreat to slip out of
the trap before it shut behind his army (although this was generally out of
the question, as Napoleon
would of course launch a general frontal attack
against all sectors of the enemy line to coincide with the unmasking of his
flanking force and thus pin the foe still tighter to the ground he was
holding); or he would be compelled to find troops from
somewhere to form
a new line at right angles to his main position to face the new onslaught
and protect his flank. As all
reserves were (ideally) already committed to
battle, this could be easily and quickly effected only by deliberately
weakening
those frontal sectors closest to the new threat. This thinning out
of the enemy front is what Napoleon termed “the Event”— and was of
course exactly what he intended to have happen. The curtain on the first act
would now fall; the enemy was reacting
as required; the destruction of the
cohesion of his line, the final ruination of his equilibrium, could now be
undertaken
with practically a guarantee of ultimate success.
THE CAMPAIGNS OF NAPOLEON, DAVID G. CHANDLER, 1966
On the third day of fighting, d’Alvintzi’s soldiers—their lines thinned by
relentless French attacks—were preparing for another
battle for the bridge
when they suddenly heard trumpets blaring from their southern flank. A
French force had somehow crossed
the river below the bridge and was
marching toward the Austrian flank at Arcola. The sound of trumpets was
quickly replaced
by shouts and the whizzing of bullets. The sudden
appearance of the French on their flank was too much for the wearied
Austrians;
not waiting to see the size of the French force, they panicked and
fled the scene. The French poured across the river. D’Al-vintzi
gathered up
his men as best he could and managed to lead them east to safety. But the
battle for Verona was lost, and with
it the doom of Mantua was sealed.
Somehow Napoleon had managed to snatch victory from defeat. The
battle of Arcola helped forge the legend of his invincibility.
Interpretation
Napoleon was no magician, and his defeat of the Austrians in Italy was
deceptively simple. Facing two armies converging on
him, he calculated
that d’Alvintzi’s was the more imminent danger. The fight for Caldiero
encouraged the Austrians to think
that Verona would be defended through
direct, frontal confrontation. But Napoleon instead divided his army and
sent the larger
portion of it to threaten the Austrian supply depot and lines
of communication and retreat. Had d’Alvintzi ignored the threat
and
advanced on Verona, he would have moved farther away from his critical
base of operations and put himself in great jeopardy;
had he stayed put,
Napoleon would have squeezed him between two armies. In fact, Napoleon
knew d’Alvintzi would have to retreat—the
threat was too real—and once
he had done so, he would have relinquished the initiative. At Arcola,
sensing that the enemy
was tiring, Napoleon sent a small contingent to cross
the river to the south and march on the Austrian flank, with instructions
to
make as much noise as possible—trumpets, shouts, gunfire. The presence of
this attacking force, small though it was, would
induce panic and collapse.
The ruse worked.
This maneuver—the manoeuvre sur les derrières, Napoleon called it—
would become a favorite strategy of his. Its success was based on two
truths: First, generals like to
place their armies in a strong frontal position,
whether to make an attack or to meet one. Napoleon would often play on
this
tendency to face forward in battle by seeming to engage the enemy
frontally; in the fog of battle, it was hard to tell that
really only half of his
army was deployed here, and meanwhile he would sneak the other half to
the side or rear. Second, an
army sensing attack from the flank is alarmed
and vulnerable and must turn to face the threat. This moment of turning
contains
great weakness and confusion. Even an army in the stronger
position, like d’Alvintzi’s at Verona, will almost always lose
cohesion and
balance as it turns.
Learn from the great master himself: attacking from the front is rarely
wise. The soldiers facing you will be tightly packed
in, a concentration of
force that will amplify their power to resist you. Go for their flank, their
vulnerable side. This
principle is applicable to conflicts or encounters of
any scale.
Individuals often show their flank, signal their vulnerability, by its
opposite, the front they show most visibly to the world.
This front can be an
aggressive personality, a way of dealing with people by pushing them
around. Or it can be some obvious
defense mechanism, a focus on keeping
out intruders to maintain stability in their lives. It can be their most
cherished beliefs
and ideas; it can be the way they make themselves liked.
The more you get people to expose this front, to show more of themselves
and the directions they tend to move in, the more their unprotected flanks
will come into focus—unconscious desires, gaping
insecurities, precarious
alliances, uncontrollable compulsions. Once you move on their flanks, your
targets will turn to face
you and lose their equilibrium. All enemies are
vulnerable from their sides. There is no defense against a well-designed
flanking
maneuver.
Opposition to the truth is inevitable, especially if it takes the form of a new
idea, but the degree of resistance can be
diminished—by giving thought
not only to the aim but to the method of approach. Avoid a frontal attack
on a long-established
position; instead, seek to turn it by flank movement,
so that a more penetrable side is exposed to the thrust of truth.
—B. H. Liddell Hart (1895–1970)
OCCUPYING THE FLANK
As a young man, Julius Caesar (100–44 B.C.) was once captured by pirates.
They asked for a ransom of twenty talents; laughing,
he replied that a man
of his nobility was worth fifty talents, and he volunteered to pay that sum.
His attendants were sent
for the money, and Caesar was left alone with
these bloodthirsty pirates. For the weeks he remained among them, he
participated
in their games and revelry, even playing a little rough with
them, joking that he would have them crucified someday.
Amused by this spirited yet affectionate young man, the pirates
practically adopted him as their own. But once the ransom
was paid and
Caesar was freed, he proceeded to the nearest port, manned some ships at
his own expense, then went after the
pirates and surprised them in their lair.
At first they welcomed him back—but Caesar had them arrested, took back
the money
he had given them, and, as promised, had them crucified. In the
years to come, many would learn—whether to their delight or
to their
horror—that this was how Caesar did battle.
Caesar, however, did not always exact retribution. In 62 B.C., during a
religious ceremony in Caesar’s home, a young man named
Publius Clodius
was caught among the female celebrants, dressed as a woman and cavorting
with Caesar’s wife, Pompeia. This
was considered an outrage, and Caesar
immediately divorced Pompeia, saying, “My wife must be above
suspicion.” Yet when Clodius
was arrested and tried for sacrilege, Caesar
used his money and influence to get the youth acquitted. He was more than
repaid
a few years later, when he was preparing to leave Rome for wars in
Gaul and needed someone to protect his interests while
he was away. He
used his clout to get Clodius named to the political office of tribune, and in
that position Clodius doggedly
supported Caesar’s interests, stirring up so
much trouble in the Senate with his obnoxious maneuvers that no one had
the time
or inclination to intrigue against the absent general.
During this survey one impression became increasingly strong— that,
throughout the ages, effective results in war have rarely
been attained
unless the approach has had such indirectness as to ensure the opponent’s
unreadiness to meet it. The indirectness has usually been physical, and
always psychological. In strategy, the longest way round is often the
shortest
way home. More and more clearly has the lesson emerged that a
direct approach to one’s mental object, or physical objective, along
the
“line of natural expectation” for the opponent, tends to produce negative
results. The reason has been expressed vividly
in Napoleon’s dictum that
“the moral is to the physical as three to one.” It may be expressed
scientifically by saying that, while the strength of an opposing force or
country
lies outwardly in its numbers and resources, these are
fundamentally dependent upon stability of control, morale, and supply. To
move along the line of natural expectation consolidates the opponent’s
balance and thus increases his resisting power.
In war, as in wrestling, the
attempt to throw the opponent without loosening his foothold and upsetting
his balance results
in self-exhaustion, increasing in disproportionate ratio
to the effective strain put upon him. Success by such a method only
becomes
possible through an immense margin of superior strength in some form—
and, even so, tends to lose decisiveness. In
most campaigns the dislocation
of the enemy’s psychological and physical balance has been the vital
prelude to a successful
attempt at his overthrow.
STRATEGY, B. H. LIDDELL HART, 1954
The three most powerful men in Rome at the time were Caesar, Crassus,
and Pompey. Fearing Pompey, a popular and famously successful
general,
Crassus tried to form a secret alliance with Caesar, but Caesar balked;
instead, a few years later, he approached
the wary Pompey (who was
suspicious of and hostile toward Caesar as a possible future rival) and
suggested they form their
own alliance. In return he promised to support
some of Pompey’s political proposals, which had been stalled in the Senate.
Surprised, Pompey agreed, and Crassus, not wanting to be left out, agreed
to join the group to form the First Triumvirate,
which was to rule Rome for
the next several years.
In 53 B.C., Crassus was killed in battle in Syria, and a power struggle
quickly emerged between Pompey and Caesar. Civil war
seemed inevitable,
and Pompey had more support in the Senate. In 50 B.C., the Senate ordered
that both Caesar (who was fighting
in Gaul at the time) and Pompey should
send one of their legions to Syria to support the Roman army fighting there.
But since
Pompey had already lent Caesar a legion for the war in Gaul, he
proposed to send that one to Syria—so that Caesar would have
lost two
legions instead of one, weakening him for the impending war.
Caesar did not complain. He sent off the two legions, one of which,
however—as he had expected—did not go to Syria but was
conveniently
quartered near Rome, at Pompey’s disposal. Before the two legions left,
Caesar paid each soldier handsomely.
He also instructed their officers to
spread the rumor in Rome that his troops still in Gaul were exhausted and
that, should
he dare to send them against Pompey, they would switch sides
as soon as they had crossed the Alps. Coming to believe these
false reports,
and expecting massive defections, Pompey did not trouble to recruit more
soldiers for the imminent war, which
he would later regret.
In January of 49 B.C., Caesar crossed the Rubicon, the river between
Gaul and Italy, a dramatic, unexpected move that initiated
the Civil War.
Caught by surprise, Pompey fled with his legions to Greece, where he
began to prepare a major operation. As
Caesar marched south, many of
Pompey’s supporters, left behind in Rome, were terrified. Caesar had
established a reputation
in Gaul for brutal treatment of the enemy, leveling
whole towns and killing their inhabitants. Yet when Caesar took the key
town of Corfinium, capturing important senators and army officers who had
fought there alongside troops loyal to Pompey, he
did not punish these men;
in fact, he returned to them the monies his soldiers had looted in taking the
town. This remarkable
act of clemency became the model for his treatment
of Pompey’s supporters. Instead of Caesar’s men switching allegiance to
Pompey, it was Pompey’s who now became the most ardent followers of
Caesar. As a result, Caesar’s march on Rome was quick
and bloodless.
Next, although Pompey had established his base in Greece, Caesar
decided to first attack his flank: the large army he had
quartered in Spain.
Over several months of campaigning, he completely outmaneuvered this
force, led by Pompey’s generals Afranius
and Petreius, and finally cornered
them. They were surrounded, the situation was hopeless, and Afranius and
many of the soldiers,
knowing of Caesar’s gentle treatment of his enemies,
sent word that they were ready to surrender; but Petreius, horrified
at this
betrayal, ordered that any soldier who supported Caesar be slaughtered.
Then, determined to go down fighting, he led
his remaining men out of the
camp for battle—but Caesar refused to engage. The soldiers were unable to
fight.
Finally, desperately low in supplies, Pompey’s men surrendered. This
time they could expect the worst, for Caesar knew about
the massacre in the
camp—yet once again he pardoned Petreius and Afranius and simply
disbanded their army, giving the soldiers
supplies and money for their
return to Rome. Hearing of this, the Spanish cities still loyal to Pompey
quickly changed sides.
In a matter of three months, Roman Spain had been
conquered through a combination of maneuver and diplomacy, and with
barely
a drop of blood spilled.
In the following months, Pompey’s political support in Rome evaporated.
All he had left was his army. His defeat by Caesar
at the Battle of Pharsalus,
in northern Greece, a year later merely put the seal on his inevitable
destruction.
THE TENTH LABOUR: THE CATTLE OF GERYON
Heracles’ Tenth Labour was to fetch the famous cattle of Geryon from
Erytheia, an island near the Ocean stream, without either
demand or
payment. Geryon, a son of Chrysaor and Callirrhoë, a daughter of the Titan
Oceanus, was the King of Tartessus in
Spain, and reputedly the strongest
man alive. He had been born with three heads, six hands, and three bodies
joined together at the waist. Geryon’s shambling red cattle, beasts of
marvellous beauty, were guarded by the herdsman Eurytion, son of Ares,
and by the
two-headed watchdog Orthrus—formerly Atlas’ property—born
of Typhoon and Echidne. . . . On his arrival, [Hercules] ascended Mount
Abas. The dog Orthrus rushed at him, barking, but Heracles’ club struck
him lifeless; and Eurytion, Geryon’s
herdsman, hurrying to Orthrus’ aid,
died in the same manner. Heracles then proceeded to drive away the cattle.
Menoetes, who was pasturing the cattle of Hades near by—but Heracles
had left these untouched—took the news to Geryon. Challenged
to battle,
Hera-cles ran to Geryon’s flank and shot him sideways through all three
bodies with a single arrow. . . . As Hera hastened to Geryon’s assistance,
Heracles wounded her with an arrow in the right breast, and she fled. Thus
he won the
cattle, without either demand or payment.
THE GREEK MYTHS, VOL. 2, ROBERT GRAVES, 1955
Interpretation
Caesar discovered early on in his political life that there are many ways to
conquer. Most people advance more or less directly,
attempting to
overpower their opponents. But unless they kill the foes they beat this way,
they are merely creating long-term
enemies who harbor deep resentment
and will eventually make trouble. Enough such enemies and life becomes
dangerous.
Caesar found another way to do battle, taking the fight out of his enemies
through strategic and cunning generosity. Disarmed
like this, enemy
becomes ally, negative becomes positive. Later on, if necessary, when the
former foe’s guard is down, you
can exact retribution, as Caesar did with
the pirates. Behave more gently, though, and your enemy may become your
best follower.
So it was with Publius Clodius, who, after disgracing
Caesar’s home, became the devoted agent of the general’s dirty work.
When the Civil War broke out, Caesar understood that it was a political
phenomenon as much as a military one—in fact, what
mattered most was
the support of the Senate and the Romans. His acts of mercy were part of a
calculated campaign to disarm
his enemies and isolate Pompey. In essence,
what Caesar was doing here was occupying his enemies’ flank. Instead of
attacking
them frontally and engaging them directly in battle, he would take
their side, support their causes, give them gifts, charm
them with words and
favors. With Caesar apparently on their side, both politically and
psychologically they had no front to
fight against, nothing to oppose. In
contact with Caesar, all hostility toward him melted away. This way of
waging war allowed
him to defeat the militarily superior Pompey.
Life is full of hostility—some of it overt, some clever and underhanded.
Conflict is inevitable; you will never have total
peace. Instead of imagining
you can avoid these clashes of will, accept them and know that the way you
deal with them will
decide your success in life. What good is it to win little
battles, to succeed in pushing people around here and there, if
in the long
run you create silent enemies who will sabotage you later? At all cost you
must gain control of the impulse to
fight your opponents directly. Instead
occupy their flank. Disarm them and make them your ally; you can decide
later whether
to keep them on your side or to exact revenge. Taking the
fight out of people through strategic acts of kindness, generosity,
and charm
will clear your path, helping you to save energy for the fights you cannot
avoid. Find their flank—the support people
crave, the kindness they will
respond to, the favor that will disarm them. In the political world we live in,
the flank is
the path to power.
Let us see if by moderation we can win all hearts and secure a lasting
victory, since by cruelty others have been unable to
escape from hatred
and maintain their victory for any length of time. . . . This is a new way of
conquering, to strengthen
one’s position by kindness and generosity.
—Julius Caesar (100–44 B.C.)
Your gentleness shall force More than your force move us to gentleness.
AS YOU LIKE IT, WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE, 1564–1616
KEYS TO WARFARE
The conflict and struggle we go through today are astounding—far greater
than those faced by our ancestors. In war the passages
of armies are marked
with arrows on maps. If we had to map the battles of our own daily lives,
we would draw thousands of
those arrows, a constant traffic of moves and
maneuvers—not to speak of the arrows actually hitting us, the people trying
to persuade us of one thing or another, to move us in a particular direction,
to bend us to their will, their product, their
cause.
When, in the course of studying a long series of military campaigns, I first
came to perceive the superiority of the indirect
over the direct approach, I
was looking merely for light upon strategy. With deepened reflection,
however, I began to realize
that the indirect approach had a much wider
application— that it was a law of life in all spheres: a truth of philosophy.
Its fulfillment was seen to be the key to practical achievement in dealing
with any problem where the human factor predominates,
and a conflict of
wills tends to spring from an underlying concern for all interests. In all such
cases, the direct assault
of new ideas provokes a stubborn resistance, thus
intensifying the difficulty of producing a change of outlook. Conversion is
achieved more easily and rapidly by unsuspected infiltration of a different
idea or by an argument that turns
the flank of instinctive opposition. The
indirect approach is as fundamental to the realm of politics as to the realm
of sex. In commerce, the suggestion that
there is a bargain to be secured is
far more important than any direct appeal to buy. And in any sphere, it is
proverbial that the surest way of gaining a superior’s acceptance of a new
idea is to weaken resistance
before attempting to overcome it; and the effect
is best attained by drawing the other party out of his defences.
STRATEGY, B. H. LIDDELL HART, 1954
Because so many people are constantly shifting for power, our social
world becomes blanketed in barely disguised aggression.
In this situation it
requires time and patience to be indirect; in the daily rush to move and
influence people, the subtle
approach is too difficult and time-consuming,
so people tend to take the direct route to what they want. To convince us of
the correctness of their ideas, they use argument and rhetoric, growing ever
louder and more emotional. They push and pull
with words, actions, and
orders. Even those more passive players who use the tools of manipulation
and guilt are quite direct,
not in the least subtle, in the paths they choose;
witness a few of their maneuvers and they are rather easy to figure out.
The result of all of this is twofold: we have all become more defensive,
resistant to change. To maintain some peace and stability
in our lives, we
build our castle walls ever higher and thicker. Even so, the increasingly
direct brutality of daily life
is impossible to avoid. All those arrows hitting
us infect us with their energy; we cannot help but try to give back what
we
get. Reacting to direct maneuvers, we find ourselves dragged into head-to-
head arguments and battles. It takes effort to
step away from this vicious
arena and consider another approach.
You must ask yourself this question: what is the point of being direct and
frontal if it only increases people’s resistance,
and makes them more certain
of their own ideas? Directness and honesty may give you a feeling of relief,
but they also stir
up antagonism. As tactics they are ineffective. In war itself
—blood war, not the interpersonal wars of everyday life—frontal
battles
have become rare. Military officers have come to realize that direct attack
increases resistance, while indirection
lowers it.
The people who win true power in the difficult modern world are those
who have learned indirection. They know the value of
approaching at an
angle, disguising their intentions, lowering the enemy’s resistance, hitting
the soft, exposed flank instead
of butting horns. Rather than try to push or
pull people, they coax them to turn in the direction they desire. This takes
effort but pays dividends down the road in reduced conflict and greater
results.
The key to any flanking maneuver is to proceed in steps. Your initial
move cannot reveal your intentions or true line of attack.
Make Napoleon’s
manoeuvre sur les derrières your model: First hit them directly, as
Napoleon did the Austrians at Caldiero, to hold their attention to the front.
Let
them come at you mano a mano. An attack from the side now will be
unexpected and hard to combat.
At a palace reception in Paris in 1856, all eyes were on a new arrival on
the scene: an eighteen-year-old Italian aristocrat
called the Countess de
Castiglione. She was stunningly beautiful and more: she carried herself like
a Greek statue come to
life. Emperor Napoleon II, a notorious womanizer,
could not help but take notice and be fascinated, but for the moment that
was all—he tended to prefer more hot-blooded women. Yet as he saw her
again over the months that followed, he became intrigued
despite himself.
Six in the fifth place means: The tusk of a gelded boar. Good fortune. Here
the restraining of the impetuous forward drive is achieved in an indirect
way. A boar’s tusk is in itself dangerous,
but if the boar’s nature is altered,
the tusk is no longer a menace. Thus also where men are concerned, wild
force should
not be combated directly.
THE I CHING, CHINA, CIRCA EIGHTH CENTURY B.C.
In events at court, Napoleon and the countess would exchange glances
and occasional remarks. She always left before he could
engage her in
conversation. She wore stunning dresses, and long after the evening was
over, her image would return to his
mind.
What drove the emperor crazy was that he apparently didn’t excite her—
she seemed only modestly interested in him. He began
to court her
assiduously, and after weeks of assault, she finally succumbed. Yet even
now that she was his mistress, he still
sensed her coldness, still had to
pursue her, was never sure of her feelings. At parties, too, she would draw
men’s attention
like a magnet, making him furiously jealous. The affair
went on, but before too long the emperor naturally tired of the countess
and
moved on to another woman. Even so, while it lasted, he could think of no
one else.
In Paris at the time was Victor-Emmanuel, the king of Piedmont, the
countess’s home. Italy was divided into small states like
this one at the time,
but with France’s support it would soon become a unified nation, and
Victor-Emmanuel harbored the secret
desire to become its first king. In her
conversations with Napoleon, the countess would occasionally talk of the
king of Piedmont,
praising his character and describing his love of France
and his strength as a leader. The emperor could only agree: Victor-
Emmanuel
would make the perfect king of Italy. Soon Napoleon was
broaching this idea with his advisers, then actively promoting Victor-
Emmanuel
for the throne as if it were his own idea—and eventually he
made this happen. Little did he know: his affair with the countess
had been
set up by Victor-Emmanuel and his clever adviser, the Count di Cavour.
They had planted her in Paris to seduce Napoleon
and slowly insinuate the
idea of Victor-Emmanuel’s promotion.
After this meeting a story about Mao’s methods went the rounds of
Shanghai’s remaining executive suites. Mao called in Liu
[Shaoqi] and
Zhou [Enlai]. He had a question for them: “How would you make a cat eat
pepper?” Liu spoke up first. “That’s easy,” said the number-two man.“You
get somebody to hold the cat, stuff the pepper in its mouth, and push it down
with a chopstick.” Mao raised his hands in horror at such a made-in-
Moscow solution. “Never use force. . . . Everything must be voluntary.”
Zhou had been listening. Mao inquired what the premier would do with the
cat. “I would starve the cat,” replied the man who had often walked the
tightrope of opportunity. “Then I would wrap the pepper
with a slice of
meat. If the cat is sufficiently hungry it will swallow it whole.” Mao did not
agree with Zhou any more than with Liu. “One must not use deceit either—
never fool the people.” What, then would the Chairman himself do?
“Easy,” he said— concurring with Liu at least on that. “You rub the pepper
thoroughly into the cat’s backside. When it burns, the cat will lick it off—
and be happy that it is permitted to do so.”
MAO: A BIOGRAPHY, ROSS TERRILL, 1999
The countess’s seduction of the emperor had been planned like an
elaborate military campaign, right down to the dresses she
would wear, the
words she would say, the glances she would throw. Her discreet way of
roping him in was a classic flanking
attack, a seductive manoeuvre sur les
derrières The countess’s cold beauty and fascinating manner drew the
emperor on until he had advanced so far that he was convinced it
was he
who was the aggressor. Holding his attention to the front, the countess
worked to the side, subtly conjuring the idea
of crowning Victor-Emmanuel.
Had she pursued the emperor directly or suggested the crowning of the king
in so many words,
not only would she have failed, but she would have
pushed the emperor in the opposite direction. Drawn forward frontally by
his weakness for a beautiful woman, he was vulnerable to gentle persuasion
on his flank.
Maneuvers like this one should be the model for your attempts at
persuasion. Never reveal your intentions or goals; instead
use charm,
pleasant conversation, humor, flattery—whatever works—to hold people’s
attention to the front. Their focus elsewhere,
their flank is exposed, and now
when you drop hints or suggest subtle changes in direction, the gates are
open and the walls
are down. They are disarmed and maneuverable.
Think of people’s ego and vanity as a kind of front. When they are
attacking you and you don’t know why, it is often because
you have
inadvertently threatened their ego, their sense of importance in the world.
Whenever possible, you must work to make
people feel secure about
themselves. Again, use whatever works: subtle flattery, a gift, an
unexpected promotion, an offer
of alliance, a presentation of you and they
as equals, a mirroring of their ideas and values. All these things will make
them
feel anchored in their frontal position relative to the world, lowering
their defenses and making them like you. Secure and
comfortable, they are
now set up for a flanking maneuver. This is particularly devastating with a
target whose ego is delicate.
A common way of using the flanking maneuver in war is to get your
enemies to expose themselves on a weak salient. This means
maneuver- ing
them onto ground or luring them to advance in such a way that their front is
narrow and their flanks are long—a
delicious target for a side attack.
Inner truth. Pigs and fishes. Good fortune. It furthers one to cross the great
water. Perseverance furthers. Pigs and fishes are the least intelligent of all
animals and therefore the most difficult to influence. The force of inner
truth
must grow great indeed before its influence can extend to such creatures. In
dealing with persons as intractable and
as difficult to influence as a pig or
a fish, the whole secret of success depends on finding the right way of
approach. One must first rid oneself of all prejudice and, so to speak, let the
psyche of the other person act on one without restraint.
Then one will
establish contact with him, understand and gain power over him. When a
door has been thus opened, the force
of one’s personality will influence him.
If in this way one finds no obstacles insurmountable, one can undertake
even the most dangerous things, such as crossing the
great water, and
succeed.
THE I CHING, CHINA, CIRCA EIGHTH CENTURY B.C.
In 1519, Hernán Cortés landed with a small army in eastern Mexico,
planning to realize his dream of conquering the Aztec Empire.
But first he
had to conquer his own men, particularly a small yet vocal group of
supporters of Diego de Velázquez, the governor
of Cuba, who had sent
Cortés on no more than a scouting mission and who coveted the conquest of
Mexico himself. Velázquez’s
supporters caused trouble for Cortés at every
step, constantly conspiring against him. One bone of contention was gold,
which
the Spanish were to collect for delivery to the king of Spain. Cortés
had been letting his soldiers barter for gold but then
had been using that
gold to buy food. This practice, Velázquez’s men argued, must end.
Appearing to concede, Cortés suggested the Velázquez men appoint a
treasurer. They quickly named one of their own, and with
their help this
man began to collect everyone’s gold. This policy, naturally, proved
extremely unpopular with the soldiers,
who were braving enormous dangers
for little benefit. They complained bitterly—but Cortés just pointed to the
men who had
insisted on this policy in the name of the governor of Cuba.
He personally, of course, had never been in favor of it. Soon
the Velázquez
men were universally hated, and Cortés at the urgent request of the other
soldiers, gladly rescinded the policy.
From then on, the conspirators could
get nowhere with the men. They were exposed and despised.
Cortés used this strategy often to deal with dissenters and troublemakers.
At first he would seem to go along with their ideas,
would even encourage
them to take things further. In essence, he would get his enemies to expose
themselves on a weak salient,
where their selfish or unpopular ideas could
be revealed. Now he had a target to hit.
When people present their ideas and arguments, they often censor
themselves, trying to appear more conciliatory and flexible
than is actually
the case. If you attack them directly from the front, you end up not getting
very far, because there isn’t
much there to aim at. Instead try to make them
go further with their ideas, giving you a bigger target. Do this by standing
back, seeming to go along, and baiting them into moving rashly ahead. (You
can also make them emotional, pushing their buttons,
getting them to say
more than they had wanted to.) They will expose themselves on a weak
salient, advancing an indefensible
argument or position that will make them
look ridiculous. The key is never to strike too early. Give your opponents
time to
hang themselves.
In a political world, people are dependent on their social position. They
need support from as many sources as possible. That
support, the base of
most people’s power, presents a rich flank to expose and attack. Franklin D.
Roosevelt knew that a politician’s
vulnerable flank was the electorate, the
people who might or might not vote for him in his next race. Roosevelt
could get
a politician to sign off on a bill or support a nomination, whatever
his real thoughts about the issues, by threatening a
maneuver that would
injure the other man’s popularity with his constituents. A flanking attack on
someone’s social status
and reputation will make him or her turn to face this
menace, giving you ample room to maneuver the opponent in other
directions.
The Book of Changes (I Ching) is often considered the Oriental apotheosis
of adaptation, of flexibility. In this book the recurring theme is one of
observing
life and blending with its flow in order to survive and develop. In
effect, the theme of this work is that everything in existence
can be a source
of conflict, of danger, and, ultimately, of violence if opposed from the wrong
angle or in the wrong manner—that
is, if confronted directly at the point of
its maximum strength, since this approach renders the encounter potentially
devastating.
By the same token, any and every occurrence can be dealt with
by approaching it from the right angle and in the proper manner—
that is,
at its source, before it can develop full power, or from the sides (the
vulnerable “flanks of a tiger”).
SECRETS OF THE SAMURAI, OSCAR RATTI AND ADELE
WESTBROOK, 1973
The more subtle and indirect your maneuvers in life, the better. In 1801,
Napoleon suddenly offered Russia the chance to become
the protector of
the island of Malta, then under French control. That would give the
Russians an important base in the Mediterranean.
The offer seemed
generous, but Napoleon knew that the English would soon take control of
the island, for they coveted it and
had the forces in place to take it, and the
French navy was too weak to hold it. The English and the Russians were
allies,
but their alliance would be endangered by a squabble over Malta.
That discord was Napoleon’s goal all along.
The ultimate evolution of strategy is toward more and more indirection.
An opponent who cannot see where you are heading is
at a severe
disadvantage. The more angles you use—like a cue ball in billiards
caroming off several sides of the table—the
harder it will be for your
opponents to defend themselves. Whenever possible, calculate your moves
to produce this caroming
effect. It is the perfect disguise for your
aggression.
Image: The Lobster. The creature seems intimidating and impenetrable,
with its sharp claws quick to grab, its hard protective
shell, its powerful tail
propelling it out of danger. Handle it directly and you will pay the price.
But turn it over with
a stick to reveal its tender underside and the creature
is rendered helpless.
Authority: It is by turning the enemy, by attacking his flank,
that battles are won. —Napoleon Bonaparte (1769–1821)
REVERSAL
In politics, occupying the flank by taking a similar position to the other
side, co-opting its ideas for your own purposes,
is a powerful ploy, one that
President Clinton used to great effect in his triangulations with the
Republicans. This gives
the opponent nothing to strike at, no room to
maneuver. But staying too long on the opponent’s flank can bring a price:
the
public—the real soft flank for any politician—loses its sense of what the
triangulator stands for, what sets him and his party
apart from the other side.
Over time this can prove dangerous; polarity (see chapter 1)—creating the
appearance of sharp differences—is
more effective in the long run. Beware
of occupying the opponent’s flank at the expense of exposing your own.
19
ENVELOP THE ENEMY
THE ANNIHILATION STRATEGY
People will use any kind of gap in your defenses to attack you
or revenge themselves on you. So offer no gaps. The secret
is to
envelop your opponents—create relentless pressure on them
from all sides, dominate their attention, and close off their
access to the outside world. Make your attacks unpredictable to
create a vaporous feeling of vulnerability. Finally, as you
sense
their weakening resolve, crush their willpower by tightening the
noose. The best encirclements are psychological—you
have
surrounded their minds.
Legend has it that Shaka altered the nature of fighting in the region for ever,
by inventing a heavy, broad-bladed spear designed
to withstand the stresses
of close-quarter combat. Perhaps he did: certainly both Zulu sources and
the accounts of white travellers and officials in the nineteenth century
credit
him with this achievement. . . . His military innovations made an impact on
Zulu folklore, if nothing else, for Shaka certainly developed fighting
techniques
to an unprecedented degree, and there is a wealth of stories
concerning his prowess as a warrior: he may, indeed, have been
one of the
great military geniuses of his age. In place of the loose skirmishing tactics
with light throwing spears, Shaka
trained his warriors to advance rapidly in
tight formations and engage hand-to-hand, battering the enemy with larger
war-shields,
then skewering their foes with the new spear as they were
thrown off balance. If the results are anything to judge by, Shaka’s capacity
for conquest must have been dramatic. By 1824 the Zulus had eclipsed
all
their rivals, and had extended their influence over an area many times
larger than their original homeland.
THE ANATOMY OF THE ZULU ARMY, IAN KNIGHT, 1995
THE HORNS OF THE BEAST
In December 1878 the British declared war on the Zulus, the warrior tribe
of present-day South Africa. The rather flimsy pretext
was border troubles
between Zululand and the British state of Natal; the real aim was to destroy
the Zulu army, the last remaining
native force threatening British interests
in the area, and to absorb Zulu territories into a British-run confederation of
states. The British commander, Lieutenant General Lord Chelmsford,
drafted a plan to invade Zululand with three columns, the
central one aimed
at the capital of Ulundi, the heart of the kingdom.
Many Englishmen in Natal were thrilled at the prospect of war and at the
potential benefits of taking over Zululand, but no
one was as excited as
forty-eight-year-old Colonel Anthony William Durnford. For years
Durnford had bounced from one lonely
British Empire outpost to another,
finally ending up in Natal. In all his years of military service, Durnford had
not once
seen action. He yearned to prove his valor and worth as a soldier,
but he was approaching the age when such youthful dreams
could no longer
be fulfilled. Now, suddenly, the impending war was sending the opportunity
his way.
Eager to impress, Durnford volunteered to organize an elite force of
native soldiers from Natal to fight alongside the British.
His offer was
accepted, but as the British invaded Zululand in early January 1879, he
found himself cut out of the main action.
Lord Chelmsford did not trust
him, thinking his hunger for glory made him impetuous; also, for someone
with no battle experience,
he was old. So Durnford and his company were
stationed at Rorke’s Drift, in western Zululand, to help monitor the border
areas
with Natal. Dutifully but bitterly, Durnford followed his orders.
In the first days after the invasion, the British failed to locate the main
Zulu army, only trickles of men here and there.
They were growing
frustrated. On January 21, Chelmsford took half of the central column,
which was encamped at the foot of
a mountain called Isandlwana, and led it
east in search of the Zulus. Once he had found the enemy, he would bring
the rest
of his army forward—but the elusive Zulus might attack the camp
while he was away, and the men at Rorke’s Drift were the closest
reserves.
Needing to reinforce Isandlwana, he sent word to Durnford to bring his
company there. As colonel, Durnford would
now be the highest-ranking
officer at the camp, but Chelmsford could not worry about Durnford’s
leadership qualities—the impending
battle was the only thing on his mind.
Early on the morning of January 22, Durnford received the news he had
been waiting for all his life. Barely able to contain
his excitement, he lead
his four hundred men east to Isandlwana, arriving at the camp at around
10:00 A.M. Surveying the land,
he understood why Chelmsford had put his
main camp here: to the east and south were miles of rolling grassland—
Zulus approaching
from that direction would be seen well in advance. To
the north was Isandlwana, and beyond it the plains of Nqutu. This side
was
a little less secure, but scouts had been placed at key points in the plains and
at the mountain passes; attack from that
direction would almost certainly be
detected in time.
The careful use by the Zulus of cover during their advance was observed
time and again by the British. Another anonymous survivor of Isandlwana
noted that as the Zulus crested the Nyoni ridge and came within sight of
camp, they
“appeared almost to grow out of the earth. From rock and bush
on the heights above started scores of men; some with rifles, others with
shields and assegais.” Lieutenant
Edward Hutton of the 60th left a rather
more complete description of the Zulu army deploying for the attack at
Gingindlovu: “The dark masses of men, in open order and under admirable
discipline, followed each other in quick succession, running at
a steady
pace through the long grass. Having moved steadily round so as exactly to
face our front, the larger portion of the
Zulus broke into three lines, in knots
and groups of from five to ten men, and advanced towards us. . . . [They]
continued to advance, still at a run, until they were about 800 yards from
us, when they began to open fire. In spite of the
excitement of the moment
we could not but admire the perfect manner in which these Zulus
skirmished. A knot of five or six
would rise and dart through the long grass,
dodging from side to side with heads down, rifles and shields kept low and
out of sight. They would then suddenly sink into the long grass, and nothing
but puffs of curling smoke would show their whereabouts. Then they
advance again. . . .” The speed of this final advance was terrifying. When
the British gave the order to cease firing and fall back at Isandl-wana, the
Zulus were pinned down some two or three
hundred yards from the British
position. Lieutenant Curling of the Artillery noted that in the time it took for
his experienced
men to limber his guns, the Zulus had rushed in so quickly
that one gunner had actually been stabbed as he mounted the axletree
seat.
A Zulu veteran of the battle, uMhoti of the uKhan-dempemvu, thought the
final charge so swift that “like a flame the
whole Zulu force sprang to its
feet and darted upon them.”
THE ANATOMY OF THE ZULU ARMY, IAN KNIGHT, 1995
Shortly after his arrival, Durnford received a report that a seemingly large
Zulu force had been spotted on the plains of
Nqutu heading east, perhaps to
attack Chelmsford’s half of the central column from the rear. Chelmsford
had left explicit
orders to keep the 1,800 men at Isandlwana together. In
case of attack, they had enough firepower to defeat the entire Zulu
army—
as long as they stayed concentrated and kept their lines in order. But to
Durnford it was more important to find the
main Zulu force. The British
soldiers were beginning to grow edgy, not knowing where this vaporous
enemy was. The Zulus had
no cavalry, and many of them fought with
spears; once their hiding place was uncovered, the rest would be easy—the
superior
weaponry and discipline of the British soldiers would prevail.
Durnford thought Chelmsford was too cautious. As senior officer
at the
camp, he decided to disobey orders and lead his 400 men northeast, parallel
to the plains of Nqutu, to find out what
the Zulus were up to.
As Durnford marched out of the camp, a scout on the plains of Nqutu saw
a few Zulus herding cattle some four miles away. He
gave chase on his
horse, but the Zulus disappeared into thin air. Riding to the point where they
had vanished, he stopped
his horse just in time: below him lay a wide, deep
ravine, completely hidden from the surface of the plains, and crowded into
the ravine, as far as he could see in both directions, were Zulu warriors in
full war regalia, an eerie intensity in their
eyes. They seemed to have been
meditating on the imminent battle. For a second the horseman was too
stunned to move, but as
hundreds of spears were suddenly aimed at him, he
turned and galloped away. The Zulus quickly rose and began clambering
out
of the ravine.
Soon the other scouts on the plains saw the same terrifying sight: a wide
line of Zulus filling the horizon, some 20,000 men
strong. Even from a
distance, it was clear that they were moving in formation, each end of their
line coming forward in a
shape resembling horns. The scouts quickly
brought word to the camp that the Zulus were coming. By the time
Durnford received
the news, he could look up to the ridge above him and
see a line of Zulus streaming down the slope. He quickly formed his
own
men into lines to fight them off while retreating to the camp. The Zulus
maneuvered with incredible precision. What Durnford
could not see was
that the men in the left tip of the horn were moving through the tall grass
toward the rear of the camp,
to link up with the other end of the horn and
complete the encirclement.
The Zulus facing Durnford and his men seemed to grow out of the earth,
emerging from behind boulders or from out of the grass
in ever-greater
numbers. A knot of five or six of them would suddenly charge, throwing
spears or firing rifles, then disappear
back into the grass. Whenever the
British stopped to reload, the Zulus would advance ever closer, occasionally
one reaching
Durnford’s lines and disemboweling a British soldier with the
powerful Zulu spear, which made an unbearable sucking sound
as it went in
and out.
Durnford managed to get his men back into camp. The British were
surrounded, but they closed ranks and fired away, killing
scores of Zulus
and keeping them at bay. It was like target practice: as Durnford had
predicted, their superior weaponry was
making the difference. He looked
around; the fight had turned into a stalemate, and his soldiers were
responding with relative
confidence. Almost imperceptibly, though, Durn-
ford noticed a slight slackening in their fire. Soldiers were running out of
ammunition, and in the time it took them to open a new crate and reload,
the Zulus would tighten the circle and a wave of
fear would ripple through
the men as here and there a soldier in the front lines would be impaled. The
Zulus fought with an
intensity the British had never seen; rushing forward
as if bullets could not harm them, they seemed to be in a trance.
Suddenly, sensing the turning point in the battle, the Zulus began to rattle
their spears against their shields and emit their
war cry: “Usuthu!” It was a
terrifying din. At the northern end of the camp, a group of British soldiers
gave way—just a few, panicking at the
sight and sound of the Zulus, now
only a few yards distant, but the Zulus poured through the gap. As if on cue,
those in the
circle between the two horns rained spears on the British,
killing many and making havoc of their lines. From out of nowhere,
a
reserve force rushed forward, fanning around the circle and doubling its
squeezing power. Durnford tried to maintain order,
but it was too late: in a
matter of seconds, panic. Now it was every man for himself.
Durnford ran to the one gap in the encirclement and tried to keep it open
so that his remaining men could retreat to Rorke’s
Drift. Minutes later he
was impaled by a Zulu spear. Soon the battle at Isandlwana was over. A few
hundred managed to escape
through the gap that Durnford had died in
securing; the rest, over fourteen hundred men, were killed.
After such a devastating defeat, the British forces quickly retreated out of
Zululand. For the time being, the war was indeed
over, but not as the British
had expected.
Interpretation
A few months after the defeat at Isandlwana, the British mounted a larger
invasion and finally defeated the Zulus. But the
lesson of Isandlwana
remains instructive, particularly considering the incredible discrepancy in
technology.
The Zulu way of fighting had been perfected earlier in the nineteenth
century by King Shaka Zulu, who by the 1820s had transformed
what had
been a relatively minor tribe into the region’s greatest fighting force. Shaka
invented the heavy, broad-bladed Zulu
spear, the assegai, that was so
devastating in battle. He imposed a rigorous discipline, training the Zulus to
advance and
encircle their enemies with machinelike precision. The circle
was extremely important in Zulu culture—as a symbol of their
national
unity, a motif in their artwork, and their dominant pattern in warfare. The
Zulus could not fight for extended periods,
since their culture required
lengthy cleansing rituals after the shedding of blood in battle. During these
rituals they were
completely vulnerable to attack—no Zulu could fight
again, or even rejoin the tribe, until he had been cleansed. The immense
Zulu army was also costly to maintain in the field. Once mobilized, then,
the army not only had to defeat its enemies in battle,
it had to annihilate
every last one of them, eliminating the possibility of a counterattack during
the vulnerable cleansing
period and allowing a speedy demobilization.
Encirclement was the Zulu method of obtaining this complete kind of
victory.
As soon as it grew light, Hannibal sent forward the Balearics and the other
light infantry. He then crossed the river in person
and as each division was
brought across he assigned it its place in the line. The Gaulish and Spanish
horse he posted near
the bank on the left wing in front of the Roman
cavalry; the right wing was assigned to the Numidian troopers. The centre
consisted of a strong force of infantry, the Gauls and Spaniards in the
middle, the Africans at either end of them. . . .
These nations, more than any
other, inspired terror by the vastness of their stature and their frightful
appearance: the Gauls
were naked above the waist, the Spaniards had
taken up their position wearing white tunics embroidered with purple, of
dazzling
brilliancy. The total number of infantry in the field [at Cannae]
was 40,000, and there were 10,000 cavalry. Hasdrubal was in command of
the left wing, Marhabal of the right; Hannibal himself
with his brother
Mago commanded the centre. It was a great convenience to both armies
that the sun shone obliquely on them, whether it was that they purposely so
placed
themselves, or whether it happened by accident, since the Romans
faced the north, the Carthaginians the south. The wind, called by the
inhabitants the Vulturnus, was against the Romans, and blew great clouds
of dust into their
faces, making it impossible for them to see in front of
them. When the battle [at Cannae] was raised, the auxiliaries ran forward,
and the battle began with the light infantry. Then the Gauls and Spaniards
on the left engaged the Roman cavalry on the right; the battle was not at all
like a cavalry
fight, for there was no room for maneuvering, the river on the
one side and the infantry on the other hemming them in, compelled
them to
fight face to face. Each side tried to force their way straight forward, till at
last the horses were standing in
a closely pressed mass, and the riders
seized their opponents and tried to drag them from their horses. It had
become mainly
a struggle of infantry, fierce but short, and the Roman
cavalry was repulsed and fled. Just as this battle of the cavalry
was
finished, the infantry became engaged, and as long as the Gauls and
Spaniards kept their ranks unbroken, both sides were
equally matched in
strength and courage. At length after long and repeated efforts the Romans
closed up their ranks, echeloned
their front, and by the sheer weight of their
deep column bore down the division of the enemy which was stationed in
front of Hannibal’s line, and was too thin and weak to resist the pressure.
Without a moment’s pause they followed up their broken and hastily
retreating foe till they took to headlong flight. Cutting their way through to
the mass of fugitives, who offered no resistance, they penetrated as far as
the Africans who
were stationed on both wings, somewhat further back than
the Gauls and Spaniards who had formed the advanced centre. As the
latter
fell back, the whole front became level, and as they continued to give
ground, it became concave and crescent-shaped,
the Africans at either end
forming the horns. As the Romans rushed on incautiously between them,
they were enfiladed by the
two wings, which extended and closed round
them in the rear. On this, the Romans, who had fought one battle to no
purpose, left the Gauls and Spaniards, whose rear they had been
slaughtering,
and commenced a fresh struggle with the Africans. The
contest was a very one-sided one, for not only were they hemmed in on
all
sides, but wearied with the previous fighting they were meeting fresh and
vigorous opponents.
THE HISTORY OF ROME, LIVY, 59 B.C.–A.D. 17
Before any battle, the Zulus would scout the terrain for places to hide. As
one looks out over the grasslands and plains of
South Africa, they seem to
offer wide visibility, but they often conceal ravines and gullies undetectable
from any distance.
Even up close, grasses and boulders provide excellent
coverage. The Zulus would move quickly to their hiding places, their
feet
tough as leather from years of running over the grasslands. They would
send out scouting parties as distractions to hide
the movements of the main
force.
Once they emerged from their hiding place and headed into battle, the
Zulus would form what they called the “horns, chest,
and loins.” The chest
was the central part of the line, which would hold and pin the enemy force.
Meanwhile the horns to either
side would encircle it, moving in to the sides
and rear. Often the tip of one horn would stay hidden behind tall grass or
boulders; when it emerged to complete the encirclement it would at the
same time give the enemy a nasty psychological shock.
The loins were a
reserve force kept back to be thrown in for the coup de grâce. These men
often actually stood with their
backs to the battle, so as not to grow overly
excited and rush in before the right moment.
Years after Isandlwana a commission laid the blame for the disaster on
Durnford, but in reality it was not his fault. It was
true that the British had
let themselves be surrounded, but they managed to form lines in decent
order and fought back bravely
and well. What destroyed them was what
destroyed every opponent of the Zulus: the terror created by the precision of
their
movements, the feeling of being encircled in an ever-tightening space,
the occasional sight of a fellow soldier succumbing
to the horrible Zulu
spear, the war cries, the spears that rained down at the moment of greatest
weakness, the nightmarish
sight of a reserve force suddenly joining the
circle. For all the superiority of their weaponry, the British collapsed under
this calculated psychological pressure.
We humans are extremely clever creatures: in disaster or setback, we
often find a way to adapt, to turn the situation around.
We look for any gap
and often find it; we thrive on hope, craftiness, and will. The history of war
is littered with stories
of dramatic adjustments and reversals, except in one
place: the envelopment. Whether physical or psychological, this is the
only
true exception to the possibility of turning things around.
When properly executed, this strategy gives your opponents no gaps to
exploit, no hope. They are surrounded, and the circle
is tightening. In the
abstract space of social and political warfare, encirclement can be any
maneuver that gives your opponents
the feeling of being attacked from all
sides, being pushed into a corner and denied hope of making a
counterattack. Feeling
surrounded, their willpower will weaken. Like the
Zulus, keep a force in reserve, the loins to work with your horns—you hit
them with these forces when you sense their weakness growing. Let the
hopelessness of their situation encircle their minds.
You must make your opponent acknowledge defeat from the bottom of his
heart.
—Miyamoto Musashi (1584–1645)
KEYS TO WARFARE
Thousands of years ago, we humans lived a nomadic life, wandering across
deserts and plains, hunting and gathering. Then we
shifted into living in
settlements and cultivating our food. The change brought us comfort and
control, but in a part of our
spirit we remain nomads: we cannot help but
associate the room to roam and wander with a feeling of freedom. To a cat,
tight,
enclosed spaces may mean comfort, but to us they conjure
suffocation. Over the centuries this reflex has become more psychological:
the feeling that we have options in a situation, a future with prospects,
translates into something like the feeling of open
space. Our minds thrive
on the sense that there is possibility and strategic room to maneuver.
Conversely, the sense of psychological enclosure is deeply disturbing to
us, often making us overreact. When someone or something
encircles us—
narrowing our options, besieging us from all sides—we lose control of our
emotions and make the kinds of mistakes
that render the situation more
hopeless. In history’s great military sieges, the greater danger almost always
comes from the
panic and confusion within. Unable to see what is
happening beyond the siege, losing contact with the outside world, the
defenders
also lose their grip on reality. An animal that cannot observe the
world around it is doomed. When all you can see are Zulus
closing in, you
succumb to panic and confusion.
The battles of daily life occur not on a map but in a kind of abstract space
defined by people’s ability to maneuver, act
against you, limit your power,
and cut into your time to respond. Give your opponents any room in this
abstract or psychological
space and they will exploit it, no matter how
powerful you are or how brilliant your strategies—so make them feel
surrounded.
Shrink their possibilities of action and close off their escape
routes. Just as the inhabitants of a city under siege may
slowly lose their
minds, your opponents will be maddened by their lack of room to maneuver
against you.
There are many ways to envelop your opponents, but perhaps the
simplest is to put whatever strength or advantage you naturally
have to
maximum use in a strategy of enclosure.
In his struggle to gain control of the chaotic American oil industry in the
1870s, John D. Rockefeller—founder and president
of Standard Oil —
worked first to gain a monopoly on the railroads, which were then oil’s
main transport. Next he moved to
gain control over the pipelines that
connected the refineries to the railroads. Independent oil producers
responded by banding
together to fund a pipeline of their own that would
run from Pennsylvania to the coast, bypassing the need for railroads and
Rockefeller’s network of pipelines. Rockefeller tried buying up the land
that lay in the path of the project, being built
by a company called
Tidewater, but his opponents worked around him, building a zigzag pipeline
all the way to the sea.
Rockefeller was faced with a classic paradigm in war: a motivated enemy
was utilizing every gap in his defenses to avoid his
control, adjusting and
learning how to fight him along the way. His solution was an enveloping
maneuver. First, Rockefeller
built his own pipeline to the sea, a larger one
than Tidewater’s. Then he began a campaign to buy up stock in the
Tidewater
company, gaining a minority interest in it and working from
within to damage its credit and stir dissension. He initiated
a price war,
undermining interest in the Tidewater pipeline. And he purchased refineries
before they could become Tidewater
clients. By 1882 his envelopment was
complete: Tidewater was forced to work out a deal that gave Standard Oil
even more control
over the shipping of oil than it had had before this war.
Rockefeller’s method was to create relentless pressure from as many
directions as possible. The result was confusion on the
part of the
independent oil producers—they could not tell how far his control
extended, but it seemed enormous. They still
had options at the point when
they surrendered, but they had been worn down and made to believe the
fight was hopeless. The
Tidewater envelopment was made possible by the
immense resources at Rockefeller’s disposal, but he used these resources
not
just practically but psychologically, generating an impression of himself
as a relentless foe who would leave no gaps for
the enemy to sneak through.
He won not only by how much he spent but by his use of his resources to
create psychological pressure.
To envelop your enemies, you must use whatever you have in abundance.
If you have a large army, use it to create the appearance
that your forces are
everywhere, an encircling pressure. That is how Toussaint l’Ouverture
ended slavery in what today is
called Haiti, at the end of the eighteenth
century, and liberated the island from France: he used his greater numbers
to create
the feeling among the whites on the island that they were
hopelessly engulfed by a hostile force. No minority can withstand
such a
feeling for long.
That night Ren Fu stationed the [Song army] troops by the Haoshui River,
while Zhu Guan and Wu Ying made camp on a tributary of the river. They
were about five li apart. Scouts reported that the Xia forces were inferior in
number and seemed rather fearful. At this Ren Fu lost his vigilance and
grew contemptuous of the men of Xia. He did not stop his officers and men
from pursuing
the Xia army and capturing its abandoned provisions. Geng
Fu reminded him that the men of Xia had always been deceptive and
advised him to bring the troops under discipline and advance slowly in a
regular formation. Scouts should also be dispatched
to probe further into
the surrounding areas in order to find out what tricks the enemy was up to.
However, Ren Fu ignored
this advice. He made arrangements with Zhu
Guan to proceed by separate routes to pursue the enemy and join forces at
the mouth
of Haoshui River the next day. The Xia horsemen feigned defeat,
emerging now and then four or five li in front of the Song army. Ren Fu and
Zhu Guan marched swiftly in a hot pursuit, eventually arriving to the north
of the city
of Longgan. There the Xia soldiers suddenly vanished from sight.
Ren Fu realized at last that he had been deceived and decided to pull the
troops out of the mountainous region. The next day Ren Fu led his men to
move westward along the Haoshui River. They finally got out of the Liupan
Mountains and
proceeded towards the city of Yangmulong. At this juncture
Ren Fu got reports of enemy activity in the vicinity. He had to call the
troops to a halt about five li from the city and array them in a defensive
formation. Just then, several large wooden boxes were discovered lying by
the
road. The boxes were tightly sealed and rustling sound came from
within. Curiously, Ren Fu ordered the boxes to be opened.
All of a sudden,
dozens of pigeons fluttered out of the boxes and flew high into the sky, with
loud tinkling sounds coming
from the small bells attached to their claws. All
the Song soldiers looked up in astonishment, when large hosts of Xia
soldiers appeared in every direction to form a complete
encirclement. On
hearing the pigeon bells, Yuanhao knew that the Song army had entered his
ambush ring. Thereupon he sent an assistant general
with fifty thousand
men to surround and assault the band of troops led by Zhu Guan and led
the other half of his troops in
person to attack Ren Fu, whom he considered
a tougher opponent than Zhu Guan. . . . The Song soldiers failed to
penetrate the encirclement and were compelled to continue the tangled
fight. Many were killed
and some even threw themselves down the precipice
in despair. Ren Fu himself was hit by over a dozen arrows. One of his
guards
urged him to surrender, which seemed the only way to save his life
and the remnants of his men. But Ren Fu sighed and said, “I am a general
of the Song and shall pay for this defeat with my life.”With this he
brandished
his mace and fought fiercely until he was mortally injured on
the face by a spear. Then he took his own life by strangling himself. All of
Ren Fu’s subordinate officers died in combat, and his army was completely
wiped out.
THE WILES OF WAR: 36 MILITARY STRATEGIES FROM ANCIENT
CHINA, TRANSLATED BY SUN HAICHEN, 1991
Remember: the power of envelopment is ultimately psychological.
Making the other side feel vulnerable to attack on many sides is as good as
enveloping them physically.
In the Ismaili Shiite sect during the eleventh and twelfth centuries A.D., a
group later known as the Assassins developed
the strategy of killing key
Islamic leaders who had tried to persecute the sect. Their method was to
infiltrate an Assassin
into the target’s inner circle, perhaps even joining his
bodyguard. Patient and efficient, the Assassins were able over the
years to
instill the fear that they could strike at any time and at any person. No
caliph or vizier felt secure. The technique
was a masterpiece of economy,
for in the end the Assassins actually killed quite a few people, yet the threat
they posed gave
the Ismailis great political power.
A few well-timed blows to make your enemies feel vulnerable in multiple
ways and from multiple directions will do the same
thing for you. Often, in
fact, less is more here: too many blows will give you a shape, a personality
—something for the other
side to respond to and develop a strategy to
combat. Instead seem vaporous. Make your maneuvers impossible to
anticipate.
Your psychological encirclement will be all the more sinister and
complete.
The best encirclements are those that prey on the enemy’s preexisting,
inherent vulnerabilities. Be attentive, then, to signs
of arrogance, rashness,
or other psychological weakness. Once Winston Churchill saw the paranoid
streak in Adolf Hitler, he
worked to create the impression that the Axis
might be attacked from anywhere—the Balkans, Italy, western France.
Churchill’s
resources were meager; he could only hint at these possibilities
through deception. But that was enough: a man like Hitler
could not bear
the thought of being vulnerable from any direction. By 1942 his forces were
stretched across vast parts of
Europe, and Churchill’s ploys made him
stretch them even thinner. At one point a mere feint at the Balkans made
him hold back
forces from the invasion of Russia, which in the end cost him
dearly. Feed the fears of the paranoid and they will start to
imagine attacks
you hadn’t even thought of; their overheated brains will do much of the
encirclement for you.
When the Carthaginian general Hannibal was planning what turned out to
be perhaps the most devastating envelopment in history—his
victory at the
Battle of Cannae in 216 B.C.—he heard from his spies that one of the
opposing Roman generals, Varro, was a
hothead, arrogant and
contemptuous. Hannibal was outnumbered two to one, but he made two
strategic decisions that turned this
around. First, he lured the Romans onto
tight terrain, where their greater numbers would find it hard to maneuver.
Second,
he weakened the center of his lines, placing his best troops and
cavalry at the lines’ outer ends. Led by the rash Varro,
the Romans charged
into the center, which gave way. The Romans pushed farther and farther.
Then, just as the Zulus would encircle
the British within two horns, the
outer ends of the Carthaginian line pushed inward, enclosing the Romans in
a tight and fatal
embrace.
The impetuous, violent, and arrogant are particularly easy to lure into the
traps of envelopment strategies: play weak or
dumb and they will charge
ahead without stopping to think where they’re going. But any emotional
weakness on the opponent’s
part, or any great desire or unrealized wish, can
be made an ingredient of encirclement.
That is how the Iranians enveloped the administration of President
Ronald Reagan in 1985–86, in what became known as the Iran-Contra
Affair. America was leading an international embargo on the sale of
weapons to Iran. In fighting this boycott, the Iranians
saw two American
weaknesses: first, Congress had cut off U.S. funding for the war of the
Contras against the Sandinista government
in Nicaragua—a cause dear to
the Reagan government—and second, the administration was deeply
disturbed about the growing number
of Americans held hostage in the
Middle East. Playing on these desires, the Iranians were able to lure the
Americans into
a Cannae-like trap: they would work for the release of
hostages and secretly fund the Contras, in exchange for weapons.
It seemed too good to resist, but as the Americans entered further into this
web of duplicity (backroom deals, secret meetings),
they could sense their
room to maneuver slowly narrowing: the Iranians were able to ask for more
in exchange for less. In
the end they got plenty of weapons, while the
Americans got only a handful of hostages and not enough money to make a
difference
in Nicaragua. Worse, the Iranians openly told other diplomats
about these “secret” dealings, closing their encirclement by
ensuring that it
would be revealed to the American public. For the government officials
who had been involved in the affair,
there was no possible escape route
from the mess they had been drawn into. Feeling intense pressure from all
sides as news
of the deal became public, their attempts to cover it up or
explain it away only made the situation worse.
In luring your enemies into such a trap, always try to make them feel as if
they are in control of the situation. They will
advance as far as you want
them to. Many of the Americans involved in Iran-Contra believed they were
the ones conning the
naïve Iranians.
Finally, do not simply work to envelop your opponents’ forces or
immediate emotions, but rather envelop their whole strategy—indeed,
their
whole conceptual framework. This ultimate form of envelopment involves
first studying the rigid, predictable parts of
your opponents’ strategy, then
crafting a novel strategy of your own that goes outside their experience.
Taking on the armies
of Islam, Russia, Poland, Hungary, and the Teutonic
Order, the Mongols did not merely defeat them, they annihilated them—by
inventing a new brand of mobile warfare to use against an enemy mired in
centuries-old methods of fighting. This kind of strategic
mismatch can lead
to victory not just in any given battle but in large-scale campaigns—the
ultimate goal in any form of war.
Image:
The Noose. Once it is in place, there is no escape, no hope. At the mere
thought of being caught in it, the enemy will grow
desperate and struggle,
its frantic efforts to escape only hastening its destruction.
Authority: Place a monkey in a cage, and it is the same as a pig,
not because it isn’t clever and quick, but because it has
no place
to freely exercise its capabilities. —Huainanzi (second century
B.C.)
REVERSAL
The danger of envelopment is that unless it is completely successful, it may
leave you in a vulnerable position. You have
announced your plans. The
enemy knows that you are trying to annihilate it, and unless you can quickly
deliver your knockout
punch, it will work furiously not only to defend itself
but to destroy you—for now your destruction is its only safeguard.
Some
armies that have failed in their envelopments have found themselves later
encircled by their enemies. Use this strategy
only when you have a
reasonable chance of bringing it to the conclusion you desire.
20
MANEUVER THEM INTO WEAKNESSTHE
RIPENING-FOR-THE-SICKLE
STRATEGY
No matter how strong you are, fighting endless battles with
people is exhausting, costly, and unimaginative. Wise strategists
generally prefer the art of maneuver: before the battle even
begins, they find ways to put their opponents
in positions of
such weakness that victory is easy and quick. Bait enemies into
taking positions that may seem alluring but
are actually traps
and blind alleys. If their position is strong, get them to abandon
it by leading them on a wild-goose chase.
Create dilemmas:
devise maneuvers that give them a choice of ways to respond—
all of them bad. Channel chaos and disorder in
their direction.
Confused, frustrated, and angry opponents are like ripe fruit on
the bough: the slightest breeze will make them fall.
Warfare is like hunting. Wild animals are taken by scouting, by nets, by
lying in wait, by stalking, by circling around, and by other such stratagems
rather than by sheer force. In waging war we should proceed in the same
way, whether the enemy be many or few. To try simply
to overpower the
enemy in the open, hand to hand and face to face, even though you might
appear to win, is an enterprise which
is very risky and can result in serious
harm. Apart from extreme emergency, it is ridiculous to try to gain a victory
which
is so costly and brings only empty glory. . . .
BYZANTINE EMPEROR MAURIKIOS, A.D. 539–602
MANEUVER WARFARE
Throughout history two distinct styles of warfare can be identified. The
most ancient is the war of attrition: the enemy surrenders
because you have
killed so many of its men. A general fighting a war of attrition will calculate
ways to overwhelm the other
side with larger numbers, or with the battle
formation that will do the most damage, or with superior military
technology.
In any event, victory depends on wearing down the other side
in battle. Even with today’s extraordinary technology, attrition
warfare is
remarkably unsophisticated, playing into humanity’s most violent instincts.
Over many centuries, and most notably in ancient China, a second
method of waging war developed. The emphasis here was not
destroying
the other side in battle but weakening and unbalancing it before the battle
began. The leader would maneuver to
confuse and infuriate and to put the
enemy in a bad position—having to fight uphill, or with the sun or wind in
its face,
or in a cramped space. In this kind of war, an army with mobility
could be more effective than one with muscle.
The maneuver-warfare philosophy was codified by Sun-tzu in his Art of
War, written in China’s Warring States period, in the fifth to third century
B.C.—over two hundred years of escalating cycles
of warfare in which a
state’s very survival depended on its army and strategists. To Sun-tzu and
his contemporaries, it was
obvious that the costs of war went far beyond its
body counts: it entailed a loss of resources and political goodwill and
a
lowering of morale among soldiers and citizens. These costs would mount
over time until eventually even the greatest warrior
nation would succumb
to exhaustion. But through adroit maneuvering a state could spare itself
such high costs and still emerge
victorious. An enemy who had been
maneuvered into a weak position would succumb more easily to
psychological pressure; even
before the battle had begun, it had
imperceptibly started to collapse and would surrender with less of a fight.
Several strategists outside Asia—most notably Napoleon Bonaparte —
have made brilliant use of maneuver warfare. But in general,
attrition
warfare is deeply engrained in the Western way of thinking—from the
ancient Greeks to modern America. In an attrition
culture, thoughts
naturally gravitate toward how to overpower problems, obstacles, those
who resist us. In the media, emphasis
is placed on big battles, whether in
politics or in the arts—static situations in which there are winners and
losers. People
are drawn to the emotional and dramatic quality in any
confrontation, not the many steps that lead to such confrontation.
The
stories that are told in such cultures are all geared toward such battlelike
moments, a moral message preached through
the ending (as opposed to the
more telling details). On top of it all, this way of fighting is deemed more
manly, honorable,
honest.
More than anything, maneuver war is a different way of thinking. What
matters here is process—the steps toward battle and
how to manipulate
them to make the confrontation less costly and violent. In the maneuver
universe, nothing is static. Battles
are in fact dramatic illusions, short
moments in the larger flow of events, which is fluid, dynamic, and
susceptible to alteration
through careful strategy. This way of thinking finds
no honor or morality in wasting time, energy, and lives in battles. Instead
wars of attrition are seen as lazy, reflecting the primitive human tendency to
fight back reactively, without thinking.
In a society full of attrition fighters, you will gain an instant advantage by
converting to maneuver. Your thought process
will become more fluid,
more on the side of life, and you will be able to thrive off the rigid, battle-
obsessed tendencies
of the people around you. By always thinking first
about the overall situation and about how to maneuver people into positions
of weakness rather than fight them, you will make your battles less bloody
—which, since life is long and conflict is endless,
is wise if you want a
fruitful and enduring career. And a war of maneuver is just as decisive as a
war of attrition. Think
of weakening your enemies as ripening them like
grain, ready to be cut down at the right moment.
The following are the four main principles of maneuver warfare:
Craft a plan with branches. Maneuver warfare depends on planning, and
the plan has to be right. Too rigid and you leave yourself no room to adjust
to
the inevitable chaos and friction of war; too loose and unforeseen events
will confuse and overwhelm you. The perfect plan
stems from a detailed
analysis of the situation, which allows you to decide on the best direction to
follow or the perfect
position to occupy and suggests several effective
options (branches) to take, depending on what the enemy throws at you. A
plan with branches lets you outmaneuver your enemy because your
responses to changing circumstances are faster and more rational.
Give yourself room to maneuver. You cannot be mobile, you cannot
maneuver freely, if you put yourself in cramped spaces or tie yourself down
to positions
that do not allow you to move. Consider the ability to move and
keeping open more options than your enemy has as more important
than
holding territories or possessions. You want open space, not dead positions.
This means not burdening yourself with commitments
that will limit your
options. It means not taking stances that leave you nowhere to go. The need
for space is psychological
as well as physical: you must have an unfettered
mind to create anything worthwhile.
Give your enemy dilemmas, not problems. Most of your opponents are
likely to be clever and resourceful; if your maneuvers simply present them
with a problem, they
will inevitably solve it. But a dilemma is different:
whatever they do, however they respond—retreat, advance, stay still—they
are still in trouble. Make every option bad: if you maneuver quickly to a
point, for instance, you can force your enemies
either to fight before they
are ready or to retreat. Try constantly to put them in positions that seem
alluring but are traps.
“Addicts of attrition,” as Simpkin calls them, generally cannot think
beyond the battle, and they consider that the only way—or at least the
preferred
way—to defeat an enemy is to destroy the physical components of
his army, especially the combat portions (armored fighting
vehicles, troops,
guns, etc.). If the attrition addict appreciates war’s intangibles at all (such
as morale, initiative, and shock), he sees them only as
combat multipliers
with which to fight the attrition battle better. If the attrition warrior learns
about maneuver, he sees
it primarily as a way to get to the fight. In other
words, he moves in order to fight. Maneuver theory, on the other hand,
attempts to defeat the enemy through means other than simple destruction
of his mass. Indeed, the highest and purest application of maneuver theory
is to preempt the enemy, that is, to disarm or neutralize him before the
fight. If such is not possible, the maneuver warrior seeks to dislocate the
enemy forces, i.e., removing the enemy from the decisive point, or vice
versa, thus rendering them useless and irrelevant
to the fight. If the enemy
cannot be preempted or dislocated, then the maneuver-warfare practitioner
will attempt to disrupt the enemy, i.e., destroy or neutralize his center of
gravity, preferably by attacking with friendly strengths through enemy
weaknesses.
THE ART OF MANEUVER, ROBERT R. LEONHARD, 1991
Create maximum disorder. Your enemy depends on being able to read
you, to get some sense of your intentions. The goal of your maneuvers
should be
to make that impossible, to send the enemy on a wild-goose chase
for meaningless information, to create ambiguity as to which
way you are
going to jump. The more you break down people’s ability to reason about
you, the more disorder you inject into
their system. The disorder you create
is controlled and purposeful, at least for you. The disorder the enemy
suffers is debilitating
and destructive.
So to win a hundred victories in a hundred battles is not the highest
excellence; the highest excellence is to subdue the
enemy’s army without
fighting at all.
—Sun-tzu (fourth century B.C.)
HISTORICAL EXAMPLES
1. On November 10, 1799, Napoleon Bonaparte completed the coup d’état
that brought him to power as first consul, giving him near-complete
control
of the French state. For over ten years, France had been convulsed with
revolution and war. Now that Napoleon was
leader, his most pressing need
was peace, to give the country time to recoup and himself time to
consolidate his power—but
peace would not come easily.
France had a bitter enemy in Austria, which had put two large armies in
the field, ready to move against Napoleon: one to
the east of the Rhine and
the other in northern Italy under General Michael Melas. The Austrians
were clearly planning a major
campaign. Waiting was too dangerous;
Napoleon had to seize the initiative. He had to defeat at least one of these
armies if
he were to force Austria to negotiate peace on his terms. The one
trump card he had was that several months earlier a French
army had gained
control of Switzerland. There were also French troops in northern Italy,
which Napoleon had taken from the
Austrians several years earlier.
To plan for the first real campaign under his direction, Napoleon holed
himself up in his office for several days. His secretary,
Louis de Bourienne,
would recall seeing him lying on giant maps of Germany, Switzerland, and
Italy laid out wall to wall on
the floor. The desks were piled high with
reconnaissance reports. On hundreds of note cards organized into boxes,
Napoleon
had calculated the Austrians’ reactions to the feints he was
planning. Muttering to himself on the floor, he mulled over every
permutation of attack and counterattack.
By the end of March 1800, Napoleon had emerged from his office with a
plan for a campaign in northern Italy that went far
beyond any- thing his
lieutenants had ever seen before. In the middle of April, a French army
under General Jean Moreau would
cross the Rhine and push the eastern
Austrian army back into Bavaria. Then Napoleon would lead a 50,000-man
force, already
in place in Switzerland, into northern Italy through several
different passes in the Alps. Moreau would then release one of
his divisions
to move south and follow Napoleon into Italy. Moreau’s initial move into
Bavaria, and the subsequent scattered
dispatch of divisions into Italy, would
confuse the Austrians as to Napoleon’s intentions. And if the Austrian army
at the
Rhine was pushed east, it would be too distant to support the Austrian
army in northern Italy.
Once across the Alps, Napoleon would concentrate his forces and link up
with the divisions under General André Massena already
stationed in
northern Italy. He would then move much of his army to the town of
Stradella, cutting off communications between
Melas in northern Italy and
command headquarters in Austria. With Melas’s troops now isolated and
the mobile French army within
reach of them, Napoleon would have many
excellent options for dislocating and destroying them. At one point, as he
described
this plan to Bourienne, Napoleon lay down on the giant map on
his floor and stuck a pin next to the town of Marengo, in the
center of the
Italian theater of war. “I will fight him here,” he said.
A few weeks later, as Napoleon began to position his armies, he received
some troubling news: Melas had beaten him to the
punch by attacking
Massena’s army in Northern Italy. Massena was forced back to Genoa,
where the Austrians quickly surrounded
him. The danger here was great: if
Massena surrendered, the Austrians could sweep into southern France.
Also, Napoleon had
been counting on Massena’s army to help him beat
Melas. Yet he took the news with surprising calm and simply made some
adjustments:
he transferred more men to Switzerland and sent word to
Massena that he must do whatever he could to hold out for at least
eight
weeks, keeping Melas busy while Napoleon moved into Italy.
Within a week there was more irritating news. After Moreau had begun
the campaign to push the Austrians back from the Rhine,
he refused to
transfer the division that Napoleon had counted on for Italy, claiming he
could not spare it. Instead he sent
a smaller, less experienced division. The
French army in Switzerland had already begun the dangerous crossings
through the
Alps. Napoleon had no choice but to take what Moreau gave
him.
By May 24, Napoleon had brought his army safely into Italy. Absorbed
with the siege at Genoa, Melas ignored reports of French
movements to the
north. Next Napoleon advanced to Milan, close to Stradella, where he cut
Austrian communications as planned.
Now, like a cat stealing up on its
prey, he could wait for Melas to notice the trap he was in and try to fight his
way out
of it near Milan.
On June 8, however, once again more bad news reached Napoleon: two
weeks before he had hoped, Massena had surrendered. Napoleon
now had
fewer men to work with, and Melas had won a strong base in Genoa. Since
its inception the campaign had been plagued
with mistakes and unforeseen
events—the Austrians attacking early, Massena retreating into a trap at
Genoa, Moreau disobeying
orders, and now Massena’s surrender. Yet while
Napoleon’s lieutenants feared the worst, Napoleon himself not only stayed
cool,
he seemed oddly excited by these sudden twists of fortune. Somehow
he could discern opportunities in them that were invisible
to everyone else
—and with the loss of Genoa, he sensed the greatest opportunity of all. He
quickly altered his plan; instead
of waiting at Milan for Melas to come to
him, he suddenly cast his divisions in a wide net to the west.
Aptitude for maneuver is the supreme skill in a general; it is the most useful
and rarest of gifts by which genius is estimated.
NAPOLEON BONAPARTE, 1769–1821
Watching his prey closely, Napoleon sensed that Melas was mesmerized
by the movements of the French divisions—a fatal hesitation.
Napoleon
moved one division west to Marengo, close to the Austrians at Genoa,
almost baiting them to attack. Suddenly, on
the morning of June 14, they
took the bait, and in surprising force. This time it was Napoleon who had
erred; he had not expected
the Austrian attack for several days, and his
divisions were scattered too widely to support him. The Austrians at
Marengo
outnumbered him two to one. He dispatched urgent messages in
all directions for reinforcements, then settled into battle,
hoping to make his
small forces hold ground until they came.
The hours went by with no sign of aid. Napoleon’s lines grew weaker,
and at three in the afternoon the Austrians finally broke
through, forcing the
French to retreat. This was the ultimate downturn in the campaign, and it
was yet again Napoleon’s moment
to shine. He seemed encouraged by the
way the retreat was going, the French scattering and the Austrians pursuing
them, without
discipline or cohesion. Riding among the men who had
retreated the farthest, he rallied them and prepared them to counterattack,
promising them that reinforcements would arrive within minutes—and he
was right. Now French divisions were coming in from
all directions. The
Austrians, meanwhile, had let their ranks fall into disorder, and, stunned to
find themselves facing new
forces in this condition, they halted and then
gave ground to a quickly organized French counterattack. By 9:00 P.M. the
French
had routed them.
Just as Napoleon had predicted with his pin on the map, he met and
defeated the enemy at Marengo. A few months later, a treaty
was signed
that gave France the peace it so desperately needed, a peace that was to last
nearly four years.
Interpretation
Napoleon’s victory at Marengo might seem to have depended on a fair
amount of luck and intuition. But that is not at all the
case. Napoleon
believed that a superior strategist could create his own luck—through
calculation, careful planning, and staying
open to change in a dynamic
situation. Instead of letting bad fortune face him down, Napoleon
incorporated it into his plans.
When he learned that Massena had been
forced back to Genoa, he saw that the fight for the city would lock Melas
into a static
position, giving Napoleon time to move his men into place.
When Moreau sent him a smaller division, Napoleon sent it through
the
Alps by a narrower, more obscure route, throwing more sand in the eyes of
the Austrians trying to figure out how many
men he had available. When
Massena unexpectedly surrendered, Napoleon realized that it would be
easier now to bait Melas into
attacking his divisions, particularly if he
moved them closer. At Marengo itself he knew all along that his first
reinforcements
would arrive sometime after three in the afternoon. The
more disorderly the Austrian pursuit of the French, the more devastating
the
counterattack would be.
Now the army’s disposition of force (hsing) is like water. Water’s
configuration (hsing) avoids heights and races downward. . . . Water
configures (hsing) its flow in accord with the terrain; the army controls its
victory in accord with the enemy. Thus the army does not maintain
any
constant strategic configuration of power (shih), water has no constant
shape (hsing). One who is able to change and transform in accord with the
enemy and wrest victory is termed spiritual.
THE ART OF WAR, SUN-TZU, FOURTH CENTURY B.C.
Napoleon’s power to adjust and maneuver on the run was based in his
novel way of planning. First, he spent days studying maps
and using them
to make a detailed analysis. This was what told him, for example, that
putting his army at Stradella would
pose a dilemma for the Austrians and
give him many choices of ways to destroy them. Then he calculated
contingencies: if the
enemy did x, how would he respond? If part y of his
plan misfired, how would he recover? The plan was so fluid, and gave him
so many options, that he could adapt it infinitely
to whatever situation
developed. He had anticipated so many possible problems that he could
come up with a rapid answer to
any of them. His plan was a mix of detail
and fluidity, and even when he made a mistake, as he did in the early part of
the
encounter at Marengo, his quick adjustments kept the Austrians from
taking advantage of it—before they’d figured out what
to do, he was
already somewhere else. His devastating freedom of maneuver cannot be
separated from his methodical planning.
Understand: in life as in war, nothing ever happens just as you expect it
to. People’s responses are odd or surprising, your
staff commits outrageous
acts of stupidity, on and on. If you meet the dynamic situations of life with
plans that are rigid,
if you think of only holding static positions, if you rely
on technology to control any friction that comes your way, you
are doomed:
events will change faster than you can adjust to them, and chaos will enter
your system.
In an increasingly complex world, Napoleon’s way of planning and
maneuvering is the only rational solution. You absorb as
much information
and as many details as possible; you analyze situations in depth, trying to
imagine the enemy’s responses
and the accidents that might happen. You do
not get lost in this maze of analysis but rather use it to formulate a free-
flowing
plan with branches, one that puts you in positions with the
possibility of maneuver. You keep things loose and adjustable.
Any chaos
that comes your way is channeled toward the enemy. In practicing this
policy, you will come to understand Napoleon’s
dictum that luck is
something you create.
THE REED AND THE OLIVE
The reed and the olive tree were arguing over their steadfastness, strength
and ease. The olive taunted the reed for his powerlessness
and pliancy in
the face of all the winds. The reed kept quiet and didn’t say a word. Then,
not long after this, the wind blew violently. The reed, shaken and bent,
escaped easily from it, but the olive tree,
resisting the wind, was snapped by
its force. The story shows that people who yield to circumstances and to
superior power have the advantage over their stronger rivals.
FABLES, AESOP, SIXTH CENTURY B.C.
2. As the Republicans prepared their convention to pick a presidential
candidate in 1936, they had reason to hope. The sitting
president, the
Democrat Franklin D. Roosevelt, was certainly popular, but America was
still in the Depression, unemployment
was high, the budget deficit was
growing, and many of Roosevelt’s New Deal programs were mired in
inefficiency. Most promising
of all, many Americans had become
disenchanted with Roosevelt as a person—in fact, they had even come to
hate him, thinking
him dictatorial, untrustworthy, a socialist at heart,
perhaps even un-American.
Roosevelt was vulnerable, and the Republicans were desperate to win the
election. They decided to tone down their rhetoric
and appeal to traditional
American values. Claiming to support the spirit of the New Deal but not the
man behind it, they
pledged to deliver the needed reforms more efficiently
and fairly than Roosevelt had. Stressing party unity, they nominated
Alf M.
Landon, the governor of Kansas, as their presidential candidate. Landon
was the perfect moderate. His speeches tended
to be a little dull, but he
seemed so solid, so middle class, a comfortable choice, and this was no
time to be promoting a
radical. He had supported much of the New Deal,
but that was fine—the New Deal was popular. The Republicans nominated
Landon
because they thought he had the best chance to defeat Roosevelt,
and that was all that mattered to them.
During the nominating ceremony, the Republicans staged a western
pageant with cowboys, cowgirls, and covered wagons. In his
acceptance
speech, Landon did not talk about specific plans or policy but about himself
and his American values. Where Roosevelt
was associated with unpleasant
dramas, he would bring stability. It was a feel-good convention.
The Republicans waited for Roosevelt to make his move. As expected, he
played the part of the man above the fray, keeping
his public appearances to
a minimum and projecting a presidential image. He talked in vague
generalities and struck an optimistic
note. After the Democratic convention,
he departed for a long vacation, leaving the field open to the Republicans,
who were
only too happy to fill the void: they sent Landon out on the
campaign trail, where he made stump speeches about how he was
the one to
enact reforms in a measured, rational way. The contrast between Landon
and Roosevelt was one of temperament and
character, and it seemed to
resonate: in the polls, Landon pulled into the lead.
Sensing that the election would be close and feeling that this was their
great chance, the Republicans escalated their attacks,
accusing Roosevelt of
class warfare and painting a bleak picture of his next term. The anti-
Roosevelt newspapers published
a slew of editorials attacking him in
personal terms. The chorus of criticism grew, and the Republicans watched
gleefully
as many in Roosevelt’s camp seemed to panic. One poll had
Landon building a substantial lead.
Not until late September, a mere six weeks before the election, did
Roosevelt finally start his campaign—and then, to everyone’s
shock, he
dropped the nonpartisan, presidential air that he had worn so naturally.
Positioning himself clearly to Landon’s
left, he drew a sharp contrast
between the two candidates. He quoted with great sarcasm Landon’s
speeches supporting the New
Deal but claiming to be able to do it better:
why vote for a man with basically the same ideas and approach but with no
experience
in making them work? As the days went by, Roosevelt’s voice
grew louder and clearer, his gestures more animated, his oratory
even
biblical in tone: he was David facing the Goliath of the big-business
interests that wanted to return the country to
the era of monopolies and
robber barons.
The Republicans watched in horror as Roosevelt’s crowds swelled. All
those whom the New Deal had helped in any way showed
up in the tens of
thousands, and their response to Roosevelt was almost religious in its
fervor. In one particularly rousing
speech, Roosevelt catalogued the
moneyed interests arrayed against him: “Never before in our history,” he
concluded, “have
these forces been so united against one candidate as they
stand today. They are unanimous in their hate for me—and I welcome
their
hatred. . . . I should like to have it said of my second administration that in
it these forces met their master.”
Landon, sensing the great change in the tide of the election, came out
with sharper attacks and tried to distance himself
from the New Deal, which
he had earlier claimed to support—but all of this only seemed to dig him a
deeper hole. He had changed
too late, and clearly in reaction to his waning
fortunes.
On Election Day, Roosevelt won by what at the time was the greatest
popular margin in U.S. electoral history; he won all but
two states, and the
Republicans were reduced to sixteen seats in the Senate. More amazing
than the size of his unprecedented
victory was the speed with which he had
turned the tide.
Interpretation
As Roosevelt followed the Republican convention, he clearly saw the line
they would take in the months to come—a centrist
line, emphasizing values
and character over policy. Now he could lay the perfect trap by abandoning
the field. Over the weeks
to come, Landon would pound his moderate
position into the public’s mind, committing himself to it further and further.
Meanwhile
the more right-wing Republicans would attack the president in
bitter, personal terms. Roosevelt knew that a time would come
when
Landon’s poll numbers would peak. The public would have had its fill of
his bland message and the right’s vitriolic attacks.
Sensing that moment in late September, he returned to the stage and
positioned himself clearly to Landon’s left. The choice
was strategic, not
ideological; it let him draw a sharp distinction between Landon and himself.
In a time of crisis like the
Depression, it was best to look resolute and
strong, to stand for something firm, to oppose a clear enemy. The attacks
from
the right gave him that clear enemy, while Landon’s milquetoast
posturing made him look strong by contrast. Either way he
won.
Of course this beautiful simplicity of strategic movement, with its infinite
flexibility, is extremely deceptive. The task of correlating and coordinating
the daily movements of a dozen or more major formations, all moving along
separate
routes, of ensuring that every component is within one or, at most,
two days’ marching distance of its immediate neighbors,
and yet at the
same time preserving the appearance of an arbitrary and ill-coordinated
“scatter” of large units in order to
deceive the foe concerning the true
gravity of his situation—this is the work of a mathematical mind of no
common caliber.
It is in fact the hallmark of genius— that “infinite capacity
for taking pains.” . . . The ultimate aim of all this carefully considered
activity was to produce the greatest possible number of men on the
battlefield,
which on occasion had been chosen months in advance of the
actual event. Bourienne gives his celebrated . . . eyewitness account of the
First Consul, in the early days of the Italian Campaign of 1800, lying full-
length on the floor,
pushing colored pins into his maps, and saying, “I shall
fight him here—on the plain of the Scrivia,” with that uncanny prescience
which was in reality the product of mental calculations of computer-like
complexity. After considering every possible course of action open to the
Austrian Melas, Bonaparte eliminated them one by one, made allowance
for the effect of chance on events, and came up with the answer—
subsequently borne out by the events of June 14 on the field
of Marengo,
which lies, surely enough, on the plain bounded by the rivers Bormida and
Scrivia.
THE CAMPAIGNS OF NAPOLEON, DAVID G. CHANDLER, 1966
Now Landon was presented with a dilemma. If he kept going with his
centrist appeal, he would bore the public and seem weak.
If he moved to the
right—the choice he actually took—he would be inconsistent and look
desperate. This was pure maneuver warfare:
Begin by taking a position of
strength—in Roosevelt’s case his initial, presidential, bipartisan pose—that
leaves you with
open options and room to maneuver. Then let your enemies
show their direction. Once they commit to a position, let them hold
it—in
fact, let them trumpet it. Now that they are fixed in place, maneuver to the
side that will crowd them, leaving them
only bad options. By waiting to
make this maneuver until the last six weeks of the presidential race,
Roosevelt both denied
the Republicans any time to adjust and kept his own
strident appeal from wearing thin.
Everything is political in the world today, and politics is all about
positioning. In any political battle, the best way to
stake out a position is to
draw a sharp contrast with the other side. If you have to resort to speeches
to make this contrast,
you are on shaky ground: people distrust words.
Insisting that you are strong or well qualified rings as self-promotion.
Instead
make the opposing side talk and take the first move. Once they have
committed to a position and fixed it in other people’s
minds, they are ripe
for the sickle. Now you can create a contrast by quoting their words back at
them, showing how different
you are—in tone, in attitude, in action. Make
the contrast deep. If they commit to some radical position, do not respond
by
being moderate (moderation is generally weak); attack them for
promoting instability, for being power-hungry revolutionaries.
If they
respond by toning down their appeal, nail them for being inconsistent. If
they stay the course, their message will
wear thin. If they become more
strident in self-defense, you make your point about their instability.
Use this strategy in the battles of daily life, letting people commit
themselves to a position you can turn into a dead end.
Never say you are
strong, show you are, by making a contrast between yourself and your
inconsistent or moderate opponents.
3. The Turks entered World War I on the side of Germany. Their main
enemies in the Middle Eastern theater were the British, who
were based in
Egypt, but by 1917 they had arrived at a comfortable stalemate: the Turks
controlled a strategic eight-hundred-mile
stretch of railway that ran from
Syria in the north to the Hejaz (the southwestern part of Arabia) in the
south. Due west
of the central part of this railway line was the town of
Aqaba, on the Red Sea, a key Turkish position from which they could
quickly move armies north and south to protect the railway.
The Turks had already beaten back the British at Gallipoli (see chapter 5),
a huge boost to their morale. Their commanders
in the Middle East felt
secure. The English had tried to stir up a revolt against the Turks among the
Arabs of the Hejaz,
hoping the revolt would spread north; the Arabs had
managed a few raids here and there but had fought more among themselves
than against the Turks. The British clearly coveted Aqaba and plotted to
take it from the sea with their powerful navy, but
behind Aqaba was a
mountain wall marked by deep gorges. The Turks had converted the
mountain into a fortress. The British
knew that even if their navy took
Aqaba, they would be unable to advance inland, rendering the city’s capture
useless. Both
the British and the Turks saw the situation the same way, and
the stalemate endured.
In June 1917 the Turkish commanders of the forts guarding Aqaba
received reports of strange enemy movements in the Syrian
deserts to the
northeast. It seemed that a twenty-nine-year-old British liaison officer to the
Arabs named T. E. Lawrence
had trekked across hundreds of miles of
desolate terrain to recruit an army among the Howeitat, a Syrian tribe
renowned for
fighting on camels. The Turks dispatched scouts to find out
more. They already knew a little about Lawrence: unusually for
British
officers of the time, he spoke Arabic, mixed well with the local people, and
even dressed in their style. He had also
befriended Sherif Feisal, a leader of
the Arab revolt. Could he be raising an army to attack Aqaba? To the extent
that this
was possible, he was worth watching carefully. Then word came
that Lawrence had imprudently told an Arab chief, secretly in
Turkish pay,
that he was heading for Damascus to spread the Arab revolt. This was the
Turks’ great fear, for a revolt in the
more populated areas of the north
would be unmanageable.
The army Lawrence had recruited could not have numbered more than
500, but the Howeitat were great fighters on camel, fierce
and mobile. The
Turks alerted their colleagues in Damascus and dispatched troops to hunt
Lawrence down, a difficult task given
the mobility of the Arabs and the
vastness of the desert.
In the next few weeks, the Englishman’s movements were baffling, to say
the least: his troops moved not north toward Damascus
but south toward the
railway town of Ma’an, site of a storage depot used to supply Aqaba, forty
miles away. No sooner had
Lawrence appeared in the area of Ma’an,
however, than he disappeared, reemerging over a hundred miles north to
lead a series
of raids on the railway line between Amman and Damascus.
Now the Turks were doubly alarmed and sent 400 cavalry from Amman
to
find him.
For a few days, there was no sign of Lawrence. In the meantime an
uprising several miles to the south of Ma’an surprised the
Turks. An Arab
tribe called the Dhumaniyeh had seized control of the town of Abu el
Lissal, directly along the route from
Ma’an to Aqaba. A Turkish battalion
dispatched to take the town back found the blockhouse guarding it
destroyed and the Arabs
gone. Then, suddenly, something unexpected and
quite disturbing occurred: out of nowhere Lawrence’s Howeitat army
emerged
on the hill above Abu el Lissal.
The warrior and the statesman, like the skillful gambler, do not make their
luck but prepare for it, attract it, and seem
almost to determine their luck.
Not only are they, unlike the fool and the coward, adept at making use of
opportunities when these occur; they know furthermore
how to take
advantage, by means of precautions and wise measures, of such and such
an opportunity, or of several at once.
If one thing happens, they win; if
another, they are still the winners; the same circumstance often makes them
win in a variety
of ways. These prudent men may be praised for their good
fortune as well as their good management, and rewarded for their luck as
well as for their merits.
CHARACTERS, JEAN DE LA BRUYÈRE, 1645–1696
Distracted by the local uprising, the Turks had lost track of Lawrence.
Now, linking up with the Dhumaniyeh, he had trapped
a Turkish army at
Abu el Lissal. The Arabs rode along the hill with enormous speed and
dexterity, goading the Turks into wasting
ammunition by firing on them.
Meanwhile the midday heat took its toll on the Turkish riflemen, and,
having waited until the
Turks were sufficiently tired, the Arabs, Lawrence
among them, charged down the hill. The Turks closed their ranks, but the
swift-moving camel cavalry took them from the flank and rear. It was a
massacre: 300 Turkish soldiers were killed and the
rest taken prisoner.
Now the Turkish commanders at Aqaba finally saw Lawrence’s game: he
had cut them off from the railway line on which they depended
for supplies.
Also, seeing the Howeitat’s success, other Arab tribes around Aqaba joined
up with Lawrence, creating a powerful
army that began to wend its way
through the narrow gorges toward Aqaba. The Turks had never imagined an
army coming from this
direction; their fortifications faced the other way,
toward the sea and the British. The Arabs had a reputation for ruthlessness
with enemies who resisted, and the commanders of the forts in back of
Aqaba began to surrender. The Turks sent out their 300-man
garrison from
Aqaba to put a stop to this advance, but they were quickly surrounded by
the swelling number of Arabs.
On July 6 the Turks finally surrendered, and their commanders watched
in shock as Lawrence’s ragtag army rushed to the sea
to take what had been
thought to be an impregnable position. With this one blow, Lawrence had
completely altered the balance
of power in the Middle East.
Interpretation
The fight between Britain and Turkey during World War I superbly
demonstrates the difference between a war of attrition and
a war of
maneuver. Before Lawrence’s brilliant move, the British, fighting by the
rules of attrition warfare, had been directing
the Arabs to capture key points
along the railway line. This strategy had played into Turkish hands: the
Turks had too few
men to patrol the entire line, but once they saw the Arabs
attacking at any one place, they could quickly move the men they
had and
use their superior firepower to either defend it or take it back. Lawrence—a
man with no military background, but
blessed with common sense—saw
the stupidity in this right away. Around the railway line were thousands of
square miles of
desert unoccupied by the Turks. The Arabs had been
masters at a mobile form of warfare on camelback since the days of the
prophet Mohammed; vast space at their disposal gave them infinite
possibilities for maneuvers that would create threats everywhere,
forcing
the Turks to bunker themselves in their forts. Frozen in place, the Turks
would wither from lack of supplies and would
be unable to defend the
surrounding region. The key to the overall war was to spread the revolt
north, toward Damascus, allowing
the Arabs to threaten the entire railway
line. But to spread the revolt north, they needed a base in the center. That
base
was Aqaba.
The British were as hidebound as the Turks and simply could not picture
a campaign of a group of Arabs led by a liaison officer.
Lawrence would
have to do it on his own. Tracing a series of great loops in the vast spaces of
the desert, he left the Turks
bewildered as to his purpose. Knowing that the
Turks feared an attack on Damascus, he deliberately spread the lie that he
was aiming for it, making the Turks send troops on a wild-goose chase to
the north. Then, exploiting their inability to imagine
an Arab attack on
Aqaba from the landward side (a failing they shared with his British
countrymen), he caught them off guard.
Lawrence’s subsequent capture of
Aqaba was a masterpiece of economy: only two men died, on his side.
(Compare this to the
unsuccessful British attempt to take Gaza from the
Turks that same year in head-on battle, in which over three thousand British
soldiers were killed.) The capture of Aqaba was the turning point in
Britain’s eventual defeat of the Turks in the Middle
East.
The greatest power you can have in any conflict is the ability to confuse
your opponent about your intentions. Confused opponents
do not know how
or where to defend themselves; hit them with a surprise attack and they are
pushed off balance and fall. To
accomplish this you must maneuver with
just one purpose: to keep them guessing. You get them to chase you in
circles; you
say the opposite of what you mean to do; you threaten one area
while shooting for another. You create maximum disorder. But
to pull this
off, you need room to maneuver. If you crowd yourself with alliances that
force your hand, if you take positions
that box you into corners, if you
commit yourself to defending one fixed position, you lose the power of
maneuver. You become
predictable. You are like the British and the Turks,
moving in straight lines in defined areas, ignoring the vast desert around
you. People who fight this way deserve the bloody battles they face.
4. Early in 1937, Harry Cohn, longtime chief of Columbia Pictures, faced a
crisis. His most successful director, Frank Capra,
had just left the studio,
and profits were down. Cohn needed a hit and a replacement for Capra. And
he believed he had found
the right formula with a comedy called The Awful
Truth and a thirty-nine-year-old director named Leo McCarey. McCarey
had directed Duck Soup, with the Marx Brothers, and Ruggles of Red Gap,
with Charles Laughton, two different but successful comedies. Cohn
offered McCarey The Awful Truth.
McCarey said he did not like the script, but he would do the picture
anyway for a hundred thousand dollars—a huge sum in 1937
dollars. Cohn,
who ran Columbia like Mussolini (in fact, he kept a picture of Il Duce in his
office), exploded at the price.
McCarey got up to go, but as he was leaving,
he noticed the producer’s office piano. McCarey was a frustrated
songwriter.
He sat down and began to play a show tune. Cohn had a
weakness for such music, and he was entranced: “Anybody who likes music
like that has got to be a talented man,” he said. “I’ll pay that exorbitant fee.
Report to work tomorrow.”
Expanding on the issue of directive control, Lind introduces the reader to a
decision-making model known as the Boyd cycle. Named for Col. John
Boyd, the term refers to the understanding that war consists of the repeated
cycle of observation, orientation,
decision, and action. Colonel Boyd
constructed his model as a result of his observations of fighter combat in
the Korean War. He had been investigating
why American fighter pilots had
been consistently able to best enemy pilots in dogfights. His analysis of
opposing aircraft
led to some startling discoveries. Enemy fighters typically
outperformed their American counterparts in speed, climb, and turning
ability. But the Americans
had the advantage in two subtly critical aspects.
First, the hydraulic controls allowed for faster transition from one
maneuver
to another. Second, the cockpit allowed for a wide field of view
for the pilot. The result was that the American pilots could
more rapidly
observe and orient to the tactical situation moment by moment. Then,
having decided what to do next, they could
quickly change maneuvers. In
battle, this ability to rapidly pass through the observation-orientation-
decision-action loop (the Boyd cycle) gave the American pilots a slight time
advantage. If one views a dogfight as a series of Boyd cycles, one sees that
the Americans would repeatedly gain a time advantage each cycle, until the
enemy’s actions become totally inappropriate to
the changing situations.
Hence, the American pilots were able to “out–Boyd cycle” the enemy, thus
outmaneuvering him and finally shooting him down. Colonel Boyd and
others then began to question whether this pattern might be applicable to
other forms of warfare as well.
THE ART OF MANEUVER, ROBERT R. LEONHARD, 1991
In the days to come, Cohn was going to regret his decision. Three stars
were cast for The Awful Truth—Cary Grant, Irene Dunne, and Ralph
Bellamy. All had problems with their roles as written in the script, none of
them wanted
to do the picture, and, as time went by, their unhappiness only
grew. Revisions to the script began to come in: McCarey had
apparently
junked the original and was starting over, but his creative process was
peculiar—he would sit in a parked car on
Hollywood Boulevard with the
screenwriter Viña Delmar and verbally improvise scenes with her. Later,
when shooting began,
he would walk on the beach and scribble the next
day’s setups on torn pieces of brown paper. His style of directing was
equally
upsetting to the actors. One day, for instance, he asked Dunne
whether she played the piano and Bellamy whether he could sing.
Both
answered, “Not very well,” but McCarey’s next step was to have Dunne
play “Home on the Range” as best she could while
Bellamy sang off key.
The actors did not enjoy this rather humiliating exercise, but McCarey was
delighted and filmed the
entire song. None of this was in the script, but all
of it ended up in the film.
Sometimes the actors would wait on set while McCarey would mess
around on the piano, then suddenly come up with an idea for
what to shoot
that day. One morning Cohn visited the set and witnessed this odd process.
“I hired you to make a great comedy
so I could show up Frank Capra. The
only one who’s going to laugh at this picture is Capra!” he exclaimed. Cohn
was disgusted
and basically wrote the whole thing off. His irritation grew
daily, but he was contractually bound to pay Dunne forty thousand
dollars
for the film, whether it was shot or not. He could not fire McCarey at this
point without creating greater problems,
nor could he have him go back to
the original script, since McCarey had already begun shooting and only he
seemed to know
where the film was going.
Yet as the days went on, the actors began to see some method in
McCarey’s madness. He would shoot them in long takes in which
much of
their work was only loosely guided; the scenes had spontaneity and
liveliness. Casual as he seemed, he knew what he
wanted and would
reshoot the simplest shot if the look on the actors’ faces was not loving
enough. His shoot days were short
and to the point.
One day, after many days’ absence, Cohn showed up on set to find
McCarey serving drinks to the cast. Cohn was about to explode
when the
director told him they were drinking to celebrate—they had just finished
shooting. Cohn was shocked and delighted;
McCarey had finished ahead of
schedule and two hundred thousand dollars under budget. Then, to his
surprise as well, the picture
came together in the editing room like a strange
puzzle. It was good, very good. Test audiences roared with laughter.
Premiering
in 1937, The Awful Truth was a complete success and won
McCarey the best director Oscar. Cohn had found his new Frank Capra.
Unfortunately, McCarey had seen his boss’s dictatorial tendencies all too
clearly, and though Cohn made lucrative offers,
McCarey never worked for
Columbia again.
Interpretation
Leo McCarey, one of the great directors of Hollywood’s golden era, was
essentially a frustrated composer and songwriter. He
had gone to work
directing slapstick comedies—McCarey was the man who paired Laurel
with Hardy—only because he was unable
to make a living in music. The
Awful Truth is considered one of the greatest screwball comedies ever
made, and both its style and the way McCarey worked on it stemmed
from
his musical instincts: he composed the film in his head in just the same
loose yet logical way that he would tinker with
a tune on the piano. To
create a film this way required two things: room to maneuver and the ability
to channel chaos and
confusion into the creative process.
McCarey kept his distance from Cohn, the actors, the screenwriters —in
fact, everyone—as best he could. He would not let himself
be boxed in by
anyone’s idea of how to shoot a film. Given room to maneuver, he could
improvise, experiment, move fluidly
in different directions in any scene, yet
keep everything perfectly controlled—he always seemed to know what he
wanted and
what worked. And because filmmaking this way made every
day a fresh challenge, the actors had to respond with their own energy,
rather than simply regurgitating words from a script. McCarey allowed
room for chance and the random events of life to enter
his creative scheme
without being overwhelmed by chaos. The scene he was inspired to create
when he learned of Dunne’s and
Bellamy’s lack of musical skill, for
example, seems unrehearsed and lifelike because it really was. Had it been
scripted,
it would have been far less funny.
Directing a film—or any project, artistic or professional or scientific —is
like fighting a war. There is a certain strategic
logic to the way you attack a
problem, shape your work, deal with friction and the discrepancy between
what you want and what
you get. Directors or artists often start out with
great ideas but in the planning create such a straitjacket for themselves,
such a rigid script to follow and form to fit in, that the process loses all joy;
there’s nothing left to explore in the creation
itself, and the end result seems
lifeless and disappointing. On the other side, artists may start with a loose
idea that seems
promising, but they are too lazy or undisciplined to give it
shape and form. They create so much space and confusion that
in the end
nothing coheres.
The solution is to plan, to have a clear idea what you want, then put
yourself in open space and give yourself options to
work with. You direct
the situation but leave room for unexpected opportunities and random
events. Both generals and artists
can be judged by the way they handle
chaos and confusion, embracing it yet guiding it for their own purposes.
Mobility, defined as the ability to project power over distance, is another
characteristic of good chess. It is the goal of
a good chess player to ensure
that each of his pieces can exert pressure upon a maximum number of
squares, rather than being
bottled up in a corner, surrounded by other
pieces. Hence, the chess master looks forward to pawn exchanges (infantry
battles,
if you will), not because he is trying to wear down the enemy, but
because he knows that he can project the power of his rooks
(mechanized
forces) down the resulting open files. In this manner, the chess master fights
in order to move. This idea is
central to maneuver-warfare theory.
THE ART OF MANEU-VER, ROBERT R. LEON-HARD, 1991
5. One day in the Japan of the 1540s, in a ferryboat crowded with farmers,
merchants, and craftsmen, a young samurai regaled
all who would listen
with tales of his great victories as a swordsman, wielding his three-foot-
long sword as he spoke to demonstrate
his prowess. The other passengers
were a little afraid of this athletic young man, so they feigned interest in his
stories
to avoid trouble. But one older man sat to the side, ignoring the
young boaster. The older man was obviously a samurai himself—he
carried
two swords—but no one knew that this was in fact Tsukahara Bokuden,
perhaps the greatest swordsman of his time. He
was in his fifties by then
and liked to travel alone and incognito.
Bokuden sat with his eyes closed, seemingly deep in meditation. His
stillness and silence began to annoy the young samurai,
who finally called
out, “Don’t you like this kind of talk? You don’t even know how to wield a
sword, old man, do you?” “I
most certainly do,” answered Boku-den. “My
way, however, is not to wield my sword in such inconsequential
circumstances as
these.” “A way of using a sword that doesn’t use a
sword,” said the young samurai. “Don’t talk gibberish. What is your school
of fighting called?” “It is called Mutekatsu-ryu [style that wins without
swords or fighting],” replied Bokuden. “What? Mutekatsu-ryu?
Don’t be
ridiculous. How can you defeat an opponent without fighting?”
By now the young samurai was angry and irritated, and he demanded that
Bokuden demonstrate his style, challenging him to a
fight then and there.
Bokuden refused to duel in the crowded boat but said he would show the
samurai Mutekatsu-ryu at the
nearest shore, and he asked the ferryman to
guide the boat to a tiny nearby island. The young man began to swing his
sword
to loosen up. Bokuden continued to sit with his eyes closed. As they
approached the island, the impatient challenger shouted,
“Come! You are as
good as dead. I will show you how sharp my sword is!” He then leaped
onto the shore.
Bokuden took his time, further infuriating the young samurai, who began
to hurl insults. Bokuden finally handed the ferryman
his swords, saying,
“My style is Mutekatsu-ryu. I have no need for a sword”—and with those
words he took the ferryman’s long
oar and pushed it hard against the shore,
sending the boat quickly out into the water and away from the island. The
samurai
screamed, demanding the boat’s return. Bokuden shouted back to
him, “This is what is called victory without fighting. I dare
you to jump into
the water and swim here!”
Now the passengers on the boat could look back at the young samurai
receding into the distance, stranded on the island, jumping
up and down,
flailing his arms as his cries became fainter and fainter. They began to
laugh: Bokuden had clearly demonstrated
Mutekatsu-ryu.
Interpretation
The minute Bokuden heard the arrogant young samurai’s voice, he knew
there would be trouble. A duel on a crowded boat would
be a disaster, and a
totally unnecessary one; he had to get the young man off the boat without a
fight, and to make the defeat
humiliating. He would do this through
maneuver. First, he remained still and quiet, drawing the man’s attention
away from
the innocent passengers and drawing him toward Bokuden like a
magnet. Then he confused the man with a rather irrational name
for a
school of fighting, overheating the samurai’s rather simple mind with a
perplexing concept. The flustered samurai tried
to cover up with bluster. He
was now so angry and mentally off balance that he leaped to the shore
alone, failing to consider
the rather obvious meaning of Mutekatsu-ryu even
once he got there. Bokuden was a samurai who always depended on setting
up
his opponents first and winning the victory easily, by maneuver rather
than brute force. This was the ultimate demonstration
of his art.
NO. 71. THE VICTORY IN THE MIDST OF A HUNDRED ENEMIES
To priest Yozan, the 28th teacher at Enkakuji, came for an interview a
samurai named Ryozan, who practised Zen. The teacher
said: “You are
going into the bath-tub, stark naked without a stitch on. Now a hundred
enemies in armour, with bows and swords, appear all around you. How will
you meet them? Will you crawl before them and beg for mercy? Will you
show your warrior birth by dying in combat
against them? Or does a man
of the Way get some special holy grace?” Ryozan said, “Let me win without
surrendering and without fighting.”

Test Caught in the midst of the hundred enemies, how will you manage to
win without surrendering and without fighting?
SAMURAI ZEN: THE WARRIOR KOANS, TREVOR LEGGETT, 1985
The goal of maneuver is to give you easy victories, which you do by
luring opponents into leaving their fortified positions
of strength for
unfamiliar terrain where they must fight off balance. Since your opponents’
strength is inseparable from their
ability to think straight, your maneuvers
must be designed to make them emotional and befuddled. If you are too
direct in
this maneuvering, you run the risk of revealing your game; you
must be subtle, drawing opponents toward you with enigmatic
behavior,
slowly getting under their skin with provocative comments and actions,
then suddenly stepping back. When you feel
that their emotions are
engaged, that their frustration and anger are mounting, you can speed up the
tempo of your maneuvers.
Properly set up, your opponents will leap onto
the island and strand themselves, giving you the easy victory.
Image:
The Sickle. The simplest of instruments. To cut the tall grass or unripened
fields of wheat with it is exhausting labor. But
let the stalks turn golden
brown, hard and dry, and in that brief time even the dullest sickle will mow
the wheat with ease.
Authority: Battles are won by slaughter and maneuver. The
greater the general, the more he contributes in maneuver, the
less
he demands in slaughter. . . . Nearly all the battles which
are regarded as masterpieces of the military art . . . have been
battles of maneuver in which very often the enemy has found
himself defeated by some novel expedient or device, some
queer,
swift, unexpected thrust or stratagem. In such battles the
losses of the victors have been small. —Winston Churchill
(1874–1965)
REVERSAL
There is neither point nor honor in seeking direct battle for its own sake.
That kind of fighting, however, may have value
as part of a maneuver or
strategy. A sudden envelopment or powerful frontal blow when the enemy
is least expecting it can
be crushing.
The only danger in maneuver is that you give yourself so many options
that you yourself get confused. Keep it simple—limit
yourself to the
options you can control.
21
NEGOTIATE WHILE ADVANCING
THE DIPLOMATIC-WAR STRATEGY
People will always try to take from you in negotiation what they
could not get from you in battle or direct confrontation.
They
will even use appeals to fairness and morality as a cover to
advance their position. Do not be taken in: negotiation
is about
maneuvering for power or placement, and you must always put
yourself in the kind of strong position that makes it
impossible
for the other side to nibble away at you during your talks.
Before and during negotiations, you must keep advancing,
creating relentless pressure and compelling the other side to
settle on your terms. The more you take, the more you can give
back in meaningless concessions. Create a reputation for being
tough and uncompromising, so that people are back on their
heels before they even meet you.
WAR BY OTHER MEANS
After Athens was finally defeated by Sparta in the Peloponnesian War of
404 B.C., the great city-state fell into steady decline.
In the decades that
followed, many citizens, including the great orator Demosthenes, began to
dream of a revival of the once
dominant Athens.
In 359 B.C. the king of Macedonia, Perdiccas, was killed in battle, and a
power struggle emerged for his succession. The Athenians
saw Macedonia
as a barbaric land to the north, its only importance its proximity to Athenian
outposts that helped secure their
supplies of corn from Asia and of gold
from local mines. One such outpost was the city of Amphipolis, a former
Athenian colony,
which, however, had lately fallen into Macedonian hands.
A plan emerged among the politicians of Athens to support one of
the
claimants to the Macedonian throne (a man named Argaeus) with ships and
soldiers. If he won, he would be indebted to Athens
and would return to
them the valuable city of Amphipolis.
Unfortunately, the Athenians backed the wrong horse: Perdiccas’s
twenty-four-year-old brother, Philip, easily defeated Argaeus
in battle and
became king. To the Athenians’ surprise, however, Philip did not push his
advantage but stepped back, renouncing
all claim to Amphipolis and
making the city independent. He also released without ransom all the
Athenian soldiers he had
captured in battle. He even discussed forming an
alliance with Athens, his recent enemy, and in secret negotiations proposed
to reconquer Amphipolis in a few years and deliver it to Athens in exchange
for another city still under Athenian control,
an offer too good to refuse.
The Athenian delegates at the talks reported that Philip was an amiable
sort and that beneath his rude exterior he was clearly
an admirer of
Athenian culture—indeed, he invited Athens’s most renowned philosophers
and artists to reside in his capital.
Overnight, it seemed, the Athenians had
gained an important ally to the north. Philip set about fighting barbaric
tribes on
other borders, and peace ruled between the two powers.
A few years later, as Athens was racked by an internal power struggle of
its own, Philip marched on and captured Amphipolis.
Following their
agreement, the Athenians dispatched envoys to negotiate, only to find, to
their surprise, that Philip no longer
offered them the city but merely made
vague promises for the future. Distracted by their problems at home, the
envoys had
no choice but to accept this. Now, with Amphipolis securely
under his control, Philip had unlimited access to the gold mines
and rich
forests in the area. It seemed that he had been playing them all along.
Now Demosthenes came forward to rail against the duplicitous Philip and
warn of the danger he posed to all of Greece. Urging
the citizens of Athens
to raise an army to meet the threat, the orator recalled their victories in the
past over other tyrants.
Nothing happened then, but a few years later, when
Philip maneuvered to take the pass at Thermopylae—the narrow gateway
that
controlled movement from central to southern Greece—Athens indeed
sent an army to defend it. Philip retreated, and the Athenians
congratulated
themselves on their victory.
In the years to come, the Athenians watched warily as Philip extended his
domain to the north, the east, and well into central
Greece. Then, in 346
B.C., he suddenly proposed to negotiate a treaty with Athens. He had
proved he could not be trusted,
of course, and many of the city’s politicians
had sworn never to deal with him again, but the alternative was to risk war
with Macedonia at a time when Athens was ill prepared for it. And Philip
seemed absolutely sincere in his desire for a solid
alliance, which, at the
very least, would buy Athens a period of peace. So, despite their
reservations, the Athenians sent
ambassadors to Macedonia to sign a treaty
called the Peace of Philocrates. By this agreement Athens relinquished its
rights
to Amphipolis and in exchange received promises of security for its
remaining outposts in the north.
The ambassadors left satisfied, but on the way home they received news
that Philip had marched on and taken Thermopylae. Challenged
to explain
himself, Philip responded that he had acted to secure his interests in central
Greece from a temporary threat by
a rival power, and he quickly abandoned
the pass. But the Athenians had had enough—they had been humiliated.
Time and time
again, Philip had used negotiations and treaties to cover
nefarious advances. He was not honorable. He might have abandoned
Thermopylae, but it did not matter: he was always taking control over larger
territories, then making himself look conciliatory
by giving some of his
acquisitions back—but only some, and he often retook the conceded lands
later anyway. The net effect
was inevitably to enlarge his domain. Mixing
war with deceptive diplomacy, he had slowly made Macedonia the
dominant power
in Greece.
Demosthenes and his followers were now on the ascendant. The Peace of
Philocrates was obviously a disgrace, and everyone involved
in it was
thrown out of office. The Athenians began to make trouble in the country to
the east of Amphipolis, trying to secure
more outposts there, even
provoking quarrels with Macedonia. In 338 B.C. they engaged in an
alliance with Thebes to prepare
for a great war against Philip. The two
allies met the Macedonians in battle at Chaeronea, in central Greece— but
Philip won
the battle decisively, his son Alexander playing a key role.
Now the Athenians were in panic: barbarians from the north were about
to descend on their city and burn it to the ground.
And yet again they were
proved wrong. In a most generous peace offer, Philip promised not to
invade Athenian lands. In exchange
he would take over the disputed
outposts in the east, and Athens would become an ally of Macedonia. As
proof of his word,
Philip released his Athenian prisoners from the recent
war without asking for payment of any ransom. He also had his son
Alexander
lead a delegation to Athens bearing the ashes of all the Athenian
soldiers who had died at Chaeronea. Overwhelmed with gratitude,
the
Athenians granted citizenship to both Alexander and his father and erected
a statue of Philip in their agora.
Later that year Philip convened a congress of all the Greek city-states
(except for Sparta, which refused to attend) to discuss
an alliance to form
what would be called the Hellenic League. For the first time, the Greek
city-states were united in a single
confederation. Soon after the terms of the
alliance were agreed upon, Philip proposed a united war against the hated
Persians.
The proposal was happily accepted, with Athens leading the way.
Somehow everyone had forgotten how dishonorable Philip had
been; they
only remembered the king who had recently been so generous.
In 336 B.C., before the war against Persia got under way, Philip was
assassinated. It would be his son Alexander who would
lead the league into
war and the creation of an empire. And through it all, Athens would remain
Macedonia’s most loyal ally,
its critical anchor of stability within the
Hellenic League.
Lord Aberdeen, the British ambassador to Austria, proved even easier to
deal with. Only twenty-nine years old, barely able to speak French, he was
not a match for a diplomat of Metter-nich’s subtlety. His
stiffness and self-
confidence only played into Metternich’s hands. “Metternich is extremely
attentive to Lord Aberdeen,” reported Cathcart. The results were not long
delayed. Metternich had once described the diplomat’s task as the art of
seeming
a dupe, without being one, and he practised it to the fullest on the
high-minded Aberdeen. “Do not think Metternich such a
formidable
personage . . . ,” Aberdeen wrote to Castlereagh. “Living with him at all
times . . . , is it possible I should not know him? If indeed he were
the most
subtle of mankind, he might certainly impose on one little used to deceive,
but this is not his character. He is,
I repeat it to you, not a very clever man.
He is vain . . . but he is to be trusted. . . .” For his mixture of condescension
and gullibility, Aberdeen earned himself Metternich’s sarcastic epithet as
the “dear simpleton of diplomacy.”
A WORLD RESTORED, HENRY KISSINGER, 1957
Interpretation
On one level, war is a relatively simple affair: you maneuver your army to
defeat your enemy by killing enough of its soldiers,
taking enough of its
land, or making yourself secure enough to proclaim victory. You may have
to retreat here and there, but
your intention is eventually to advance as far
as possible. Negotiation, on the other hand, is almost always awkward. On
the
one hand, you need both to secure your existing interests and to get as
much on top of them as you can; on the other hand,
you need to bargain in
good faith, make concessions, and gain the opposing side’s trust. To mix
these needs is an art, and
an almost impossible one, for you can never be
sure that the other side is acting in good faith. In this awkward realm
between
war and peace, it is easy to misread the opponent, leading to a
settlement that is not in your long-term interest.
Philip’s solution was to see negotiation not as separate from war but
rather as an extension of it. Negotiation, like war,
involved maneuver,
strategy, and deception, and it required you to keep advancing, just as you
would on the battlefield. It
was this understanding of negotiation that led
Philip to offer to leave Amphipolis independent while promising to take it
for Athens later on, a promise he never meant to keep. This opening
maneuver bought him friendship and time, and kept the
pesky Athenians
out of his hair while he dealt with his enemies elsewhere. The Peace of
Philocrates similarly covered his
moves in central Greece and kept the
Athenians off balance. Having decided at some point that his ultimate goal
was to unite
all of Greece and lead it on a crusade against Persia, Philip
determined that Athens—with its noble history—would have to
function as
a symbolic center of the Hellenic League. His generous peace terms were
calculated to purchase the city’s loyalty.
Philip never worried about breaking his word. Why should he sheepishly
honor his agreements when he knew the Athenians would
find some excuse
later on to extend their outposts to the north at his expense? Trust is not a
matter of ethics, it is another
maneuver. Philip saw trust and friendship as
qualities for sale. He would buy them from Athens later on, when he was
powerful
and had things to offer it in exchange.
Like Philip, you must see any negotiating situation in which your vital
interests are at stake as a realm of pure maneuver,
warfare by other means.
Earning people’s trust and confidence is not a moral issue but a strategic
one: sometimes it is necessary,
sometimes it isn’t. People will break their
word if it serves their interests, and they will find any moral or legal excuse
to justify their moves, sometimes to themselves as well as to others.
Just as you must always put yourself in the strongest position before
battle, so it is with negotiation. If you are weak,
use negotiations to buy
yourself time, to delay battle until you are ready; be conciliatory not to be
nice but to maneuver.
If you are strong, take as much as you can before and
during negotiations—then later you can give back some of what you took,
conceding the things you least value to make yourself look generous. Do
not worry about your reputation or about creating
distrust. It is amazing
how quickly people will forget your broken promises when you are strong
and in a position to offer
them something in their self-interest.
Therefore, a prudent ruler ought not to keep faith when by so doing it
would be against his interest. . . . If men were all
good, this precept would
not be a good one; but as they are bad, and would not observe their faith
with you, so you are not
bound to keep faith with them. Nor have legitimate
grounds ever failed a prince who wished to show colorable excuse for the
nonfulfillment of his promise.
—Niccolò Machiavelli, The Prince (1469–1527)
JADE FOR TILE
Early in 1821 the Russian foreign minister, Capo d’Istria, heard news he
had long been awaiting: a group of Greek patriots
had begun a rebellion
against the Turks (Greece was then part of the Ottoman Empire), aiming to
throw them out and establish
a liberal government. D’Istria, a Greek
nobleman by birth, had long dreamed of involving Russia in Greek affairs.
Russia was
a growing military power; by supporting the revolution —
assuming the rebels won—it would gain influence over an independent
Greece and Mediterranean ports for its navy. The Russians also saw
themselves as the protectors of the Greek Orthodox Church,
and Czar
Alexander I was a deeply religious man; leading a crusade against the
Islamic Turks would satisfy his moral consciousness
as well as Russian
political interests. It was all too good to be true.
Only one obstacle stood in d’Istria’s way: Prince Klemens von
Metternich, the Austrian foreign minister. A few years earlier,
Metter-nich
had brought Russia into an alliance with Austria and Prussia called the Holy
Alliance. Its goal was to protect
these nations’ governments from the threat
of revolution and to maintain peace in Europe after the turmoil of the
Napoleonic
Wars. Metternich had befriended Alexander I. Sensing that the
Russians might intervene in Greece, he had sent the czar hundreds
of
reports claiming that the revolution was part of a Europe-wide conspiracy to
get rid of the continent’s monarchies. If
Alexander came to Greece’s aid, he
would be the revolutionaries’ dupe and would be violating the purpose of
the Holy Alliance.
D’Istria was no fool: he knew that what Metternich really wanted was to
prevent Russia from expanding its influence in the
Mediterranean, which
would upset England and destabilize Europe, Metter-nich’s greatest fear. To
d’Istria it was simple: he
and Metternich were at war over who would have
ultimate influence over the czar. And d’Istria had the advantage: he saw the
czar often and could counteract Metter-nich’s persuasive powers through
constant personal contact.
The Turks inevitably moved to suppress the Greek rebellion, and as their
atrocities against the Greeks mounted, it seemed
almost certain that the czar
would intervene. But in February 1822, as the revolution was reaching a
boiling point, the czar
made what in d’Istria’s eyes was a fatal mistake: he
agreed to send an envoy to Vienna to discuss the crisis with Metternich.
The
prince loved to lure negotiators to Vienna, where he would charm them to
death. D’Istria felt the situation slipping out
of his hands. Now he had just
one option: to choose the envoy who would go to Vienna and brief him in
detail.
D’Istria’s choice was a man called Taticheff, who had been Russia’s
ambassador to Spain. Taticheff was a shrewd, experienced
negotiator.
Called in for a meeting shortly before he was to leave, he listened carefully
as d’Istria laid out the dangers:
Metternich would try to charm and seduce
Taticheff; to prevent the czar from intervening, he would offer to negotiate a
settlement
between the Russians and Turks; and, of course, he would call
for a European conference to discuss the issue. This last was
Metternich’s
favorite ploy: he was always able to dominate these conferences and
somehow get what he wanted. Taticheff was
not to fall under his spell. He
was to give Metternich a note from d’Istria arguing that Russia had a right
to come to the
aid of fellow Christians suffering at the hands of the Turks.
And on no account was he to agree to Russia’s participation
in a
conference.
On the eve of his departure for Vienna, Taticheff was unexpectedly called
in for a meeting with the czar himself. Alexander
was nervous and
conflicted. Unaware of d’Istria’s instructions, he told Taticheff to tell Met-
ternich that he wanted both
to act in accordance with the alliance and to
meet his moral obligation in Greece. Taticheff decided he would have to
delay
giving this message as long as he could—it would make his work far
too confusing.
In his first meeting with Metternich in Vienna, Taticheff took measure of
the Austrian minister. He saw him as rather vain,
apparently more interested
in fancy-dress balls and young girls than in Greece. Met-ternich seemed
detached and somewhat ill-informed;
the little he said about the situation in
Greece betrayed confusion. Taticheff read d’Istria’s note to him, and, as if
without
thinking, Metternich asked if these were the czar’s instructions as
well. Put on the spot, Taticheff could not lie. His hope
now was that the
czar’s rather contradictory instructions would further confuse the prince,
letting Taticheff stay one step
ahead.
In the days to come, Taticheff had a splendid time in the delightful city of
Vienna. Then he had another meeting with Metternich,
who asked him if
they could begin negotiations based on the instructions of the czar. Before
Taticheff could think, Metternich
next asked what Russia’s demands might
be in this situation. That seemed fair, and Taticheff replied that the Russians
wanted
to make Greece a protectorate state, to get the alliance’s approval
for Russian intervention in Greece, on and on. Metternich
turned down
every proposal, saying his government would never agree to such things, so
Taticheff asked him to suggest alternate
ideas. Instead Metternich launched
into an abstract discussion of revolution, of the importance of the Holy
Alliance, and
other irrelevancies. Taticheff left confused and rather
annoyed. He had wanted to stake out a position, but these discussions
were
informal and shapeless; feeling lost, he had been unable to steer them in the
direction he wanted.
A few days later, Metternich called Taticheff in again. He looked
uncomfortable, even pained: the Turks, he said, had just
sent him a note
claiming that the Russians were behind the trouble in Greece and asking
him to convey to the czar their determination
to fight to the death to hold on
to what was theirs. In solemn tones suggesting that he was angry at the
Turks’ lack of diplomacy,
Metternich said he thought it beneath his
country’s dignity to pass this disgraceful message to the czar. He added that
the
Austrians considered Russia their staunchest ally and would support
Russia’s conditions for resolving the crisis. Finally,
if the Turks refused to
concede, Austria would break off relations with them.
Taticheff was quite moved by this sudden emotional display of solidarity.
Perhaps the Russians had misread the prince—perhaps
he was really on
their side. Fearing that d’Istria would misunderstand, Taticheff reported this
meeting to the czar alone.
A few days later, Alexander responded that from
now on, Taticheff was to report only to him; d’Istria was to be excluded
from
the negotiations.
The pace of the meetings with Metternich picked up. Somehow the two
men discussed only diplomatic solutions to the crisis;
Russia’s right to
intervene in Greece militarily was no longer mentioned. Finally, Met-
ternich invited the czar to attend
a conference on the question in Verona,
Italy, a few months later. Here Russia would lead the debate on how best to
settle
the matter; it would be at the center of attention, with the czar rightly
celebrated as Europe’s savior in the crusade against
revolution. The czar
happily agreed to attend.
Back in St. Petersburg, d’Istria fumed and ranted to anyone who would
listen, but shortly after Taticheff got home, the Russian
foreign minister was
kicked out of office for good. And at the later conference in Verona, just as
he had predicted, the Greek
crisis was resolved in precisely the way that
best served Austria’s interests. The czar was the star of the show, but
apparently
he did not care or notice that he had signed a document
essentially precluding Russia from intervening unilaterally in the
Balkans,
thereby conceding a right insisted upon by every Russian leader since Peter
the Great. Metternich had won the war
with d’Istria more completely than
the former minister had ever imagined possible.
Interpretation
Metternich’s goal was always a settlement that would best serve Austria’s
long-term interests. Those interests, he decided,
involved not just
preventing Russian intervention in Greece but maneuvering the czar into
permanently relinquishing the right
to send troops into the Balkans, an
enduring source of instability in Europe. So Metternich looked at the
relative forces
on both sides. What leverage did he have over the Russians?
Very little; in fact, he had the weaker hand. But Metternich possessed
a
trump card: his years-long study of the czar’s rather strange personality.
Alexander was a highly emotional man who would
act only in a state of
exaltation; he had to turn everything into a crusade. So, right at the
beginning of the crisis, Metternich
planted the seed that the real crusade
here was one not of Christians against Turks but of monarchies against
revolution.
Metternich also understood that his main enemy was d’Istria and that he
would have to drive a wedge between d’Istria and the
czar. So he lured an
envoy to Vienna. In one-on-one negotiations, Metternich was a chess player
on the grand-master level.
With Taticheff as with so many others, he first
lowered his opponent’s suspicions by playing the foppish, even dim-witted
aristocrat. Next he drew out the negotiations, miring them in abstract,
legalistic discussions. That made him seem even more
stupid, further
misleading Taticheff but also confusing and irritating him. A confused and
riled negotiator is prone to make
mistakes—such as reveal too much about
what he is after, always a fatal error. A confused negotiator is also more
easily seduced
by emotional demonstrations. In this case Metternich used
the note from the Turks to stage a little drama in which he appeared
to
reveal a sudden change in his sympathies. That put Taticheff—and through
him the czar—completely under his spell.
From then on, it was child’s play to reframe the discussion to suit
Metternich’s purpose. The offer to stage a conference
at which the czar
would shine was dazzling and alluring, and it also seemed to offer Russia
the chance of greater influence
in European affairs (one of Alexander’s
deepest desires). In fact the result was the opposite: Alexander ended up
signing
a document that cut Russia out of the Balkans—Metternich’s goal
all along. Knowing how easily people are seduced by appearances,
the
Austrian minister gave the czar the appearance of power (being the center
of attention at the conference), while he himself
retained its substance
(having the signed document). It is what the Chinese call giving someone a
gaudy piece of painted tile
in exchange for jade.
In gratitude for his acquittal, Orestes dedicated an altar to Warlike Athene;
but the Erinnyes threatened, if the judgement
were not reversed, to let fall a
drop of their own hearts’ blood which would bring barrenness upon the
soil, blight the crops,
and destroy all the offspring of Athens. Athene
nevertheless soothed their anger by flattery: acknowledging them to be far
wiser than herself, she suggested that
they should take up residence in a
grotto at Athens, where they would gather such throngs of worshippers as
they could never
hope to find elsewhere. Hearth-altars proper to
Underworld deities should be theirs, as well as sober sacrifices, torchlight
libations, first-fruits
offered after the consummation of marriage or the
birth of children, and even seats in the Erechtheum. If they accepted this
invitation she would decree that no house where worship was withheld from
them might prosper; but they, in return, must undertake
to invoke fair winds
for her ships, fertility for her land, and fruitful marriages for her people—
also rooting out the impious,
so that she might see fit to grant Athens
victory in war. The Erinnyes, after a short deliberation, graciously agreed
to these
proposals.
THE GREEK MYTHS, VOL. 2, ROBERT GRAVES, 1955
As Metternich so often demonstrated, success in negotiation depends on
the level of preparation. If you enter with vague notions
as to what you
want, you will find yourself shifting from position to position depending on
what the other side brings to
the table. You may drift to a position that
seems appropriate but does not serve your interests in the end. Unless you
carefully
analyze what leverage you have, your maneuvers are likely to be
counterproductive.
Before anything else you must anchor yourself by determining with
utmost clarity your long-term goals and the leverage you
have for reaching
them. That clarity will keep you patient and calm. It will also let you toss
people meaningless concessions
that seem generous but actually come
cheap, for they do not hurt your real goals. Before the negotiations begin,
study your
opponents. Uncovering their weaknesses and unfulfilled desires
will give you a different kind of leverage: the ability to
confuse them, make
them emotional, seduce them with pieces of tile. If possible, play a bit of
the fool: the less people understand
you and where you are headed, the
more room you have to maneuver them into corners.
Everyone wants something without having any idea how to obtain it, and
the really intriguing aspect of the situation is that
nobody quite knows how
to achieve what he desires. But because I know what I want and what the
others are capable of I am completely prepared.
—Prince Klemens von Metternich (1773–1859)
KEYS TO WARFARE
Conflict and confrontation are generally unpleasant affairs that churn up
unpleasant emotions. Out of a desire to avoid such
unpleasantness, people
will often try to be nice and conciliatory to those around them, in the belief
that that will elicit
the same response in return. But so often experience
proves this logic to be wrong: over time, the people you treat nicely
will
take you for granted. They will see you as weak and exploitable. Being
generous does not elicit gratitude but creates
either a spoiled child or
someone who resents behavior perceived as charity.
Those who believe against the evidence that niceness breeds niceness in
return are doomed to failure in any kind of negotiation,
let alone in the
game of life. People respond in a nice and conciliatory way only when it is
in their interest and when they
have to do so. Your goal is to create that
imperative by making it painful for them to fight. If you ease up the
pressure
out of a desire to be conciliatory and gain their trust, you only give
them an opening to procrastinate, deceive, and take
advantage of your
niceness. That is human nature. Over the centuries those who have fought
wars have learned this lesson the
hard way.
When nations have violated this principle, the results are often tragic. In
June 1951, for example, the U.S. military halted
its extremely effective
offensive against the Chinese People’s Liberation Army in Korea because
the Chinese and the North
Koreans had signaled they were ready to
negotiate. Instead they drew out the talks as long as they could while they
recovered
their forces and strengthened their defenses. When the
negotiation failed and the war was resumed, the American forces found
that
their battlefield advantage was lost. This pattern was repeated in the
Vietnam War and to some extent in the Gulf War
of 1991 as well. The
Americans acted partly out of a desire to reduce casualties, partly to be seen
as trying to bring these
wars to an end as soon as possible, to appear
conciliatory. What they did not realize was that the enemy’s incentive to
negotiate
in good faith was lost in the process. In this case, trying to be
conciliatory and save lives led to much longer wars, more
bloodshed, real
tragedy. Had the United States continued to advance in Korea in 1951, it
could have compelled the Koreans
and Chinese to negotiate on its own
terms; had it continued its bombing campaigns in Vietnam, it could have
forced the North
Vietnamese to negotiate instead of procrastinate; had it
continued its march all the way to Baghdad in 1991, it could have
forced
Saddam Hussein out of office as a condition of peace, preventing a future
war and saving countless lives.
The lesson is simple: by continuing to advance, by keeping up
unrelenting pressure, you force your enemies to respond and
ultimately to
negotiate. If you advance a little further every day, attempts to delay
negotiation only make their position
weaker. You are demonstrating your
resolve and determination, not through symbolic gestures but by
administering real pain.
You do not continue to advance in order to grab
land or possessions but to put yourself in the strongest possible position
and
win the war. Once you have forced them to settle, you have room to make
concessions and give back some of what you’ve
taken. In the process you
might even seem nice and conciliatory.
Sometimes in life you will find yourself holding the weak hand, the hand
without any real leverage. At those times it is even
more important to keep
advancing. By demonstrating strength and resolve and maintaining the
pressure, you cover up your weaknesses
and gain footholds that will let you
manufacture leverage for yourself.
In June 1940, shortly after the German blitzkrieg had destroyed France’s
defenses and the French government had surrendered,
General Charles de
Gaulle fled to England. He hoped to establish himself there as the leader of
Free France, the legitimate
government in exile, as opposed to the German-
dominated Vichy government that now ruled much of the country. The odds
were
stacked heavily against de Gaulle: he had never been a high-profile
figure within France. Many better-known French soldiers
and politicians
could claim the role he wanted; he had no leverage to make the allies
recognize him as the leader of Free
France, and without their recognition he
would be powerless.
From the beginning de Gaulle ignored the odds and presented himself to
one and all as the only man who could save France after
its disgraceful
surrender. He broadcast stirring speeches to France over the radio. He
toured England and the United States,
making a show of his sense of
purpose, casting himself as a kind of latter-day Joan of Arc. He made
important contacts within
the French Resistance. Winston Churchill
admired de Gaulle but often found him unbearably arrogant, and Franklin
Roosevelt
despised him; time and again the two leaders tried to persuade
him to accept shared control of Free France. But his response
was always
the same: he would not compromise. He would not accept anything less
than sole leadership. In negotiating sessions
he was downright rude, to the
point where he would sometimes walk out, making it clear that for him it
was all or nothing.
Churchill and Roosevelt cursed de Gaulle’s name, ruing the day they had
let him take any position at all. They even talked
about demoting him and
forcing him out of the picture. But they always backed down, and in the end
they gave him what he wanted.
To do otherwise would mean a public
scandal in delicate times and would disrupt their relations with the French
underground.
They would be demoting a man whom much of the public had
come to revere.
Understand: if you are weak and ask for little, little is what you will get.
But if you act strong, making firm, even outrageous
demands, you will
create the opposite impression: people will think that your confidence must
be based on something real.
You will earn respect, which in turn will
translate into leverage. Once you are able to establish yourself in a stronger
position,
you can take this further by refusing to compromise, making it
clear that you are willing to walk away from the table— an
effective form
of coercion. The other side may call your bluff, but you make sure there’s a
price to pay for this—bad publicity,
for instance. And if in the end you do
compromise a little, it will still be a lot less than the compromises they
would have
forced on you if they could.
The great British diplomat and writer Harold Nicholson believed there
were two kinds of negotiators: warriors and shopkeepers.
Warriors use
negotiations as a way to gain time and a stronger position. Shopkeepers
operate on the principle that it is more
important to establish trust, to
moderate each side’s demands and come to a mutually satisfying settlement.
Whether in diplomacy
or in business, the problem arises when shopkeepers
assume they are dealing with another shopkeeper only to find they are
facing a warrior.
It would be helpful to know beforehand which kind of negotiator you
face. The difficulty is that skillful warriors will make
themselves masters of
disguise: at first they will seem sincere and friendly, then will reveal their
warrior nature when it
is too late. In resolving a conflict with an enemy you
do not know well, it is always best to protect yourself by playing
the
warrior yourself: negotiate while advancing. There will always be time to
back off and fix things if you go too far. But
if you fall prey to a warrior,
you will be unable to recoup anything. In a world in which there are more
and more warriors,
you must be willing to wield the sword as well, even if
you are a shopkeeper at heart.
Image: The Big Stick. You may speak softly and nicely, but the other side
sees that you hold something fearsome in your hand.
He does not have to
feel the actual pain of it striking his head; he knows the stick is there, that
it is not going away,
that you have used it before, and that it hurts. Better to
end the argument and negotiate a settlement, at whatever price,
than risk a
painful thwack.
Authority: Let us not consider ourselves victorious until the day
after battle, nor defeated until four days later. . . . Let us always
carry the sword in one hand and the olive branch in the other,
always ready to negotiate but negotiating only while advancing.
—Prince Klemens von Metternich (1773–1859)
REVERSAL
In negotiation as in war, you must not let yourself get carried away: there is
a danger in advancing too far, taking too much,
to the point where you
create an embittered enemy who will work for revenge. So it was after
World War I with the Allies,
who imposed such harsh conditions on
Germany in negotiating the peace that they arguably laid the foundations
for World War
II. A century earlier, on the other hand, when Metternich
negotiated, it was always his goal to prevent the other side from
feeling
wronged. Your purpose in any settlement you negotiate is never to satisfy
greed or to punish the other side but to
secure your own interests. In the
long run, a punitive settlement will only win you insecurity.
22
KNOW HOW TO END THINGS
THE EXIT STRATEGY
You are judged in this world by how well you bring things to an
end. A messy or incomplete conclusion can reverberate for
years to come, ruining your reputation in the process. The art of
ending things well is knowing when to stop, never going so far
that you exhaust yourself or create bitter enemies
that embroil
you in conflict in the future. It also entails ending on the right
note, with energy and flair. It is not a question
of simply
winning the war but the way you win it, the way your victory
sets you up for the next round. The height of strategic wisdom is
to avoid all conflicts and entanglements from which there are
no realistic exits.
If one overshoots the goal, one cannot hit it. If a bird will not come to its
nest but flies higher and higher, it eventually falls into the hunter’s net. He
who in times
of extraordinary salience of small things does not know how to
call a halt, but restlessly seeks to press on and on, draws
upon himself
misfortune at the hands of gods and men, because he deviates from the
order of nature.
THE I CHING, CHINA, CIRCA EIGHTH CENTURY B.C.
NO EXIT
For the most senior members of the Soviet Politburo—General Secretary
Leonid Brezhnev, KGB head Yuri Andropov, and Defense
Minister Dmitri
Ustinov—the late 1960s and early ’70s seemed a golden era. These men
had survived the nightmare of the Stalin
years and the bumbling reign of
Khrushchev. Now, finally, there was some stability in the Soviet empire. Its
satellite states
in Eastern Europe were relatively docile, particularly after an
uprising in Czechoslovakia in 1968 had been squashed. Its
archnemesis, the
United States, had received a black eye from the Vietnam War. And, most
promising of all, the Russians had
slowly been able to expand their
influence in the Third World. The future looked bright.
A key country in the Russians’ plans for expansion was Afghanistan, on
their southern border. Afghanistan was rich in natural
gas and other
minerals and had ports on the Indian Ocean; to make it a Soviet satellite
would be a dream come true. The Russians
had been insinuating themselves
into the country since the 1950s, helping to train its army, building the
Salang Highway from
Kabul north to the Soviet Union, and trying to
modernize this backward nation. All was going according to plan until the
early
to mid 1970s, when Islamic fundamentalism began to become a
political force across Afghanistan. The Russians saw two dangers:
first, that
the fundamentalists would come to power and, seeing communism as
godless and loathsome, would cut off ties with
the Soviets; and second, that
fundamentalist unrest would spill over from Afghanistan into the southern
Soviet Union, which
had a large Islamic population.
In 1978, to prevent such a nightmare scenario, Brezhnev secretly
supported a coup that brought the Afghan Communist Party
to power. But
the Afghan Communists were hopelessly factionalized, and only after a
long power struggle did a leader emerge:
Hafizullah Amin, whom the
Soviets distrusted. On top of that, the Communists were not popular in
Afghanistan, and Amin resorted
to the most brutal means to maintain his
party’s power. This only fed the fundamentalist cause. All around the
country, insurgents—the
mujahideen—began to rebel, and thousands of
Afghan soldiers defected from the army to them.
By December 1979 the Communist government in Afghanistan was on
the verge of collapse. In Russia the senior members of the
Politburo met to
discuss the crisis. To lose Afghanistan would be a devastating blow and a
source of instability after so
much progress had been made. They blamed
Amin for their problems; he had to go. Ustinov proposed a plan: Repeating
what the
Soviets had done in quelling rebellions in Eastern Europe, he
advocated a lightning strike by a relatively small Soviet force
that would
secure Kabul and the Salang Highway. Amin would then be ousted, and a
Communist named Babrak Karmal would take
his place. The Soviet army
would assume a low profile, and the Afghan army would be beefed up to
take over from it. During
the course of some ten years, Afghanistan would
be modernized and would slowly become a stable member of the Soviet
Bloc.
Blessed with peace and prosperity, the Afghan people would see the
great benefits of socialism and embrace it.
Solitudinem faciunt pacem appellant (They create desolation and call it
peace).
TACITUS, CIRCA A.D. 55–CIRCA 120
A few days after the meeting, Ustinov presented his plan to the army’s
chief of staff, Nikolai Orgakov. Told that the invading
army would not
exceed 75,000 men, Orgakov was shocked: that force, he said, was far too
small to secure the large, mountainous
expanses of Afghanistan, a very
different world from Eastern Europe. Ustinov countered that a giant
invading force would generate
bad publicity for the Soviets in the Third
World and would give the insurgents a rich target. Orgakov responded that
the fractious
Afghans had a tradition of suddenly uniting to throw out an
invader—and that they were fierce fighters. Calling the plan reckless,
he
said it would be better to attempt a political solution to the problem. His
warnings were ignored.
The plan was approved by the Politburo and on December 24 was put in
motion. Some Red Army forces flew into Kabul while others
marched
down the Salang Highway. Amin was quietly taken away and killed while
Karmal was shuffled into power. Condemnation
poured in from all over the
world, but the Soviets figured that would eventually die down—it usually
did.
ALL’S WELL THAT ENDS WELL: still the fine’s the crown; Whate’er the
course, the end is the renown.
ALL’S WELL THAT ENDS WELL, WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE, 1564–
1616
In February 1980, Andropov met with Karmal and instructed him on the
importance of winning the support of the Afghan masses.
Presenting a plan
for that purpose, he also promised aid in money and expertise. He told
Karmal that once the borders were
secured, the Afghan army built up, and
the people reasonably satisfied with the government, Karmal should
politely ask the Soviets to leave.
The invasion itself went more easily than the Soviets had expected, and
for this military phase their leaders could confidently
declare “mission
accomplished.” But within weeks of Andropov’s visit, they had to adjust
this assessment: the mujahideen were
not intimidated by the Soviet army, as
the Eastern Europeans had been. In fact, since the invasion their power only
seemed
to grow, their ranks swelling with both Afghan recruits and
outsiders. Ustinov funneled more soldiers into Afghanistan and
ordered a
series of offensives in parts of the country that were sheltering the
mujahideen. The Soviets’ first major operation
was that spring, when they
moved into the Kunar Valley with heavy weaponry, leveling entire villages
and forcing the inhabitants
to flee to refugee camps in Pakistan. Having
cleared the area of rebels, they withdrew.
A few weeks later, reports came in that the mujahideen had quietly
returned to the Kunar Valley. All the Soviets had done
was leave the
Afghans more embittered and enraged, making it easier for the mujahideen
to recruit. But what could the Soviets
do? To let the rebels alone was to give
the mujahideen the time and space to grow more dangerous, yet the army
was too small
to occupy whole regions. Its answer was to repeat its police
operations again and again, but with more violence, hoping to
intimidate the
Afghans—but, as Orgakov had predicted, this only emboldened them.
Ten thousand Muslims then marched through the mountain valleys upon
Mecca. Muhammad divided his force into four columns. .
. . Muhammad
gave strict orders that no violence was to be used. His own tent was pitched
on high ground immediately overlooking
the town. Eight years before, he
had fled from Mecca under cover of darkness, and lain hidden three days in
a cave on Mount Thor, which
from his tent he could now see rising beyond
the city. Now ten thousand warriors were ready to obey his least command
and his native town lay helpless at his feet. After a brief rest, he remounted
his camel and entered the town, reverently touched the black stone and
performed the seven
ritual circuits of the kaaba. . . . Muhammad the
Conqueror was not vindictive. A general amnesty was proclaimed, from
which less than a dozen persons were excluded,
only four being actually
executed. Ikrima, the son of Abu Jahal, escaped to the Yemen, but his wife
appealed to the Apostle, who agreed to forgive him. . .
. The Muslim
occupation of Mecca was thus virtually bloodless. The fiery Khalid ibn al
Waleed killed a few people at the southern
gate and was sharply
reprimanded by Muhammad for doing so. Although the Apostle had himself
been persecuted in the city and although many of his bitterest opponents
were still living there, he won all hearts by his
clemency on his day of
triumph. Such generosity, or statesmanship, was particularly remarkable
among Arabs, a race to whom
revenge has always been dear. His success
had been won by policy and diplomacy rather than by military action. In an
age of violence and bloodshed, he
had realized that ideas are more
powerful than force.
THE GREAT ARAB CONQUESTS, JOHN BAGOT GLUBB, 1963
Meanwhile Karmal initiated programs to teach literacy, to give more
power to women, to develop and modernize the country—all
to peel off
support from the rebels. But the Afghans preferred their traditional way of
life by a vast majority, and the Communist
Party’s attempts to expand its
influence had the opposite effect.
Most ominous of all, Afghanistan quickly became a magnet for other
countries eager to exploit the situation there against
the Soviets. The United
States in particular saw an opportunity to revenge itself on Russia for
supplying the North Vietnamese
during the Vietnam War. The CIA funneled
vast sums of money and matériel to the mujahideen. In neighboring
Pakistan, President
Zia ul-Haq viewed the invasion as a gift from heaven:
having come to power a few years earlier in a military coup, and having
recently earned worldwide condemnation by executing his prime minister,
Zia saw a way to gain favor with both the United States
and the Arab
nations by allowing Pakistan to serve as a base for the mujahideen. The
Egyptian president Anwar Sadat, who had
recently signed a controversial
peace treaty with Israel, likewise saw a golden opportunity to shore up his
Islamic support
by sending aid to fellow Muslims.
With Soviet armies stretched thin in Eastern Europe and around the
world, Ustinov refused to send in more men; instead he
armed his soldiers
with the latest weaponry and worked to enlarge and strengthen the Afghan
army. But none of this translated
into progress. The mujahideen improved
their ambushes of Soviet transports and used the latest Stinger missiles
acquired from
the Americans to great effect. Years passed, and morale in
the Soviet army dropped precipitously: the soldiers felt the hatred
of the
local population and were stuck guarding static positions, never knowing
when the next ambush would come. Abuse of
drugs and alcohol became
widespread.
As the costs of the war rose, the Russian public began to turn against it.
But the Soviet leaders could not afford to pull
out: besides creating a
dangerous power vacuum in Afghanistan, that would deliver a sharp blow
to their global reputation
as a superpower. And so they stayed, each year
supposedly the last. The senior members of the Politburo slowly died off—
Brezhnev
in 1982, Andropov and Ustinov in 1984— without seeing the
slightest progress.
In 1985, Mikhail Gorbachev became general secretary of the Soviet
Union. Having opposed the war from the beginning, Gorbachev
started
phased withdrawals of troops from Afghanistan. The last soldiers left early
in 1989. In all, over 14,000 Soviet soldiers
died in the conflict, but the
hidden costs—to the delicate Russian economy, to the people’s slender faith
in their government—were
far greater. Only a few years later, the entire
system would come tumbling down.
Interpretation
The great German general Erwin Rommel once made a distinction between
a gamble and a risk. Both cases involve an action with
only a chance of
success, a chance that is heightened by acting with boldness. The difference
is that with a risk, if you
lose, you can recover: your reputation will suffer
no long-term damage, your resources will not be depleted, and you can
return
to your original position with acceptable losses. With a gamble, on
the other hand, defeat can lead to a slew of problems
that are likely to spiral
out of control. With a gamble there tend to be too many variables to
complicate the picture down
the road if things go wrong. The problem goes
further: if you encounter difficulties in a gamble, it becomes harder to pull
out—you realize that the stakes are too high; you cannot afford to lose. So
you try harder to rescue the situation, often
making it worse and sinking
deeper into a hole that you cannot get out of. People are drawn into gambles
by their emotions:
they see only the glittering prospects if they win and
ignore the ominous consequences if they lose. Taking risks is essential;
gambling is foolhardy. It can be years before you recover from a gamble, if
you recover at all.
The invasion of Afghanistan was a classic gamble. The Soviets were
drawn in by the irresistible lure of possessing a client
state in the region.
Dazzled by that prospect, they ignored the reality: the mujahideen and
outside powers had too much at
stake to ever allow the Soviets to leave
behind a secure Afghanistan. There were too many variables beyond their
control:
the actions of the United States and Pakistan, the mountainous
border areas impossible to seal off, and more. An occupying
army in
Afghanistan involved a double bind: the larger the military presence, the
more it would be hated, and the more it
was hated, the larger it would have
to be to protect itself, and so on indefinitely.
Yet the Soviets took their gamble and made their mess. Now, too late,
they realized that the stakes had been raised: to pull
out—to lose— would
be a devastating blow to their prestige. It would mean the expansion of
American interests and a cancerous
insurgency on their border. Since they
should never have invaded in the first place, they had no rational exit
strategy. The
best they could do would be to cut their losses and run—but
that is nearly impossible with a gamble, for gambling is governed
by
emotions, and once the emotions are engaged, it is difficult to retreat.
The worst way to end anything—a war, a conflict, a relationship—is
slowly and painfully. The costs of such an ending run deep:
loss of self-
confidence, unconscious avoidance of conflict the next time around, the
bitterness and animosity left breeding—it
is all an absurd waste of time.
Before entering any action, you must calculate in precise terms your exit
strategy. How exactly
will the engagement end, and where it will leave you?
If the answers to those questions seem vague and full of speculation,
if
success seems all too alluring and failure somewhat dangerous, you are
more than likely taking a gamble. Your emotions
are leading you into a
situation that could end up a quagmire.
Before that happens, catch yourself. And if you do find you have made
this mistake, you have only two rational solutions:
either end the conflict as
quickly as you can, with a strong, violent blow aimed to win, accepting the
costs and knowing they
are better than a slow and painful death, or cut your
losses and quit without delay. Never let pride or concern for your reputation
pull you farther into the morass; both will suffer far greater blows by your
persistence. Short-term defeat is better than
long-term disaster. Wisdom is
knowing when to end.
Aut non tentaris, aut perfice (Either don’t attempt it, or carry it through to
the end).
OVID, 43 B.C.–A.D. 17
To go too far is as bad as to fall short.
—Confucius (551?–479 B.C.)
Indeed, deepening study of past experience leads to the conclusion that
nations might often have come nearer to their object
by taking advantage of
a lull in the struggle to discuss a settlement than by pursuing the war with
the aim of “victory.” History reveals, also, that in many cases a beneficial
peace could have been obtained if the statesmen of the warring nations
had
shown more understanding of the elements of psychology in their peace
“feelers.” Their attitude has commonly been too akin to that seen in the
typical domestic quarrel; each party is afraid to appear yielding,
with the
result that when one of them shows any inclination towards conciliation this
is usually expressed in language that
is too stiff, while the other is apt to be
slow to respond—partly from pride or obstinacy and partly from a tendency
to interpret
such a gesture as a sign of weakening when it may be a sign of
returning common sense. Thus the fateful moment passes, and conflict
continues—to the common damage. Rarely does a continuation serve any
good purpose where the two parties are bound to go on living under the
same roof. This applies even more to modern war than to domestic conflict,
since the industrialization of nations has made their fortunes
inseparable.
STRATEGY, B. H. LIDDELL HART, 1954
ENDING AS BEGINNING
As a young man, Lyndon B. Johnson had just one dream: to climb the
ladder of politics and become president. When Johnson was
in his mid-
twenties, the goal was starting to seem unreachable. A job as the secretary
of a Texas congressman had allowed
him to meet and make an impression
on President Franklin D. Roosevelt, who had named him the Texas director
of the National
Youth Administration, a post promising excellent political
connections. But Texas voters were extremely loyal, often returning
congressmen to their seats for decades, or until they died. Johnson urgently
wanted a seat in Congress. If he did not get
one soon enough, he would be
too old to climb the ladder, and he burned with ambition.
On February 22, 1937, out of the blue, the chance of a lifetime opened
up: the Texas congressman James Buchanan suddenly died.
The seat he left
empty, that of Texas’s Tenth District, was a rare opportunity, and the state’s
eligible political heavyweights
immediately threw their hats in the ring. The
many contenders included Sam Stone, a popular county judge; Shelton
Polk, an
ambitious young Austin attorney; and C. N. Avery, Buchanan’s
former campaign manager, the favorite to win. Avery had the support
of
Tom Miller, mayor of Austin, the Tenth District’s only large city. With
Miller’s backing he could count on almost enough
votes to win the election.
Johnson was faced with a terrible predicament. If he entered the race, the
odds would be absurdly against him: he was young—only
twenty-eight—
and in the district he was unknown and poorly connected. A bad loss would
damage his reputation and set him far
back on the road to his long-term
goal. If he chose not to run, on the other hand, he might wait ten years for
another chance.
With all this in mind, he threw caution to the winds and
entered the race.
Johnson’s first step was to call to his side the dozens of young men and
women whom he had helped or hired over the years.
His campaign strategy
was simple: he would separate himself from the other contenders by
presenting himself as Roosevelt’s
staunchest supporter. A vote for Johnson
was a vote for the president, the popular architect of the New Deal. And
since Johnson
could not compete in Austin, he decided to aim his army of
volunteers at the countryside, the sparsely populated Hill Country.
This was
the district’s poorest area, a place where candidates rarely ventured.
Johnson wanted to meet every last farmer and
sharecropper, shake every
possible hand, win the votes of people who had never voted before. It was
the strategy of a desperate
man who recognized that this was his best and
only chance for victory.
One of Johnson’s most loyal followers was Carroll Keach, who would
serve as his chauffeur. Together the two men drove every
square mile of the
Hill Country, tracing every dirt path and cow trail. Spotting some outof-the-
way farmhouse, Johnson would
get out of the car, walk to the door,
introduce himself to the startled inhabitants, listen patiently to their
problems, then
leave with a hearty handshake and a gentle plea for their
vote. Convening meetings in dusty towns consisting mainly of a church
and
a gas station, he would deliver his speech, then mingle with the audience
and spend at least a few minutes with everyone
present. He had an
incredible memory for faces and names: if he happened to meet the same
person twice, he could recall everything
he or she had said the first time
around, and he often impressed strangers by knowing someone who knew
them. He listened intensely
and was always careful to leave people with the
feeling that they would see him again, and that if he won they would finally
have someone looking out for their interests in Washington. In bars, grocery
stores, and gas stations all through the Hill
Country, he would talk with the
locals as if he had nothing else to do. On leaving he would make sure to buy
something—candy,
groceries, gasoline—a gesture they greatly appreciated.
He had the gift of creating a connection.
As the race ran on, Johnson went days without sleep, his voice turning
hoarse, his eyes drooping. As Keach drove the length
of the district, he
would listen in amazement as the exhausted candidate in the car muttered to
himself about the people he
had just met, the impression he had made, what
he could have done better. Johnson never wanted to seem desperate or
patronizing.
It was that last handshake and look in the eye that mattered.
If you concentrate exclusively on victory, with no thought for the after-
effect, you may be too exhausted to profit by the
peace, while it is almost
certain that the peace will be a bad one, containing the germs of another
war. This is a lesson supported by abundant experience.
STRATEGY, B. H. LIDDELL HART, 1954
The polls were deceptive: they continued to show Johnson behind, but he
knew he had won votes that no poll would register.
And in any case he was
slowly catching up—by the last week he had crept into third place. Now,
suddenly, the other candidates
took notice. The election turned nasty:
Johnson was attacked for his youth, for his blind support of Roosevelt, for
anything
that could be dug up. Trying to win a few votes in Austin, Johnson
came up against the political machine of Mayor Miller,
who disliked him
and did everything possible to sabotage his campaign. Undeterred, Johnson
personally visited the mayor several
times in that last week to broker some
kind of truce. But Miller saw through his charm. His personal appeal might
have won
over the district’s poorest voters, but the other candidates saw a
different side of him: he was ruthless and capable of slinging
mud. As he
rose in the polls, he made more and more enemies.
It is even possible that the attacker, reinforced by the psychological forces
peculiar to attack, will in spite of his exhaustion
find it less difficult to go on
than to stop—like a horse pulling a load uphill. We believe that this
demonstrates without inconsistency how an attacker can overshoot the
point at which, if he stopped and
assumed the defensive, there would still be
a chance of success—that is, of equilibrium. It is therefore important to
calculate
this point correctly when planning the campaign. An attacker may
otherwise take on more than he can manage and, as it were,
get into debt; a
defender must be able to recognize this error if the enemy commits it, and
exploit it to the full. In reviewing the whole array of factors a general must
weigh before making his decision, we must remember that he can gauge
the
direction and value of the most important ones only by considering
numerous other possibilities—some immediate, some remote.
He must
guess, so to speak: guess whether the first shock of battle will steel the
enemy’s resolve and stiffen his resistance, or whether,
like a Bologna flask,
it will shatter as soon as its surface is scratched; guess the extent of
debilitation and paralysis
that the drying-up of the particular sources of
supply and the severing of certain lines of communication will cause in the
enemy; guess whether the burning pain of the injury
he has been dealt will
make the enemy collapse with exhaustion or, like a wounded bull, arouse his
rage; guess whether the
other powers will be frightened or indignant, and
whether and which political alliances will be dissolved or formed. When we
realize that he must hit upon all this and much more by means of his
discreet judgement, as a marksman hits a target,
we must admit that such
an accomplishment of the human mind is no small achievement. Thousands
of wrong turns running in all directions tempt his perception; and if the
range, confusion and complexity of the
issues are not enough to overwhelm
him, the dangers and responsibilities may. This is why the great majority of
generals will prefer to stop well short of their objective rather than risk
approaching
it too closely, and why those with high courage and an
enterprising spirit will often overshoot it and so fail to attain their
purpose.
Only the man who can achieve great results with limited means has really
hit the mark.
ON WAR, CARL VON CLAUSEWITZ, 1780–1831
On Election Day, Johnson pulled off one of the greatest upsets in
American political history, outdistancing his nearest rival
by three thousand
votes. Exhausted by the grueling pace he had set, he was hospitalized, but
the day after his victory he
was back at work—he had something extremely
important to do. From his hospital bed, Johnson dictated letters to his rivals
in the race. He congratulated them for running a great campaign; he also
described his own victory as a fluke, a vote for
Roosevelt more than for
himself. Learning that Miller was visiting Washington, Johnson telegraphed
his connections in the
city to chaperone the mayor and treat him like
royalty. As soon as Johnson left the hospital, he paid visits to his rivals
and
acted with almost embarrassing humility. He even befriended Polk’s
brother, driving him around town to run errands.
A mere eighteen months later, Johnson had to stand for reelection, and
these onetime opponents and bitter enemies suddenly
turned into the most
fervent Johnson believers, donating money, even campaigning on his
behalf. And Mayor Miller, the one
man who had hated Johnson the most,
now became his strongest supporter and remained so for years to come.
Interpretation
For most of us, the conclusion of anything—a project, a campaign, an
attempt at persuasion—represents a kind of wall: our
work is done, and it is
time to tally our gains and losses and move on. Lyndon Johnson looked at
the world much differently:
an ending was not like a wall but more like a
door, leading to the next phase or battle. What mattered to him was not
gaining
a victory but where it left him, how it opened onto the next round.
What good would it do to win the election of 1937 if he
were thrown out of
office eighteen months later? That would be a devastating setback to his
dream of the presidency. If, after
the election, he had basked in his moment
of triumph, he would have sown the seeds of failure in the next election. He
had
made too many enemies—if they didn’t run against him in 1938, they
would stir up trouble while he was away in Washington.
So Johnson
immediately worked to win these men over, whether with charm, with
meaningful gestures, or with clever appeals
to their self-interest. He kept his
eye on the future, and on the kind of success that would keep him moving
forward.
Johnson used the same approach in his efforts to win over voters. Instead
of trying to persuade people to support him with
speeches and fancy words
(he was not a good orator anyway), he focused on the feeling he left people
with. He knew that persuasion
is ultimately a process of the emotions:
words can sound nice, but if a politician leaves people suspecting him of
being insincere,
of merely plugging for votes, they will close off to him and
forget him. So Johnson worked to establish an emotional connection
with
voters, and he would close his conversations with them with a hearty
handshake and with a look in his eye, a tremor in
his voice, that sealed the
bond between them. He left them feeling that they would see him again, and
he stirred emotions
that would erase any suspicion he might be insincere.
The end of the conversation was in fact a kind of beginning, for it
stayed in
their minds and translated into votes.
Understand: in any venture, your tendency to think in terms of winning or
losing, success or failure, is dangerous. Your mind
comes to a stop, instead
of looking ahead. Emotions dominate the moment: a smug elation in
winning, dejection and bitterness
in losing. What you need is a more fluid
and strategic outlook on life. Nothing ever really ends; how you finish
something
will influence and even determine what you do next. Some
victories are negative—they lead nowhere—and some defeats are positive,
working as a wake-up call or lesson. This fluid kind of thinking will force
you to put more strategic emphasis on the quality
and mood of the ending.
It will make you look at your opponents and decide whether you might do
better to be generous to them
at the end, taking a step back and
transforming them into allies, playing on the emotions of the moment.
Keeping your eyes
on the aftermath of any encounter, you will think more
of the feeling you leave people with—a feeling that might translate
into a
desire to see more of you. By understanding that any victory or defeat is
temporary, and that what matters is what
you do with them, you will find it
easier to keep yourself balanced during the thousands of battles that life
entails. The
only real ending is death. Everything else is a transition.
As Yasuda Ukyo said about offering up the last wine cup, only the end of
things is important. One’s whole life should be like
this. When guests are
leaving, the mood of being reluctant to say farewell is essential.
—Yamamoto Tsunetomo, Hagakure: The Book of the Samurai (1659–1720)
KEYS TO WARFARE
There are three kinds of people in the world. First, there are the dreamers
and talkers, who begin their projects with a burst
of enthusiasm. But this
burst of energy quickly peters out as they encounter the real world and the
hard work needed to bring
any project to an end. They are emotional
creatures who live mainly in the moment; they easily lose interest as
something
new grabs their attention. Their lives are littered with half-
finished projects, including some that barely make it beyond
a daydream.
Then there are those who bring whatever they do to a conclusion, either
because they have to or because they can manage the
effort. But they cross
the finish line with distinctly less enthusiasm and energy than they had
starting out. This mars the
end of the campaign. Because they are impatient
to finish, the ending seems hurried and patched together. And it leaves other
people feeling slightly unsatisfied; it is not memorable, does not last, has no
resonance.
Both of these types begin each project without a firm idea of how to end
it. And as the project progresses, inevitably differing
from what they had
imagined it would be, they become unsure how to get out of it and either
give up or simply rush to the
end.
The great prizefighter Jack Dempsey was once asked, “When you are about
to hit a man, do you aim for his chin or his nose?”
“Neither,” Dempsey
replied. “I aim for the back of his head.”
QUOTED IN THE MIND OF WAR, GRANT T. HAMMOND, 2001
The third group comprises those who understand a primary law of power
and strategy: the end of something—a project, a campaign,
a conversation
—has inordinate importance for people. It resonates in the mind. A war can
begin with great fanfare and can
bring many victories, but if it ends badly,
that is all anyone remembers. Knowing the importance and the emotional
resonance
of the ending of anything, people of the third type understand
that the issue is not simply finishing what they have started
but finishing it
well—with energy, a clear head, and an eye on the afterglow, the way the
event will linger in people’s minds.
These types invariably begin with a
clear plan. When setbacks come, as setbacks will, they are able to stay
patient and think
rationally. They plan not just to the end but past it, to the
aftermath. These are the ones who create things that last—a
meaningful
peace, a memorable work of art, a long and fruitful career.
The reason it is hard to end things well is simple: endings inspire
overpowering emotions. At the end of a bitter conflict,
we have a deep
desire for peace, an impatience for the truce. If the conflict is bringing us
victory, we often succumb to
delusions of grandeur or are swept by greed
and grab for more than we need. If the conflict has been nasty, anger moves
us
to finish with a violent, punitive strike. If we lose, we are left with a
burning desire for revenge. Emotions like these
can ruin all of our prior
good work. There is in fact nothing harder in the realm of strategy than
keeping our head on straight
all the way to the end and past the end—yet
nothing is more necessary.
Napoleon Bonaparte was perhaps the greatest general that ever lived. His
strategies were marvels of combined flexibility and
detail, and he planned
all the way to the end. But after defeating the Austrians at Austerlitz and
then the Prussians at Jena-Auerstadt—his
two greatest victories—he
imposed on these nations harsh terms intended to make them weakened
satellites of France. Accordingly,
in the years after the treaties, both
countries harbored a powerful desire for revenge. They secretly built up
their armies
and waited for the day when Napoleon would be vulnerable.
That moment came after his disastrous retreat from Russia in 1812,
when
they pounced on him with horrible fervor.
Napoleon had allowed petty emotion—the desire to humiliate, revenge
himself, and force obedience—to infect his strategy. Had
he stayed focused
on his long-term interests, he would have known that it was better to
weaken Prussia and Austria psychologically
rather than physically—to
seduce them with apparently generous terms, transforming them into
devoted allies instead of resentful
satellites. Many in Prussia had initially
seen Napoleon as a great liberator. Had he only kept Prussia as a happy ally,
he
would have survived the debacle in Russia and there would have been no
Waterloo.
Learn the lesson well: brilliant plans and piled-up conquests are not
enough. You can become the victim of your own success,
letting victory
seduce you into going too far, creating hard-bitten enemies, winning the
battle but losing the political game
after it. What you need is a strategic
third eye: the ability to stay focused on the future while operating in the
present
and ending your actions in a way that will serve your interests for
the next round of war. This third eye will help you counteract
the emotions
that can insidiously infect your clever strategies, particularly anger and the
desire for revenge.
The critical question in war is knowing when to stop, when to make your
exit and come to terms. Stop too soon and you lose
whatever you might
have gained by advancing; you allow too little time for the conflict to show
you where it is heading. Stop
too late and you sacrifice your gains by
exhausting yourself, grabbing more than you can handle, creating an angry
and vengeful
enemy. The great philosopher of war Carl von Clausewitz
analyzed this problem, discussing what he called “the culminating
point of
victory”—the optimum moment to end the war. To recognize the
culminating point of victory, you must know your own
resources, how
much you can handle, the morale of your soldiers, any signs of a slackening
effort. Fail to recognize that
moment, keep fighting past it, and you bring on
yourself all kinds of unwanted consequences: exhaustion, escalating cycles
of violence, and worse.
At the turn of the twentieth century, the Japanese watched as Russia made
advances into China and Korea. In 1904, hoping to
stem Russian expansion,
they launched a surprise attack on the Russian-held town of Port Arthur, on
the coast of Manchuria.
Since they were clearly the smaller country and had
fewer military resources, they hoped that a quick offensive would work
in
their favor. The strategy—the brainchild of Baron Gentaro Kodama, vice
chief of Japan’s general staff—was effective: by
stealing the initiative, the
Japanese were able to bottle up the Russian fleet at Port Arthur while they
landed armies in
Korea. That allowed them to defeat the Russians in key
battles on land and at sea. Momentum was clearly on their side.
In April 1905, however, Kodama began to see great danger in his own
success. Japan’s manpower and resources were limited;
Russia’s were vast.
Kodama convinced the Japanese leaders to consolidate the gains they had
made and sue for peace. The Treaty
of Portsmouth, signed later that year,
granted Russia more-than-generous terms, but Japan solidified its position:
the Russians
moved out of Manchuria and Korea and left Port Arthur to
Japan. Had the Japanese been carried along by their momentum, they
would
surely have passed the culminating point of victory and had all their gains
wiped out by the inevitable counterattack.
Victory seems to have been achieved. There remains merely a remnant of
the evil resolutely to be eradicated as the time demands.
Everything looks
easy. Just there, however, lies the danger. If we are not on guard, evil will
succeed in escaping by means
of concealment, and when it has eluded us
new misfortunes will develop from the remaining seeds, for evil does not die
easily.
THE I CHING, CHINA, CIRCA EIGHTH CENTURY B.C.
On the other side of the scale, the Americans ended the Gulf War of 1991
too soon, allowing much of the Iraqi army to escape
its encirclement. That
left Saddam Hussein still strong enough to brutally put down the Shiite and
Kurdish uprisings that
erupted after his defeat in Kuwait and to hang on to
power. The allied forces were held back from completing the victory by
their desire not to appear to be beating up on an Arab nation and by the fear
of a power vacuum in Iraq. Their failure to
finish led to far greater violence
in the long run.
CENTCOM’s lightning war [Desert Storm] was over. It had been billed as a
100-hour blitz, but three years later it was still an unfinished war. Recalled
Gordon Brown, the foreign service officer who served as Schwarzkopf’s
chief foreign policy advisor at CENTCOM,“We
never did have a plan to
terminate the war.”
THE GENERAL’S WAR: THE INSIDE STORY OF THE CONFLICT IN
THE GULF, MICHAEL R. GORDON AND GENERAL BERNARD E.
TRAINOR, 1995
Imagine that everything you do has a moment of perfection and fruition.
Your goal is to end your project there, at such a
peak. Succumb to tiredness,
boredom, or impatience for the end and you fall short of that peak. Greed
and delusions of grandeur
will make you go too far. To conclude at this
moment of perfection, you must have the clearest possible sense of your
goals,
of what you really want. You must also command an in-depth
knowledge of your resources—how far can you practicably go? This
kind
of awareness will give you an intuitive feel for the culminating point.
Endings in purely social relationships demand a sense of the culminating
point as much as those in war. A conversation or
story that goes on too long
always ends badly. Overstaying your welcome, boring people with your
presence, is the deepest
failing: you should leave them wanting more of
you, not less. You can accomplish this by bringing the conversation or
encounter
to an end a moment before the other side expects it. Leave too
soon and you may seem timid or rude, but do your departure
right, at the
peak of enjoyment and liveliness (the culminating point), and you create a
devastatingly positive afterglow.
People will still be thinking of you long
after you are gone. In general, it is always best to end with energy and flair,
on a high note.
Victory and defeat are what you make of them; it is how you deal with
them that matters. Since defeat is inevitable in life,
you must master the art
of losing well and strategically. First, think of your own mental outlook,
how you absorb defeat psychologically.
See it as a temporary setback,
something to wake you up and teach you a lesson, and even as you lose,
you end on a high note
and with an edge: you are mentally prepared to go
on the offensive in the next round. So often, those who have success
become
soft and imprudent; you must welcome defeat as a way to make
yourself stronger.
Second, you must see any defeat as a way to demonstrate something
positive about yourself and your character to other people.
This means
standing tall, not showing signs of bitterness or becoming defensive. Early
in his term as president, John F. Kennedy
embroiled the country in the Bay
of Pigs fiasco, a failed invasion of Cuba. While he accepted full
responsibility for the
debacle, he did not overdo his apologies; instead he
went to work on correcting the mistake, making sure it would not happen
again. He kept his composure, showing remorse but also strength. In doing
so he won public and political support that helped
him immensely in his
future fights.
Third, if you see that defeat is inevitable, it is often best to go down
swinging. That way you end on a high note even as
you lose. This helps to
rally the troops, giving them hope for the future. At the Battle of the Alamo
in 1836, every last
American fighting the Mexican army died— but they
died heroically, refusing to surrender. The battle became a rallying cry
—“Remember
the Alamo!”—and an inspired American force under Sam
Houston finally defeated the Mexicans for good. You do not have to
experience
physical martyrdom, but a display of heroism and energy makes
defeat into a moral victory that will soon enough translate
into a concrete
one. Planting the seeds of future victory in present defeat is strategic
brilliance of the highest order.
Finally, since any ending is a kind of beginning of the next phase, it is
often wise strategy to end on an ambivalent note.
If you are reconciling
with an enemy after a fight, subtly hint that you still have a residue of doubt
—that the other side
must still prove itself to you. When a campaign or
project comes to an end, leave people feeling that they cannot foresee
what
you will do next—keep them in suspense, toying with their attention. By
ending on a note of mystery and ambiguity—a mixed
signal, an insinuating
comment, a touch of doubt—you gain the upper hand for the next round in
a most subtle and insidious
fashion.
Knowing how to end. Masters of the first rank are recognized by the fact
that in matters great and small they know how to find an end perfectly,
be it
at the end of a melody or a thought; of a tragedy’s fifth act or an act of
state. The best of the second rank always
get restless toward the end, and do
not fall into the sea with such proud and calm balance as do, for example,
the mountains
at Portofino—where the bay of Genoa finishes its melody.
THE GAY SCIENCE, FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, 1882
Image:
The Sun. When it finishes its course and sets below the horizon, it leaves
behind a brilliant and memorable afterglow. Its
return is always desired.
Authority: To conquer is nothing. One must profit from one’s
success. —Napoleon Bonaparte (1769–1821)
REVERSAL
There can be no value in ending anything badly. There is no reversal.
PART
V
UNCONVENTIONAL (DIRTY) WARFARE
A general fighting a war must constantly search for an advantage over the
opponent. The greatest advantage comes from the
element of surprise, from
hitting enemies with strategies that are novel, outside their experience,
completely unconventional.
It is in the nature of war, however, that over
time any strategy with any possible application will be tried and tested, so
that the search for the new and unconventional has an innate tendency to
become more and more extreme. At the same time, moral
and ethical codes
that governed warfare for centuries have gradually loosened. These two
effects dovetail into what we today
call “dirty war,” where anything goes,
down to the killing of thousands of unwarned civilians. Dirty war is
political, deceptive,
and supremely manipulative. Often the last recourse of
the weak and desperate, it uses any means available to level the playing
field.
The dynamic of the dirty has filtered into society and the culture at large.
Whether in politics, business, or society, the
way to defeat your opponents
is to surprise them, to come at them from an unexpected angle. And the
increasing pressures of
these daily wars make dirty strategies inevitable.
People go underground: they seem nice and decent but use slippery, devious
methods behind the scenes.
The unconventional has its own logic that you must understand. First,
nothing stays new for long. Those who depend on novelty
must constantly
come up with some fresh idea that goes against the orthodoxies of the time.
Second, people who use unconventional
methods are very hard to fight. The
classic, direct route—the use of force and strength—does not work. You
must use indirect
methods to combat indirection, fight fire with fire, even at
the cost of going dirty yourself. To try to stay clean out of
a sense of
morality is to risk defeat.
The chapters in this section will initiate you into the various forms of the
unorthodox. Some of these are strictly unconventional:
deceiving your
opponents and working against their expectations. Others are more political
and slippery: making morality a
strategic weapon, applying the arts of
guerrilla warfare to daily life, mastering the insidious forms of passive
aggression.
And some are unapologetically dirty: destroying the enemy
from within, inflicting terror and panic. These chapters are designed
to give
you a greater understanding of the diabolical psychology involved in each
strategy, helping to arm you with the proper
defense.
23
WEAVE A SEAMLESS
BLEND OF FACT AND FICTION
MISPERCEPTION
STRATEGIES
Since no creature can survive without the ability to see or sense
what is going on around it, you must make it hard for your
enemies to know what is going on around them, including what
you are doing. Disturb their focus and you weaken their
strategic powers. People’s perceptions are filtered
through their
emotions; they tend to interpret the world according to what
they want to see. Feed their expectations, manufacture
a reality
to match their desires, and they will fool themselves. The best
deceptions are based on ambiguity, mixing fact and
fiction so
that the one cannot be disentangled from the other. Control
people’s perceptions of reality and you control them.
In war-time, truth is so precious that she should always be attended by a
bodyguard of lies.
WINSTON CHURCHILL, 1874–1965
THE FALSE MIRROR
On November 3, 1943, Adolf Hitler had a document distributed to his top
generals: Directive 51, which discussed his conviction
that the Allies would
invade France the following year and explained how to beat them. For years
Hitler had depended on a
kind of intuition in making his most important
strategic decisions, and time and again his instincts had been right; the
Allies
had tried before to make him believe that an invasion of France was
imminent, but each time Hitler had seen through the deception.
This time he
was not only sure that the invasion was coming, he felt he knew exactly
where it would come: the Pas de Calais,
the region of France along the
English Channel that was the country’s closest point to Britain.
Dudley Clarke was always clear—and a little later it will be shewn to have
been a pity that others were not equally so—that
you can never, by
deception, persuade an enemy of anything not according with his own
expectations, which usually are not
far removed from his hopes. It is only by
using your knowledge of them that you are able to hypnotize him, not just
into thinking,
but doing what you want.
MASTER OF DECEPTION, DAVID MURE, 1980
The Pas de Calais had a number of major ports, and the Allies would
need a port to land their troops. The region was also
where Hitler planned to
place his V-1 and V-2 rockets, soon to be operational; with these jet-
propelled unmanned missiles
so close to London, he could bomb Britain
into submission. The English knew he was putting missiles there, and that
provided
them yet another reason to invade France at the Pas de Calais,
before Hitler could begin his bombing campaign.
In Directive 51, Hitler warned his commanders to expect the Allies to
wage a major deception campaign to cloak the time and
place of the
invasion. The Germans had to see through these deceptions and repel the
landing, and despite recent setbacks
in the German war effort, Hitler felt
supremely confident they could. Several years earlier he had commissioned
the construction
of the Atlantic Wall, a line of forts up and down the coast
from France to Norway, and he had over 10 million soldiers at
his disposal,
a million of them in France alone. The German armaments industry was
churning out ever more and better weapons.
Hitler also controlled most of
Europe, giving him enormous resources and endless options for moving his
troops here and there.
The mistocles therefore had two urgent and simultaneous problems to solve.
He must take effective action, not only to block any projected withdrawal
by the Peloponnesian contingents, but also to ensure that they fought where
and when he planned that they should; and he must somehow tempt Xerxes
into making the one move which might lead to a Greek
victory— that is,
ordering his fleet to attack in the Salamis channel. . . . The device
Themistocles finally adopted—what Plutarch calls “his celebrated trick
with Sicinnus”—is one of the most enigmatic
episodes in all Greek history.
Evidence for it goes back as far as Aeschylus’s Persians, performed only
eight years after Salamis. . . . What seems to have happened was this. At
some point during the long argument
over final strategy, Themistocles,
anticipating defeat, slipped away from the conference and sent for his
children’s tutor,
“the most faithful of his slaves,” an Asiatic Greek named
Sicinnus. This man was given a carefully prepared message, or letter, to
deliver to Xerxes, and sent off across the straits in a small
boat, probably
just before dawn on 19 September. . . . The substance of the message was as
follows. Themistocles sent it under his own name, as commander of the
Athenian contingent: he had, he told Xerxes, changed sides, and was now
ardently desirous of a Persian victory. (No real reason is given for this
volte-face, though disgust at the attitude of the Peloponnesian contingents
would provide a strong enough motive to carry conviction.) The Greek
allies were at each other’s throats, and would offer no serious opposition—
“on the contrary, you will see the pro-Persians
amongst them fighting the
rest.” Furthermore, they were planning a general withdrawal from Salamis
under cover of darkness, to be carried out the following night. . . . If Xerxes
struck at
once, on the divide-and-rule principle, he could forestall such a
move. “Attack them and destroy their naval power, while
they are still
disorganized and before they have joined forces with their land army”
[Plut.Them. 12.4 ]. The conquest of the Peloponnese would then become a
comparatively simple matter. On the other hand, if Xerxes allowed the
various Greek contingents to slip through his fingers and disperse
homewards, the war might drag on indefinitely, since he
would have to deal
with each separate city-state in turn. Sicinnus’s arguments impressed the
Persian admirals, and they duly
passed them on to the Great King himself.
Xerxes, we are told, believed the report because it “was in itself
plausible”— and also because it was just what he wanted to hear: there
was trouble brewing in Ionia and the empire, and the sooner this Greek
expedition was wound up, the better. Themistocles, always a shrewd judge
of human nature, knew very well that after so many days of delay and
frustration, the
Great King would grasp at anything which seemed to offer a
quick solution to his problem.
THE GRECO-PERSIAN WARS, PETER GREEN, 1996
Finally, to invade France the Allies would need a massive armada, which,
once assembled, would be impossible to conceal. Hitler
had infiltrated
agents into all levels of the British military, who supplied him with
excellent intelligence—they would forward
to him the time and location of
the invasion. The Allies would not surprise him. And once he had defeated
them on the shores
of France, England would have to sue for peace;
Roosevelt would certainly lose the upcoming U.S. presidential election.
Hitler
could then concentrate his entire army against the Soviet Union and
finally defeat it. In truth, the invasion of France was
the opportunity he
craved to turn the war around.
Hitler’s commander in Western Europe was Field Marshal Gerd von
Runstedt, Germany’s most respected general. To further solidify
the
defensive position in France, Hitler made General Erwin Rommel the
commander of the forces along the French coast. Rommel
proceeded to
make improvements in the Atlantic Wall, turning it into a “devil’s garden”
of minefields and fire zones. Rommel
and Runstedt also asked for more
troops to ensure that the Germans could repel the Allies at the water’s edge.
But the Führer
denied their request.
Hitler had lately come to mistrust his top staff. In the past few years, he
had survived several assassination attempts that
had clearly originated
among his officers. His generals were increasingly arguing with his
strategies, and in his mind they
had botched several battles in the Russian
campaign; he saw many of them as incompetents or traitors. He began to
spend less
time with his officers and more time holed up in his Bavarian
mountain retreat at Berchtesgaden, with his mistress, Eva Braun,
and his
beloved dog, Biondi. There he pored over maps and intelligence reports,
determined to make the important decisions
himself and to manage the
entire war effort more directly.
This caused a change in his way of thinking: instead of making quick,
intuitive choices, he was trying to foresee every possibility
and was taking
longer to make up his mind. Now he thought Rommel and Runstedt—in
their request for more troops to be transferred
to France— were being
overly cautious and even panicky. He alone would have to foil the Allied
invasion; it was up to him
to see through his generals’ weaknesses and the
enemy’s deceptions. The only downside to this was that his workload had
increased
tenfold, and he was more tired than ever. At night he took
sleeping pills, by day whatever he could get his hands on to keep
him alert.
Early in 1944 key information arrived in Hitler’s hands: a German agent
in Turkey stole classified documents confirming that
the Allies would
invade France that year. The documents also indicated plans for an
imminent invasion of the Balkans. Hitler
was particularly sensitive to any
threats to the Balkans, a valuable source of resources for Germany; a loss
there would be
devastating. The threat of such an attack made it impossible
to transfer troops from there to France. Hitler’s agents in England
also
discovered plans to invade Norway, and here Hitler actually reinforced his
troops to ward off the threat.
By April, as Hitler pored over intelligence reports, he began to feel
increasingly excited: he discerned a pattern in the
enemy activity. As he had
thought, everything pointed toward an invasion of the Pas de Calais. One
sign particularly stood
out: indications of an enormous army forming in
southeastern England under the command of General George Patton. This
army,
called FUSAG (First United States Army Group), was clearly
positioned for a crossing to the Pas de Calais. Of all the Allies’
generals,
Hitler feared Patton the most. He had proven his military skill in North
Africa and Sicily. He would be the perfect
commander for the invasion.
Hitler demanded more information on Patton’s army. High-flying
reconnaissance planes photographed enormous military camps,
docking
equipment, thousands of tanks moving through the countryside, a pipeline
being built to the coast. When a captured
German general who had been
imprisoned in England was finally repatriated, he caught glimpses of
massive activity in the FUSAG
area on his trip from his internment camp to
London. Agents in Switzerland reported that every map of the Pas de Calais
area
had been mysteriously bought up. The pieces of a giant puzzle were
coming together.
Now only one question remained: when would it happen? As April
turned to May, Hitler was deluged with all kinds of conflicting
reports,
rumors, and sightings. The information was confusing, taxing his strained
mind, but two nuggets of intelligence seemed
to clarify the picture. First, a
German agent in England reported that the Allies would attack Normandy,
southeast of the
Pas de Calais, between June 5 and 7. But the Germans had
strong indications that this man was operating as a double agent,
and his
report was clearly part of an Allied disinformation campaign. The attack
would probably be coming at the end of June
or beginning of July, when the
weather was generally more predictable. Then, later in May, a series of
more reliable German
spies spotted Britain’s top general, Sir Bernard
Montgomery, in Gibraltar and then in Algiers. Montgomery would certainly
command a large part of any invading force. The invasion could not be
imminent if he was so far away.
On the night of June 5, Hitler pored over the maps. Maybe he was wrong
—maybe the plan was for Normandy all along. He had to
consider both
options; he would not be fooled in what might be the most decisive battle of
his life. The British were tricky;
he had to keep his forces mobile in case it
was Normandy after all. He would not commit himself until he knew for
sure. Reading
the weather reports for the Channel— stormy that evening—
he took his usual sleeping pill and went to bed.
Early the next morning, Hitler woke to startling news: a massive invasion
was under way—in southern Normandy. A large armada
had left England in
the middle of the night, and hundreds of parachutists had been dropped near
the Normandy coast. As the
day progressed, the reports became more exact:
the Allies had landed on the beaches southeast of Cherbourg.
A critical moment had come. If some of the forces stationed in the Pas de
Calais were hurried to the beaches of Normandy,
the Allies could be pinned
and thrown back into the sea. This was the recommendation of Rommel and
Runstedt, who anxiously
awaited Hitler’s approval. But through the night
and into the following day, Hitler hesitated. Then, just as he was on the
verge of sending reinforcements to Normandy, he received word of
increased Allied activity in the FUSAG area. Was Normandy
in fact a giant
diversion? If he moved his reserves there, would Patton immediately cross
the Channel to the Pas de Calais?
No, Hitler would wait to see if the attack
was real. And so the days went by, with Rommel and Runstedt fuming at
his indecision.
After several weeks Hitler finally accepted that Normandy was the real
destination. But by then he was too late. The Allies
had established a
beachhead. In August they broke out of Normandy, sending the Germans
into full retreat. To Hitler the disaster
was yet another indication of the
incompetence of those around him. He had no idea how deeply and
decisively he had been fooled.
At the end of the war, Allied Intelligence Officers discovered in captured
files of the German Secret Service the text of
two hundred and fifty
messages received from agents and other sources before D-Day. Nearly all
mentioned July and the Calais
sector. One message alone gave the exact
date and place of the invasion. It had come from a French colonel in
Algiers. The
Allies had discovered this officer was working for the Abwehr
and he was arrested and subsequently turned round. He too was
used to
mislead Berlin— used and abused. The Germans were so often deceived by
him that they ended by treating all his information
as valueless. But they
kept in contact, for it is always useful to know what the enemy wants you to
believe. Allied Intelligence,
with great boldness and truly remarkable
perversity, had the colonel announce that the Invasion would take place on
the coast
of Normandy on the 5th, 6th or 7th June. For the Germans, his
message was absolute proof that the invasion was to be on any
day except
the 5th, 6th or 7th June, and on any part of the coast except Normandy.
THE SECRETS OF D-DAY, GILLES PERRAULT, 1965
Interpretation
In trying to deceive Hitler about the Normandy invasions, the Allies were
faced with a problem: not only was the Führer suspicious
and wary by
nature, he knew of previous attempts to mislead him and knew that the
Allies would have to try to deceive him
again. How could the Allies
possibly disguise the actual goal of a vast armada from a man who had
reason to believe they would
try to mislead him and was scrutinizing their
every move?
Fortunately, British intelligence had been able to provide the planners of
the D-Day landings, including Prime Minister Winston
Churchill, with
information that would prove invaluable to them. First, they knew that
Hitler was growing paranoid; he was
isolated and overworked, his
imagination overheated. He was prone to emotional outbursts, and he was
suspicious of everyone
and everything. Second, they knew of his belief that
the Allies would try to invade the Balkans before France and that the
landing site in France would be in the Pas de Calais. He almost seemed to
want these invasions to happen, as proof of his
superior reasoning powers
and foresight.
Fooling Hitler into keeping his forces dispersed across Europe and France
would give the Allies a slim margin of time in which
to establish a
beachhead. The key was to present him a picture, composed of many
different kinds of evidence, that would tell
him the Allies were doing just
what he had thought they would. But this picture could not be made up of
all kinds of flashing
signs pointing to the Balkans and the Pas de Calais—
that would reek of deception. Instead they had to create something that
had
the weight and feel of reality. It had to be subtle, a mix of banal truths with
little falsehoods stitched in. If Hitler
saw that in its outlines it supported his
expectations, his overactive mind would fill in the rest. This is how the
Allies
wove such a picture.
By late 1943 the British had secretly identified all of the German agents
active in England. The next step was to turn them
into unwitting double
agents by feeding them false information—about Allied plans for an attack
on the Balkans and Norway,
say, and the massing of a fictional army—
commanded by Patton, the American general Hitler so feared— opposite
the Pas de Calais.
(This army, FUSAG, existed only in piles of phony
paperwork and wireless transmissions that mimicked a normal army.)
German
agents were allowed to steal FUSAG documents and intercept
transmissions—carefully misleading messages but at the same time
banal
and bureaucratic ones, too banal to be seen as fake. Working with film
designers, the Allies built an elaborate set
of rubber, plastic, and wood that
from German reconnaissance planes would look like an enormous camp of
tents, airplanes,
and tanks. The German general who saw FUSAG with his
own eyes was misled about the direction he was taking toward London:
he
had actually passed the real army to the west of FUSAG’s supposed site,
massing for the invasion of Normandy.
Now Ravana said to himself, “These are all petty weapons. I should really
get down to proper business.” And he invoked the one called “Maya”—a
weapon which created illusions and confused the enemy. With proper
incantations and worship, he sent off this weapon and it created an illusion
of reviving all the armies and its
leaders—Kumbakarna and Indrajit and
the others—and bringing them back to the battlefield. Presently Rama
found all those who,
he thought, were no more, coming on with battle cries
and surrounding him. Every man in the enemy’s army was again up in arms.
They seemed to fall on Rama with victorious cries. This was very confusing
and Rama asked Matali, whom he had by now revived,
“What is happening
now? How are all these coming back? They were dead.” Matali explained,
“In your original identity you are the creator of illusions in this universe.
Please know that Ravana has
created phantoms to confuse you. If you make
up your mind, you can dispel them immediately.” Matali’s explanation was
a great help. Rama at once invoked a weapon called “Gnana”—which
means “wisdom”or “perception.” This was a very rare weapon, and he
sent it forth. And all the terrifying armies who seemed to have come on in
such a great
mass suddenly evaporated into thin air.
THE RAMAYANA, VALMIKI, INDIA, CIRCA FOURTH CENTURY B.C.
As the date of the invasion drew near, the Allies left clues combining fact
and fiction still more intricately. The real time
and place of the invasion
were planted with an agent whom the Germans completely mistrusted,
giving Hitler the feeling that
he had seen through a deception when in fact
he was staring at the truth. Now, if real information on the timing of the
invasion
somehow leaked out, Hitler would not know what to believe. The
Allies knew that reports on the buying up of Pas de Calais
maps in
Switzerland would reach Hitler, and this would have its own realistic logic.
As for the Montgomery sightings in Gibraltar,
little did the German agents
know they were seeing a look-alike, a man trained to act like the general. In
the end the picture
the Allies painted was so real to Hitler that well into July
he believed in it, long after D-Day had actually happened. Through
such
subtle deceptions they had compelled him to keep his forces dispersed—
perhaps the decisive factor in the success of the
invasion.
In a competitive world, deception is a vital weapon that can give you a
constant advantage. You can use it to distract your
opponents, send them on
goose chases, waste valuable time and resources in defending attacks that
never come. But more than
likely your concept of deception is wrong. It
does not entail elaborate illusions or all sorts of showy distractions. People
are too sophisticated to fall for such things. Deception should mirror reality.
It can be elaborate, as the British deception
around D-Day was, but the
effect should be of reality only subtly, slightly altered, not completely
transformed.
To mirror reality you must understand its nature. Above all, reality is
subjective: we filter events through our emotions
and preconceptions,
seeing what we want to see. Your false mirror must conform to people’s
desires and expectations, lulling
them to sleep. (If the Allies had wanted to
attack the Pas de Calais, as Hitler suspected, and tried to convince Hitler the
attack was coming to Normandy, that would have been a great deal harder
than playing on his preexisting belief.) Your false
mirror must incorporate
things that are visibly true. It must seem somewhat banal, like life itself. It
can have contradictory
elements, as the D-Day deception did; reality is
often contradictory. In the end, like an Escher painting, you must blend
truth and illusion to the point where they become indistinguishable, and
your false mirror is taken for reality.
What we wish, we readily believe, and what we ourselves think, we
imagine others think also.
—Julius Caesar (100–44 B.C.)
KEYS TO WARFARE
In the early history of warfare, military leaders were faced with the
following predicament: The success of any war effort
depended on the
ability to know as much about the other side—its intentions, its strengths
and weaknesses—as possible. But
the enemy would never willingly
disclose this information. In addition, the enemy often came from an alien
culture, with its
peculiar ways of thinking and behaving. A general could
not really know what was going on in the mind of the opposing general.
From the outside the enemy represented something of an impenetrable
mystery. And yet, lacking some understanding of the other
side, a general
would be operating in the dark.
The only solution was to scrutinize the enemy for outward signs of what
was going on within. A strategist might count the
cooking fires in the
enemy camp, for example, and the changes in that number over time; that
would show the army’s size and
whether it was increasing as reserves
arrived or decreasing as it was split, or perhaps as soldiers deserted. To see
where
the army was heading, or whether it was readying for battle, he
would look for signs of movement or changes in its formation.
He would
try to get agents and spies to report on its activities from within. A leader
who picked up enough of these signs
and deciphered them correctly could
piece together a reasonably clear picture.
The leader also knew that just as he was watching the other side, the
other side was doing the same with him. In pondering
this back-and-forth
game of reading appearances, certain enlightened strategists in cultures
around the world had a similar
epiphany: Why not deliberately distort the
signs the enemy was looking at? Why not mislead by playing with
appearances? If
the enemy is counting our cooking fires, just as we are
counting theirs, why not light more fires, or fewer, to create a false
impression of our strength? If they are following our army’s every move,
why not move it in deceptive patterns or send part
of it in a direction as a
decoy? If the enemy has sent spies and agents into our ranks, why not feed
them false information?
An enemy that thinks it knows our size and
intentions, and is unaware that it has been misled, will act on its false
knowledge
and commit all kinds of mistakes. It will move its men to fight
an enemy that is not there. It will fight with shadows.
Thinking in this way, these ancient strategists created the art of organized
deception, an art that would eventually filter
beyond warfare into politics
and society at large. In essence, military deception is about subtly
manipulating and distorting
signs of our identity and purpose to control the
enemy’s vision of reality and get them to act on their misperceptions. It
is
the art of managing appearances, and it can create a decisive advantage for
whichever side uses it better.
The real impact of such a strategy is the dissipation of resources, the
creation of both self-fulfilling and suicidal prophecies,
and the destruction
of truth and trust. It maximizes confusion and disorder and destroys the
organization’s resilience, adaptability,
core values, and ability to respond.
The key to such a strategy, says [Colonel John] Boyd, is less deception (the
creation of a false order) and more ambiguity (confusion about reality
itself). You want to combine
fact and fiction to create ambiguity for an
adversary, for the combination creates more problems, requires longer to
sort
out, and calls more into question than merely inserting false
information. As an example, he recalled the story of a group
of Germans
after the Normandy invasion who had stolen some American uniforms and
jeeps. They went around the French countryside
changing all the road signs
to confuse the allies as they advanced through the area. Soon, the
Americans figured out that
the directions had been reversed and simply did
the opposite of whatever the signs indicated. How much more effective it
would
have been if the Germans had changed only a portion of the signs, a
third to a half, and created even more problems for the
Americans. Creating
ambiguity about the signs’ accuracy and prolonging the time it would take
to discover the problem would have been far more effective than changing
all the signs in a consistent fashion.
THE MIND OF WAR, GRANT T. HAMMOND, 2001
In war, where the stakes are so high, there is no moral taint in using
deception. It is simply an added weapon to create an
advantage, much as
some animals use camouflage and other tricks to help them survive. To
refuse this weapon is a form of unilateral
disarmament, giving the other side
a clearer view of the field—an advantage that can translate into victory.
And there is
no morality or goodness in losing a war.
We face a similar dynamic in our daily battles in life. We are social
creatures, and our happiness, even our survival, depends
on our ability to
understand what other people are intending and thinking. But because we
cannot get inside their heads, we
are forced to read the signs in their
outward behavior. We ponder their past actions as indications of what they
might do
in the future. We examine their words, their looks, the tone in their
voice, certain actions that seem laden with significance.
Everything a
person does in the social realm is a sign of some sort. At the same time, we
are aware that a thousand pairs
of eyes are in turn watching us, reading us,
and trying to sense our intentions.
And the Lord said to Joshua, “Do not fear or be dismayed; take all the
fighting men with you, and arise, go up to Ai; see,
I have given into your
hand the king of Ai, and his people, his city, and his land; and you shall do
to Ai and its king as
you did to Jericho and its king; only its spoil and its
cattle you shall take as booty for yourselves; lay an ambush against
the
city, behind it.” . . . So Joshua arose, and all the fighting men, to go up to
Ai; and Joshua chose thirty thousand mighty men of valor, and
sent them
forth by night. And he commanded them, “Behold, you shall lie in ambush
against the city, behind it; do not go very
far from the city, but hold
yourselves all in readiness; and I, and all the people who are with me, will
approach the city. And when they come out against us, as before, we shall
flee before them; and they will come out after us, till we have drawn
them
away from the city; for they will say, ‘They are fleeing from us, as before.’
So we will flee from them; then you shall
rise up from the ambush, and seize
the city; for the Lord your God will give it into your hand. And when you
have taken the city, you shall set the city
on fire, doing as the Lord has
bidden; see, I have commanded you.” . . . . . . And when the king of Ai saw
this, he and all his people, the men of the city, made haste and went out
early to the
descent toward the Arabah to meet Israel in battle; but he did
not know that there was an ambush against him behind the city.
And Joshua
and all Israel made a pretense of being beaten before them, and fled in the
direction of the wilderness. So all
the people who were in the city were
called together to pursue them, and as they pursued Joshua they were
drawn away from
the city. There was not a man left in Ai or Bethel, who did
not go out after Israel; they left the city open, and pursued Israel. . . . And
the ambush rose quickly out of their place, and . . . they ran and entered the
city and took it; and they made
haste to set the city on fire. So when the men
of Ai looked back, behold, the smoke of the city went up to heaven; and they
had no power to flee this way or that, for the people that fled to the
wilderness turned back upon the pursuers. And when
Joshua and all Israel
saw that the ambush had taken the city, and that the smoke of the city went
up, then they turned back
and smote the men of Ai.
JOSHUA 8: 1–9, 14–23
It is a never-ending battle over appearance and perception. If other people
can read what we are up to, predict what we are
going to do, while we have
no clue about them, they have a constant advantage over us that they cannot
help but exploit. That
is why, in the social realm, we learn from an early age
to use deception—we tell others what they want to hear, concealing
our real
thoughts, hedging with the truth, misleading to make a better impression.
Many of these deceptions are entirely unconscious.
Since appearances are critical and deception is inevitable, what you want
is to elevate your game—to make your deceptions
more conscious and
skillful. You need the power to cloak your maneuvers, to keep people off
balance by controlling the perceptions
they have of you and the signs you
give out. In this sense there is a lot you can learn from the military arts of
deception,
which are based on timeless laws of psychology and are
infinitely applicable to the battles of daily life.
To master this art, you must embrace its necessity and find creative
pleasure in manipulating appearances—as if you were directing
a film. The
following are the six main forms of military deception, each with its own
advantage.
The false front. This is the oldest form of military deception. It originally
involved making the enemy believe that one was weaker than
in fact was
the case. A leader would feign a retreat, say, baiting a trap for the enemy to
rush into, luring it into an ambush.
This was a favorite tactic of Sun-tzu’s.
The appearance of weakness often brings out people’s aggressive side,
making them drop strategy and prudence for an emotional and violent
attack. When Napoleon found himself outnumbered and in a vulnerable
strategic position before the Battle of Austerlitz, he
deliberately showed
signs of being panicked, indecisive, and scared. The enemy armies
abandoned their strong position to attack
him and rushed into a trap. It was
his greatest victory.
Controlling the front you present to the world is the most critical
deceptive skill. People respond most directly to what
they see, to what is
most visible to their eyes. If you seem clever—if you seem deceptive—
their guard will be up and it will
be impossible to mislead them. Instead you
need to present a front that does the opposite—disarms suspicions. The best
front
here is weakness, which will make the other side feel superior to you,
so that they either ignore you (and being ignored is
very valuable at times)
or are baited into an aggressive action at the wrong moment. Once it is too
late, once they are committed,
they can find out the hard way that you are
not so weak after all.
In the battles of daily life, making people think they are better than you
are—smarter, stronger, more competent—is often
wise. It gives you
breathing space to lay your plans, to manipulate. In a variation on this
strategy, the front of virtue,
honesty, and uprightness is often the perfect
cover in a political world. These qualities may not seem weak but serve the
same function: they disarm people’s suspicions. In that situation, though, it
is important not to get caught doing something
underhanded. Appearing as
a hypocrite will set you far back in the deception game.
In general, as strategists advocated in the days of ancient China, you
should present a face to the world that promises the
opposite of what you
are actually planning. If you are getting ready to attack, seem unprepared
for a fight or too comfortable
and relaxed to be plotting war. Appear calm
and friendly. Doing this will help you gain control over your appearance
and sharpen
your ability to keep your opponents in the dark.
The decoy attack. This is another ruse dating back to ancient times, and it
remains perhaps the military’s most common deceptive ploy. It
began as a
solution to a problem: if the enemy knew you were going to attack point A,
they would put all their defenses there
and make your job too difficult. But
to deceive them on that score was not easy: even if before battle you were
able to disguise
your intentions and fool them out of concentrating their
forces at point A, the minute they actually saw your army headed
there,
they would rush to its defense. The only answer was to march your army
toward point B or, better, to send part of your
army in that direction while
holding troops in reserve for your real objective. The enemy would now
have to move some or all
of its army to defend point B. Do the same with
points C and D and the enemy would have to disperse all over the map.
The key to this tactic is that instead of relying on words or rumors or
planted information, the army really moves. It makes
a concrete action. The
enemy forces cannot afford to guess whether a deception is in the works: if
they guess wrong, the consequences
are disastrous. They have to move to
cover point B, no matter what. It is in any case almost impossible to doubt
the reality
of actual troop movements, with all the time and energy those
involve. So the decoy attack keeps the enemy dispersed and ignorant
of
your intentions—the ultimate dream of any general.
The decoy attack is also a critical strategy in daily life, where you must
retain the power to hide your intentions. To keep
people from defending the
points you want to attack, you must follow the military model and make
real gestures toward a goal
that does not interest you. You must seem to be
investing time and energy to attack that point, as opposed to simply trying
to signal the intention with words. Actions carry such weight and seem so
real that people will naturally assume that is your
real goal. Their attention
is distracted from your actual objective; their defenses are dispersed and
weakened.
The principle is also employed in less tortuous circumstances, but with the
same purpose of getting an individual to act naturally
in a role because, in
fact, he does not know that he is playing a false one. For example, take the
design of the “Man Who Never Was” operation during World War II—
wherein a high-level courier carrying secret papers containing
misdirections regarding the Mediterranean
invasion was to be washed up
on the coast of Spain. After the “Major” was dropped in Spanish waters,
the British attaché in
Spain was “confidentially” told that papers of great
importance had been lost, and that he should discreetly determine whether
the courier’s briefcase
had been recovered. The attaché was thus able to act
out his part in the fake-out in a very convincing manner by virtue of
the fact
that for him it wasn’t an act.
THE SECRETS OF DDAY, GILLES PERRAULT, 1965
Camouflage. The ability to blend into the environment is one of the most
terrifying forms of military deception. In modern times Asian
armies have
proven particularly adept in this art: at the battles of Guadalcanal and Iwo
Jima during World War II, American
soldiers were astounded at the ability
of their Japanese foes to blend into the various terrains of the Pacific
theater. By
sewing grass, leaves, twigs, and foliage to their uniforms and
helmets, the Japanese would merge with the forest— but the
forest would
incrementally advance, undetected until it was too late. Nor could the
Americans pinpoint the Japanese guns,
for their barrels were concealed in
natural rock crevices or were hidden under removable camouflage covers.
The North Vietnamese
were equally brilliant at camouflage, reinforcing
their skills by the use of tunnels and underground chambers that allowed
armed men to pop up seemingly anywhere. Worse, in a different kind of
camouflage, they could blend into the civilian population.
Preventing your
enemies from seeing you until it is too late is a devastating way to control
their perceptions.
The camouflage strategy can be applied to daily life in two ways. First, it
is always good to be able to blend into the social
landscape, to avoid calling
attention to yourself unless you choose to do so. When you talk and act like
everyone else, mimicking
their belief systems, when you blend into the
crowd, you make it impossible for people to read anything particular in
your
behavior. (Appearances are all that count here— dress and talk like a
businessman and you must be a businessman.) That gives you great room to
move and plot without being noticed. Like a grasshopper on a leaf, you
cannot
be picked from your context—an excellent defense in times of
weakness. Second, if you are preparing an attack of some sort
and begin by
blending into the environment, showing no sign of activity, your attack will
seem to come out of nowhere, doubling
its power.
The hypnotic pattern: According to Machiavelli, human beings naturally
tend to think in terms of patterns. They like to see events conforming to
their expectations by fitting into a pattern or scheme, for schemes, whatever
their actual content, comfort us by suggesting
that the chaos of life is
predictable. This mental habit offers excellent ground for deception, using a
strategy that Machiavelli
calls “acclimatization”—deliberately creating
some pattern to make your enemies believe that your next action will follow
true to form. Having lulled them into complacency, you now have room to
work against their expectations, break the pattern,
and take them by
surprise.
In the Six-Day War of 1967, the Israelis submitted their Arab enemies to
a devastating and lightning-fast defeat. In doing
so they confirmed all their
preexisting military beliefs: the Arabs were undisciplined, their weaponry
was outdated, and their
strategies were stale. Six years later the Egyptian
president Anwar Sadat exploited these prejudices in signaling that his
army
was in disarray and still humbled by its defeat in 1967, and that he was
squabbling with his Soviet patrons. When Egypt
and Syria attacked Israel
on Yom Kippur in 1973, the Israelis were caught almost totally by surprise.
Sadat had tricked them
into letting down their guard.
This tactic can be extended indefinitely. Once people feel you have
deceived them, they will expect you to mislead them again,
but they usually
think you’ll try something different next time. No one, they will tell
themselves, is so stupid as to repeat
the exact same trick on the same
person. That, of course, is just when to repeat it, following the principle of
always working
against your enemy’s expectations. Remember the example
of Edgar Allan Poe’s short story “The Purloined Letter”: hide something
in
the most obvious place, because that is where no one will look.
Betrayer’s masterpiece.—To express to a fellow conspirator the grievous
suspicion that one is going to be betrayed by him, and to do so at precisely
the moment one is oneself engaged in betrayal, is a masterpiece of malice,
because it keeps the other occupied with himself
and compels him for a time
to behave very openly and unsuspiciously, thus giving the actual betrayer
full freedom of action.
HUMAN, ALL TOO HUMAN, FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, 1878
Planted information. People are much more likely to believe something
they see with their own eyes than something they are told. They are more
likely to believe something they discover than something pushed at them. If
you plant the false information you desire them
to have—with third parties,
in neutral territory—when they pick up the clues, they have the impression
they are the ones discovering the truth. The more you can make them dig
for their information, the more deeply they will delude
themselves.
During World War I, in addition to the infamous standoff on the Western
Front, the Germans and the British fought a lesser-known
battle for control
of East Africa, where both sides had colonies. The man in charge of English
intelligence in the area was
Colonel Richard Meinhertzhagen, and his main
rival on the German side was an educated Arab. Meinhertzhagen’s job
included
feeding the Germans misinformation, and he tried hard to deceive
this Arab, but nothing seemed to work— the two men were equals
at the
game. Finally Meinhertzhagen sent his opponent a letter. He thanked the
Arab for his services as a double agent and
for the valuable information he
had supplied to the British. He enclosed a large sum of money and entrusted
the letter’s delivery
to his most incompetent agent. Sure enough, the
Germans captured this agent en route and found the letter. The agent, under
torture, assured them that his mission was genuine—because he believed it
was; Meinhertzhagen had kept him out of the loop.
The agent was not
acting, so he was more than believable. The Germans quietly had the Arab
shot.
Agamemnon had sent Odysseus on a foraging expedition to Thrace, and
when he came back empty-handed, Palamedes son of Nauplius
upbraided
him for his sloth and cowardice. “It was not my fault,” cried Odysseus,
“that no corn could be found. If Agamemnon
had sent you in my stead, you
would have had no greater success.” Thus challenged, Palamedes set sail
at once and presently
reappeared with a ship-load of grain. . . . After days
of tortuous thought, Odysseus at last hit upon a plan by which he might be
revenged on Palamedes; for his honour
was wounded. He sent word to
Agamemnon: “The gods have warned me in a dream that treachery is
afoot: the camp must be moved for a day and a night.” When Agamemnon
gave
immediate orders to have this done, Odysseus secretly buried a
sackfull of gold at the place where Palamedes’s tent had been
pitched. He
then forced a Phrygian prisoner to write a letter, as if from Priam to
Palamedes, which read: “The gold that I have sent is the price you asked
for betraying the Greek camp.” Having then ordered the prisoner to hand
Palamedes this letter, Odysseus had him killed just outside the camp, before
he could deliver it. Next day, when the army
returned to the old site,
someone found the prisoner’s corpse and took the letter to Agamemnon.
Palamedes was court-martialled and, when he hotly denied having received
gold from Priam or anyone else, Odysseus suggested
that his tent should be
searched. The gold was discovered, and the whole army stoned Palamedes
to death as a traitor.
THE GREEK MYTHS, VOL. 2, ROBERT GRAVES, 1955
No matter how good a liar you are, when you deceive, it is hard to be
completely natural. Your tendency is to try so hard
to seem natural and
sincere that it stands out and can be read. That is why it is so effective to
spread your deceptions through
people whom you keep ignorant of the truth
—people who believe the lie themselves. When working with double agents
of this
kind, it is always wise to initially feed them some true information—
this will establish the credibility of the intelligence
they pass along. After
that they will be the perfect conduits for your lies.
Shadows within shadows. Deceptive maneuvers are like shadows
deliberately cast: the enemy responds to them as if they were
solid and real,
which in and of itself is a mistake. In a sophisticated, competitive world,
however, both sides know the game,
and the alert enemy will not
necessarily grasp at the shadow you have thrown. So you have to take the
art of deception to
a level higher, casting shadows within shadows, making
it impossible for your enemies to distinguish between fact and fiction. You
make everything so ambiguous and
uncertain, spread so much fog, that
even if you are suspected of deceit, it does not matter— the truth cannot be
unraveled
from the lies, and all their suspicion gives them is torment.
Meanwhile, as they strain to figure out what you are up to,
they waste
valuable time and resources.
During the World War II desert battles in North Africa, the English
lieutenant Dudley Clarke ran a campaign to deceive the
Germans. One of
his tactics was to use props—dummy tanks and artillery—to make it
impossible for the Germans to figure out
the size and location of the
English army. From high-flying reconnaissance aircraft, these dummy
weapons would photograph
like the real thing. A prop that worked
particularly well was the fake airplane made of wood; Clarke dotted bogus
landing
fields filled up with rows of these around the landscape. At one
point a worried officer told him that intelligence had been
intercepted
revealing that the Germans had figured out a way to distinguish the fake
planes from the real ones: they simply
looked for the wooden struts holding
up the wings of the dummy planes (enlarged photos could reveal this). They
would now
have to stop using the dummies, said the officer. But Clarke,
one of the great geniuses of modern deception, had a better
idea: he decided
to put struts under the wings of real aircraft as well as phony ones. With the
original deception, the Germans
were confused but could eventually
uncover the truth. Now, however, Clarke took the game to a higher level:
the enemy could
not distinguish the real from the fake in general, which
was even more disconcerting.
If you are trying to mislead your enemies, it is often better to concoct
something ambiguous and hard to read, as opposed
to an outright deception
—that deception can be uncovered and enemies can turn their discovery to
their advantage, especially
if you think they are still fooled and act under
that belief. You are the one doubly deceived. By creating something that
is
simply ambiguous, though, by making everything blurry, there is no
deception to uncover. They are simply lost in a mist
of uncertainty, where
truth and falsehood, good and bad, all merge into one, and it is impossible
to get one’s bearings straight.
Appearance and intention inevitably ensnare people when artfully used,
even if people sense that there is an ulterior intention
behind the overt
appearance. When you set up ploys and opponents fall for them, then you
win by letting them act on your ruse.
As for those who do not fall for a ploy,
when you see they won’t fall for the open trap, you have another set. Then
even if
opponents haven’t fallen for your original ploy, in effect they
actually have.
FAMILY BOOK ON THE ART OF WAR, YAGYU MUNENORI, 1571–
1646
Image:
Fog. It makes the shape and color of objects impossible to know. Learn to
create enough of it and you free yourself of the
enemy’s intrusive gaze;
you have room to maneuver. You know where you are headed, while the
enemy goes astray, deeper and
deeper into the fog.
Authority: One who is good at combating the enemy fools it
with inscrutable moves, confuses it with false intelligence,
makes
it relax by concealing one’s strength, . . . deafens its ears
by jumbling one’s orders and signals, blinds its eyes by
converting
one’s banners and insignias, . . . confounds its battle
plan by providing distorted facts. —Tou Bi Fu Tan, A Scholar’s
Dilettante Remarks on War (16th century A.D.)
REVERSAL
To be caught in a deception is dangerous. If you don’t know that your cover
is blown, now, suddenly, your enemies have more
information than you do
and you become their tool. If the discovery of your deceit is public, on the
other hand, your reputation
takes a blow, or worse: the punishments for
spying are severe. You must use deception with utmost caution, then,
employing
the least amount of people as possible, to avoid the inevitable
leaks. You should always leave yourself an escape route, a
cover story to
protect you should you be exposed. Be careful not to fall in love with the
power that deception brings; the
use of it must always be subordinate to
your overall strategy and kept under control. If you become known as a
deceiver, try
being straightforward and honest for a change. That will
confuse people—because they won’t know how to read you, your honesty
will become a higher form of deception.
24
TAKE THE LINE OF
LEAST EXPECTATION
THE ORDINARY-EXTRAORDINARY
STRATEGY
People expect your behavior to conform to known patterns and
conventions. Your task as a strategist is to upset their
expectations.
Surprise them and chaos and unpredictability—
which they try desperately to keep at bay—enter their world,
and in the ensuing
mental disturbance, their defenses are down
and they are vulnerable. First, do something ordinary and
conventional to fix
their image of you, then hit them with the
extraordinary. The terror is greater for being so sudden. Never
rely on an unorthodox strategy that worked before—it is
conventional
the second time around. Sometimes the ordinary is
extraordinary because it is unexpected.
UNCONVENTIONAL WARFARE
Thousands of years ago, military leaders—aware of the incredibly high
stakes involved in war—would search high and low for
anything that could
bring their army an advantage on the battlefield. Some generals who were
particularly clever would devise
novel troop formations or an innovative
use of infantry or cavalry: the newness of the tactic would prevent the
enemy from
anticipating it. Being unexpected, it would create confusion in
the enemy. An army that gained the advantage of surprise in
this way could
often leverage it into victory on the battlefield and perhaps a string of
victories.
The enemy, however, would work hard to come up with a defense against
the new strategy, whatever it was, and would often find
one quite fast. So
what once brought brilliant success and was the epitome of innovation soon
no longer worked and in fact
became conventional. Furthermore, in the
process of working out a defense against a novel strategy, the enemy itself
would
often be forced to innovate; now it was their turn to introduce
something surprising and horribly effective. And so the cycle
would go on.
War has always been ruthless; nothing stays unconventional for long. It is
either innovate or die.
In the eighteenth century, nothing was more startling than the tactics of
the Prussian king Frederick the Great. To top Frederick’s
success, French
military theorists devised radical new ideas that were finally tested on the
battlefield by Napoleon. In 1806,
Napoleon crushed the Prussians—who
were still using the once unconventional tactics of Frederick the Great, now
grown stale—at
the Battle of Jena-Auerstadt. The Prussians were
humiliated by their defeat; now it was up to them to innovate. They studied
in depth Napoleon’s success, adapted his best strategies, and took them
further, creating the seeds for the formation of the
German General Staff.
This new Prussian army played a large role in the defeat of Napoleon at
Waterloo and went on to dominate
the military scene for decades.
In modern times the constant challenge to top the enemy with something
new and unconventional has taken a turn into dirty
warfare. Loosening the
codes of honor and morality that in the past limited what a general could do
(at least to some extent),
modern armies have slowly embraced the idea that
anything goes. Guerrilla and terrorist tactics have been known since ancient
times; now they have become not only more common but more strategic
and refined. Propaganda, disinformation, psychological
warfare, deception,
and political means of waging war have all become active ingredients in
any unconventional strategy. A
counterstrategy usually develops to deal
with the latest in dirty warfare, but it often involves falling to the enemy’s
level,
fighting fire with fire. The dirty enemy adapts by sinking to a dirtier
level still, creating a downward spiral.
This dynamic is particularly intense in warfare but it permeates every
aspect of human activity. If you are in politics and
business and your
opponents or competitors come up with a novel strategy, you must adapt it
for your own purposes or, better,
top it. Their once new tactic becomes
conventional and ultimately useless. Our world is so fiercely competitive
that one side
will almost always end up resorting to something dirty,
something outside earlier codes of accepted behavior. Ignore this
spiral out
of a sense of morality or pride and you put yourself at a severe
disadvantage; you are called to respond—in all
likelihood to fight a little
dirty yourself.
Everything which the enemy least expects will succeed the best. If he relies
for security on a chain of mountains that he
believes impracticable, and you
pass these mountains by roads unknown to him, he is confused to start with,
and if you press
him he will not have time to recover from his consternation.
In the same way, if he places himself behind a river to defend
the crossing
and you find some ford above or below on which to cross unknown to him,
this surprise will derange and confuse
him. . . .
FREDERICK THE GREAT, 1712–86
The spiral dominates not just politics or business but culture as well, with
its desperate search for the shocking and novel
to gain attention and win
momentary acclaim. Anything goes. The speed of the process has grown
exponentially with time; what
was unconventional in the arts a few years
ago now seems unbearably trite and the height of conformity.
What we consider unconventional has changed over the years, but the
laws that make unconventionality effective, being based
on elemental
psychology, are timeless. And these immutable laws are revealed in the
history of warfare. Almost twenty-five
hundred years ago, the great Chinese
strategist Sun-tzu expressed their essence in his discussion of ordinary and
extraordinary
means; his analysis is as relevant to modern politics and
culture as it is to warfare, whether clean or dirty. And once you
understand
the essence of unconventional warfare, you will be able to use it in your
daily life.
Unconventional warfare has four main principles, as gleaned from the
great practitioners of the art.
Work outside the enemy’s experience. Principles of war are based on
precedent: a kind of canon of strategies and counterstrategies develops over
the centuries,
and since war is so dangerously chaotic, strategists come to
rely on these principles for lack of anything else. They filter
what’s
happening now through what happened in the past. The armies that have
shaken the world, though, have always found a
way to operate outside the
canon, and thus outside the enemy’s experience. This ability imposes chaos
and disorder on the
enemy, which cannot orient itself to novelty and
collapses in the process.
Your task as a strategist is to know your enemies well, then use your
knowledge to contrive a strategy that goes outside their
experience. What
they might have read or heard about matters less than their personal
experience, which dominates their emotional
lives and determines their
responses. When the Germans invaded France in 1940, the French had
secondhand knowledge of their
blitzkrieg style of warfare from their
invasion of Poland the year before but had never experienced it personally
and were
overwhelmed. Once a strategy is used and is no longer outside
your enemy’s experience, though, it will not have the same effect
if
repeated.
Unfold the extraordinary out of the ordinary. To Sun-tzu and the ancient
Chinese, doing something extraordinary had little effect without a setup of
something ordinary.
You had to mix the two—to fix your opponents’
expectations with some banal, ordinary maneuver, a comfortable pattern
that
they would then expect you to follow. With the enemy sufficiently
mesmerized, you would then hit it with the extraordinary,
a show of
stunning force from an entirely new angle. Framed by the predictable, the
blow would have double the impact.
The unconventional maneuver that confused enemies, though, would
have become conventional the second or third time around.
So the wily
general might then go back to the ordinary strategy that he had used earlier
to fix their attention and use it
for his main attack, for that would be the last
thing the enemy would expect. And so the ordinary and the extraordinary
are
effective only if they play off each other in a constant spiraling manner.
This applies to culture as much as to war: to gain
attention with some
cultural product, you have to create something new, but something with no
reference to ordinary life is
not in fact unconventional, but merely strange.
What is truly shocking and extraordinary unfolds out of the ordinary. The
intertwining of the ordinary and extraordinary is the very definition of
surrealism.
Make a false move, not to pass it for a genuine one but to transform it into a
genuine one after the enemy has been convinced
of its falsity.
THE WILES OF WAR: 36 MILITARY STRATEGIES FROM ANCIENT
CHINA, TRANSLATED BY SUN HAICHEN, 1991
Act crazy like a fox. Despite appearances, a lot of disorder and irrationality
lurks beneath the surface of society and individuals.
That is why we so
desperately strain to maintain order and why people acting irrationally can
be terrifying: they are demonstrating
that they have lost the walls we build
to keep out the irrational. We cannot predict what they will do next, and we
tend to
give them a wide berth—it is not worth mixing it up with such
sources of chaos. On the other hand, these people can also inspire
a kind of
awe and respect, for secretly we all desire access to the irrational seas
churning inside us. In ancient times the
insane were seen as divinely
possessed; a residue of that attitude survives. The greatest generals have all
had a touch of
divine, strategic madness.
The secret is to keep this streak under control. Upon occasion you allow
yourself to operate in a way that is deliberately
irrational, but less is more—
do this too much and you may be locked up. You will in any case frighten
people more by showing
an occasional flash of insanity, just enough to keep
everyone off balance and wondering what will come next. As an alternative,
act somewhat randomly, as if what you did were determined by a roll of the
dice. Randomness is thoroughly disturbing to humans.
Think of this
behavior as a kind of therapy—a chance to indulge occasionally in the
irrational, as a relief from the oppressive
need to always seem normal.
Keep the wheels in constant motion. The unconventional is generally the
province of the young, who are not comfortable with
conventions and take
great pleasure in flouting them. The danger is that as we age, we need more
comfort and predictability
and lose our taste for the unorthodox. This is
how Napoleon declined as a strategist: he came to rely more on the size of
his army and on its superiority in weapons than on novel strategies and fluid
maneuvers. He lost his taste for the spirit
of strategy and succumbed to the
growing weight of his accumulating years. You must fight the psychological
aging process
even more than the physical one, for a mind full of
stratagems, tricks, and fluid maneuvers will keep you young. Make a point
of breaking the habits you have developed, of acting in a way that is
contrary to how you have operated in the past; practice
a kind of
unconventional warfare on your own mind. Keep the wheels turning and
churning the soil so that nothing settles and
clumps into the conventional.
No one is so brave that he is not disturbed by something unexpected.
—Julius Caesar (100–44 B.C.)
HISTORICAL EXAMPLES
1. In 219 B.C., Rome decided it had had enough of the Carthaginians, who
had been stirring up trouble in Spain, where both city-states
had valuable
colonies. The Romans declared war on Carthage and prepared to send an
army to Spain, where the enemy forces were
led by the twenty-eight-year-
old general Hannibal. Before the Romans could reach Hannibal, though,
they received the startling
news that he was coming to them—he had
already marched east, crossing the most treacherous part of the Alps into
northern
Italy. Because Rome had never imagined that an enemy would
attack from that direction, there were no garrisons in the area,
and
Hannibal’s march south toward Rome was unimpeded.
His army was relatively small; only some 26,000 soldiers had survived
the crossing of the Alps. The Romans and their allies
could field an army of
close to 750,000 men; their legions were the most disciplined and feared
fighters in the world, and
they had already defeated Carthage in the First
Punic War, twenty-odd years earlier. But an alien army marching into Italy
was a novel surprise, and it stirred the rawest emotions. They had to teach
these barbarians a lesson for their brazen invasion.
Legions were quickly dispatched to the north to destroy Hannibal. After a
few skirmishes, an army under the Roman consul Sempronius
Longus
prepared to meet the Carthaginians in direct battle near the river Trebia.
Sempronius burned with both hatred and ambition:
he wanted to crush
Hannibal and also to be seen as the savior of Rome. But Hannibal was
acting strangely. His light cavalry
would cross the river as if to attack the
Romans, then retreat back: Were the Carthaginians afraid? Were they ready
to make
only minor raids and sorties? Finally Sempronius had had enough
and went in pursuit. To make sure he had sufficient forces
to defeat the
enemy, he brought his entire army across the freezing-cold river (it was
wintertime), all of which took hours
and was exhausting. Finally, however,
the two armies met just to the west of the river.
It is assumed that Alexander encamped at Haranpur; opposite him on the
eastern back of the Hydaspes was Porus, who was seen
to have with him a
large number of elephants. . . . . . . Because all fords were held by pickets
and elephants, Alexander realized that his horses could neither be swum
nor
rafted across the river, because they would not face the trumpeting of
the elephants and would become frantic when in the
water or on their rafts.
He resorted to a series of feints. While small parties were dispatched to
reconnoitre all possible
crossing places, he divided his army into columns,
which he marched up and down the river as if he sought a place of crossing.
Then, when shortly before the summer solstice the rains set in and the river
became swollen, he had corn conveyed from all
quarters to his camp so that
Porus might believe that he had resolved to remain where he was until the
dry weather. In the
meantime he reconnoitred the river with his ships and
ordered tent skins to be stuffed with hay and converted into rafts.
Yet, as
Arrian writes, “all the time he was waiting in ambush to see whether by
rapidity of movement he could not steal a
passage anywhere without being
observed.” At length, and we may be certain after a close personal
reconnaissance, Alexander resolved to make the attempt at the headland
and island described by Arrian, and in preparation he decided on a
manoeuvre almost identical with that adopted by General
Wolfe in his 1759
Quebec campaign. Under cover of night he sent out his cavalry to various
points along the western bank of the river with orders to make a clamour,
and from time to time to raise the battle-cry; for several nights Porus
marched his elephants up and down the eastern bank
to block an attempted
crossing until he got tired of it, kept his elephants in camp, and posted
scouts along the eastern bank.
Then “when Alexander had brought it about
that the mind of Porus no longer entertained any fear of his nocturnal
attempts,
he devised the following stratagem”: Upstream and along the
western bank he posted a chain of sentries, each post in sight
and hearing
of the next one, with orders to raise a din and keep their picket fires
burning, while visible preparations were
made at the camp to effect a
crossing. . . . . . . When Porus had been lulled into a sense of false security
and all preparations were completed at the camp and the crossing
place,
Alexander set out secretly and kept at some distance from the western bank
of the river so that his march would not
be observed. . . .
THE GENERALSHIP OF ALEXANDER THE GREAT, J.F.C. FULLER,
1960
At first, as Sempronius had expected, his tough, disciplined legions fared
well against the Carthaginians. But on one side
the Roman lines were made
up of Gallic tribesmen fighting for the Romans, and here, suddenly, the
Carthaginians unleashed
a group of elephants ridden by archers. The
tribesmen had never seen such beasts; they panicked and fell into a chaotic
retreat.
At the same time, as if out of nowhere, some 2,000 Carthaginians,
hidden in dense vegetation near the river, fell on the Romans’
rear. The
Romans fought bravely to get out of the trap that Hannibal had laid for
them, but thousands of them drowned in the
frigid waters of the Trebia.
The battle was a disaster, and back in Rome emotions turned from
outrage to anxiety. Legions were quickly dispatched to block
the most
accessible passes in the Apennines, the mountains that run across central
Italy, but once again Hannibal defied expectations:
he crossed the
Apennines at their most unlikely, most inhospitable point, one that no army
had ever passed through before
because of the treacherous marshes on the
other side. But after four days of trudging through soft mud, Hannibal
brought the
Carthaginians to safe ground. Then, in yet another clever
ambush, he defeated a Roman army at Lake Trasimene, in present-day
Umbria. Now his path to Rome was clear. In a state of near panic, the
Roman republic resorted to the ancient tradition of
appointing a dictator to
lead them through the crisis. Their new leader, Fabius Maximus, quickly
built up the city’s walls
and enlarged the Roman army, then watched
perplexed as Hannibal bypassed Rome and headed south into Apulia, the
most fertile
part of Italy, and began to devastate the countryside.
Determined first and foremost to protect Rome, Fabius came up with a
novel strategy: he would post his legions in mountainous
areas where
Hannibal’s cavalry would be harmless, and he would harass the
Carthaginians in a guerrilla-style campaign, denying
them supplies and
isolating them in their position so far from home. Avoiding direct battle
with their formidable leader at
all costs, he would defeat them by
exhausting them. But many Romans saw Fabius’s strategy as disgraceful
and unmanly. Worse,
as Hannibal continued to raid the countryside, he hit
none of Fabius’s many properties, making it seem as if the two were
in
cahoots. Fabius became more and more unpopular.
Having razed Apulia, Hannibal entered a fertile plain in Campania, to
Rome’s south—terrain that Fabius knew well. Finally
deciding he had to act
or be thrown out of power, the dictator devised a trap: he stationed Roman
armies at all the exit points
from the plain, each army close enough to
support the other. But Hannibal had entered Campania through the eastern
mountain
pass of Allifae, and Fabius had noticed that he never left by the
same route he entered. Although Fabius kept a sufficiently
large Roman
garrison at Allifae just in case, he reinforced the other passes in greater
numbers. The beast, he thought, was
caged. Eventually Hannibal’s supplies
would run out, and he would be forced to try to break through. Fabius
would wait.
In the weeks to come, Hannibal sent his cavalry north, perhaps trying to
break out in that direction. He also plundered the
richest farms in the area.
Fabius saw through his tricks: he was trying to bait the Romans into a battle
of his choice. But
Fabius was determined to fight on his own terms, and
only when the enemy tried to retreat from the trap. Anyway, he knew
Hannibal
would try to break through to the east, the only direction that
afforded him a clean break, into country the Romans did not
control.
One night the Roman soldiers guarding the pass at Allifae saw sights and
heard sounds that made them think they were losing
their minds: an
enormous army, signaled by thousands of torches, seemed to be heading up
the pass, covering its slopes, accompanied
by loud bellowing sounds as if
possessed by some evil demon. The army seemed irresistible—far larger
than the maximum estimate
of Hannibal’s strength. Afraid that it would
climb above them and surround them, the Romans fled from their garrison,
abandoning
the pass, too scared even to look behind them. And a few hours
later, Hannibal’s army came through, escaping from Fabius’s
cordon.
No Roman leader could figure out what Hannibal had conjured up on the
slopes that night—and by the following year Fabius was
out of power. The
consul Terentius Varro burned to avenge the disgrace of Allifae. The
Carthaginians were encamped near Cannae,
in southeastern Italy not far
from modern Bari. Varro marched to face them there, and as the two armies
arrayed themselves
in ranks to meet in battle, he could only have felt
supremely confident: the terrain was clear, the enemy was in full view,
there
could be no hidden armies or last-minute tricks—and the Romans
outnumbered the Carthaginians by two to one.
The battle began. At first the Romans seemed to have the edge: the center
of the Carthaginian line proved surprisingly weak
and easily gave ground.
The Romans attacked this center with force, hoping to break through and
indeed pushing forward—when,
to their shock and horror, they looked
behind them and saw the two outer ends of the Carthaginian lines moving
around to encircle
them. They were trapped in a lethal embrace; it was a
slaughter. Cannae would go down in history as Rome’s most devastating
and humiliating defeat.
The war with Hannibal would drag on for years. Carthage never sent him
the reinforcements that might have turned the tide,
and the much larger and
more powerful Roman army was able to recover from its many defeats at
his hands. But Hannibal had
earned a terrifying reputation. Despite their
superior numbers, the Romans became so frightened of Hannibal that they
avoided
battle with him like the plague.
Interpretation
Hannibal must be considered the ancient master of the military art of the
unorthodox. In attacking the Romans on their own
soil, he never intended to
take Rome itself; that would have been impossible. Its walls were high, its
people fierce and united
in their hatred of him, and his forces were small.
Rather, Hannibal’s goal was to wreak havoc on the Italian peninsula and
to
undermine Rome’s alliances with neighboring city-states. Weakened at
home, Rome would have to leave Carthage alone and
put a stop to its
imperial expansion.
To cross the sea without heaven’s knowledge, one had to move openly over
the sea but act as if one did not intend to cross
it. Each military maneuver
has two aspects: the superficial move and the underlying purpose. By
concealing both, one can take the enemy completely by surprise. . . . [If] it
is highly unlikely that the enemy can be kept ignorant of one’s actions, one
can sometimes play tricks right under its
nose.
THE WILES OF WAR: 36 MILITARY STRATEGIES FROM ANCIENT
CHINA, TRANSLATED BY SUN HAICHEN, 1991
To sow this kind of chaos with the tiny army he had been able to bring
over the Alps, Hannibal had to make his every action
unexpected. A
psychologist before his time, he understood that an enemy that is caught by
surprise loses its discipline and
sense of security. (When chaos strikes those
who are particularly rigid and orderly to begin with, such as the people and
armies of Rome, it has double the destructive power.) And surprise can
never be mechanical, repetitive, or routine; that would
be a contradiction in
terms. Surprise takes constant adaptation, creativity, and a mischievous
pleasure in playing the trickster.
So Hannibal always took the route that Rome least expected him to take
—the road through the Alps, for example, considered
impassable to an
army and therefore unguarded. Eventually, inevitably, the Romans caught
on and began to expect him to take
the least obvious route; at that point it
was the obvious that was unexpected, as at Allifae. In battle, Hannibal
would fix
the enemy’s attention on a frontal assault—the ordinary, usual
way armies fought at the time—then unleash the extraordinary
in the form
of elephants or a reserve force hidden to the enemy’s rear. In his raids in the
Roman countryside, he deliberately
protected Fabius’s property, creating
the impression that the two men were in collusion and ultimately forcing
the embarrassed
leader to take action—an unorthodox use of politics and
extramilitary means in war. At Allifae, Hannibal had bundles of kindling
tied to the horns of oxen, then lit them and sent the terrified, bellowing
animals up the slopes to the pass at night— creating
an indecipherable
image to the Roman sentries, literally in the dark, and a terrifying one.
At Cannae, where the Romans were by this time expecting the
unorthodox, Hannibal disguised his stratagem in broad daylight,
lining up
his army like any other army of the period. The Roman force was already
impelled by the violence of the moment and
the desire for revenge; he let
them make quick progress through his deliberately weak center, where they
became crowded together.
Then the swift-moving outer wings of his line
closed in and choked them. On and on he went, each one of Hannibal’s
ingeniously
unorthodox maneuvers flowering out of the other in a constant
alternation between the uncanny and the banal, the hidden and
the obvious.
Adapting Hannibal’s method to your own daily battles will bring you
untold power. Using your knowledge of your enemies’ psychology
and way
of thinking, you must calculate your opening moves to be what they least
expect. The line of least expectation is
the line of least resistance; people
cannot defend themselves against what they cannot foresee. With less
resistance in your
path, the progress you make will inflate their impression
of your power; Hannibal’s small army seemed to the Romans much larger
than it really was. Once they come to expect some extraordinary maneuver
on your part, hit them with the ordinary. Establish
a reputation for the
unconventional and you set your opponents on their heels: knowing to
anticipate the unexpected is not
the same thing as knowing what the
unexpected will be. Before long your opponents will give way to your
reputation alone.
Chaos—where brilliant dreams are born.
THE I CHING, CHINA, CIRCA EIGHTH CENTURY B.C.
2. In 1962, Sonny Liston became the heavyweight boxing champion of the
world by defeating Floyd Patterson. Shortly afterward
he turned up to
watch a young hotshot on the scene, Cassius Clay, take on and beat rather
decisively the veteran Archie Moore.
After the fight, Liston paid a visit to
Clay’s dressing room. He put his arm around the boy’s shoulder— at
twenty, Clay was
ten years younger than Liston—and told him, “Take care,
kid. I’m gonna need you. But I’m gonna have to beat you like I’m your
daddy.” Liston was the biggest, baddest fighter in the world, and to those
who understood the sport, he seemed invincible.
But Liston recognized
Clay as a boxer just crazy enough to want to fight him down the road. It
was best to instill a touch
of fear in him now.
The fear did not take: as Liston had guessed he would, Clay soon began
to clamor for a fight with the champion and to brag
to one and all that he
would beat him in eight rounds. On television and radio shows, he taunted
the older boxer: maybe it
was Liston who was afraid to take on Cassius
Clay. Liston tried to ignore the upstart; “If they ever make the fight,” he
said,
“I’ll be locked up for murder.” He considered Clay too pretty, even
effeminate, to be a heavyweight champion.
Time passed, and Clay’s antics provoked a desire for the fight in the
public: most people wanted to see Liston beat the daylights
out of Clay and
shut him up. Late in 1963 the two men met to sign on for a championship
fight in Miami Beach the following
February. Afterward Clay told
reporters, “I’m not afraid of Liston. He’s an old man. I’ll give him talking
lessons and boxing
lessons. What he needs most is falling-down lessons.”
As the fight grew closer, Clay’s rhetoric became still more insulting
and
shrill.
Of the sportswriters polled on the upcoming fight, most of them predicted
that Clay would not be able to walk on his own after
it was over. Some
worried that he would be permanently injured. “I guess it’s quite hard to tell
Clay not to fight this monster
now,” said the boxer Rocky Marciano, “but
I’m sure he’ll be more receptive after he’s been there with Liston.” What
worried
the experts most of all was Cassius Clay’s unusual fighting style.
He was not the typical heavyweight bruiser: he would dance
in place with
his hands down at his side; he rarely put his full body into his punches,
instead hitting just from the arms;
his head was constantly moving, as if he
wanted to keep his pretty face unscathed; he was reluctant to go inside, to
brawl
and pummel the body—the usual way to wear down a heavyweight.
Instead Clay preferred to dance and shuffle, as if his fights
were ballet, not
boxing. He was too small to be a heavyweight, lacked the requisite killer
instinct—the press critique ran
on.
At the weigh-in on the morning of the bout, everyone was waiting for
Clay’s usual prefight antics. He exceeded their expectations.
When Liston
got off the scales, Clay began to shout at him: “Hey, sucker, you’re a
chump. You’ve been tricked, chump. . .
. You are too ugly. . . . I’m going to
whup you so bad.” Clay jumped and screamed, his whole body shaking, his
eyes popping,
his voice quivering. He seemed possessed. Was he afraid or
downright crazy? For Liston this was quite simply the last straw.
He wanted
to kill Clay and shut the challenger up for good.
As they stood in the ring before the opening bell, Liston tried to stare
down Clay as he had stared down others, giving him
the evil eye. But
unlike other boxers Clay stared back. Bobbing up and down in place, he
repeated, “Now I’ve got you, chump.”
The fight began, and Liston charged
forward at his prey, throwing a long left jab that missed by a mile. He kept
coming, a
look of intense anger on his face—but Clay shuffled back from
each punch, even taunting Liston at one point by lowering his
hands. He
seemed able to anticipate Liston’s every move. And he returned Liston’s
stare: even after the round ended and both
men were in their corners, his
eyes never left his opponent’s.
The second round was more of the same, except that Liston, instead of
looking murderous, began to look frustrated. The pace
was far faster than in
any of his earlier fights, and Clay’s head kept bobbing and orbiting in
disturbing patterns. Liston
would move in to strike his chin, only to miss or
find Clay hitting Liston’s chin instead, with a lightning-quick jab that
made
him wobble on his feet. At the end of the third round, a flurry of punches
came out of nowhere and opened a deep gash
under Liston’s left eye.
Now Clay was the aggressor and Liston was fighting to survive. In the
sixth round, he began taking punches from all angles,
opening more wounds
and making Liston look weak and sad. When the bell for the seventh round
rang, the mighty Liston just
sat on his stool and stared— he refused to get
up. The fight was over. The boxing world was stunned: Was it a fluke? Or
—since
Liston had seemed to fight as if under some spell, his punches
missing, his movements tired and listless—had he just had an
off night?
The world would have to wait some fifteen months to find out, until the two
boxers’ rematch in Lewiston, Maine,
in May 1965.
Consumed with a hunger for revenge, Liston trained like a demon for this
second fight. In the opening round, he went on the
attack, but he seemed
wary. He followed Clay—or rather Muhammad Ali, as he was now known
—around the ring, trying to reach
him with jabs. One of these jabs finally
grazed Ali’s face as he stepped back, but, in a move so fast that few in the
audience
even saw it, Ali countered with a hard right that sent Liston to the
canvas. He lay there for a while, then staggered to his
feet, but too late—he
had been down for more than ten seconds, and the referee called the fight.
Many in the crowd yelled
fix, claiming that no punch had landed. Liston
knew otherwise. It may not have been the most powerful blow, but it caught
him completely by surprise, before he could tense his muscles and prepare
himself. Coming from nowhere, it floored him.
Liston would continue to fight for another five years, but he was never
the same man again.
One who studies ancient tactics and employs the army in accord with their
methods is no different from someone who glues up
the tuning stops and yet
tries to play a zither. I have never heard of anyone being successful. The
acumen of strategists
lies in penetrating the subtle amid unfolding change
and discerning the concordant and contrary. Now whenever mobilizing you
must first employ spies to investigate whether the enemy’s commanding
general is talented or not. If instead of implementing
tactics, he merely
relies on courage to employ the army, you can resort to ancient methods to
conquer him. However, if the
commanding general excels in employing
ancient tactics, you should use tactics that contradict the ancient methods
to defeat
him. 
HSÜ TUNG, CHINA, 976–1018
Interpretation
Even as a child, Muhammad Ali got perverse pleasure out of being
different. He liked the attention it got him, but most of
all he just liked
being himself: odd and independent. When he began to train as a boxer, at
the age of twelve, he was already
refusing to fight in the usual way, flouting
the rules. A boxer usually keeps his gloves up toward his head and upper
body,
ready to parry a blow. Ali liked to keep his hands low, apparently
inviting attack—but he had discovered early on that he
was quicker than
other boxers, and the best way to make his speed work for him was to lure
the opponent’s chin just close
enough for Ali to snap a jab at him that would
cause a lot more pain for being so close and so quick. As Ali developed, he
also made it harder for the other boxer to reach him by working on his legs,
even more than on the power of his punch. Instead
of retreating the way
most fighters did, one foot at a time, Ali kept on his toes, shuffling back and
dancing, in perpetual
motion to his own peculiar rhythm. More than any
other boxer, he was a moving target. Unable to land a punch, the other
boxer
would grow frustrated, and the more frustrated he was, the more he
would reach for Ali, opening up his guard and exposing
himself to the jab
from nowhere that might knock him out. Ali’s style ran counter to
conventional boxing wisdom in almost
every way, yet its unorthodoxy was
exactly what made it so difficult to combat.
Ali’s unconventional tactics in the first Liston fight began well before the
bout. His irritating antics and public taunts—a
form of dirty warfare— were
designed to infuriate the champion, cloud his mind, fill him with a
murderous hatred that would
make him come close enough for Ali to knock
him out. Ali’s behavior at the weigh-in, which seemed genuinely insane,
was later
revealed as pure performance. Its effect was to make Liston
unconsciously defensive, unsure of what this man would do in the
ring. In
the opening round, as in so many of his subsequent fights, Ali lulled Liston
by fighting defensively, an ordinary
tactic when facing a boxer like Liston.
That drew Liston in closer and closer—and now the extraordinary move,
the speedy punch
out of nowhere, had double the force. Unable to reach Ali
with his punches, disconcerted by the dancing, the lowering of the
hands,
the irritating taunting, Liston made mistake after mistake. And Ali feasted
on his opponents’ mistakes.
Understand: as children and young adults, we are taught to conform to
certain codes of behavior and ways of doing things.
We learn that being
different comes with a social price. But there is a greater price to pay for
slavishly conforming: we
lose the power that comes from our individuality,
from a way of doing things that is authentically our own. We fight like
everyone else, which makes us predictable and conventional.
The way to be truly unorthodox is to imitate no one, to fight and operate
according to your own rhythms, adapting strategies
to your idiosyncrasies,
not the other way around. Refusing to follow common patterns will make it
hard for people to guess
what you’ll do next. You are truly an individual.
Your unorthodox approach may infuriate and upset, but emotional people
are
vulnerable people over whom you can easily exert power. If your
peculiarity is authentic enough, it will bring you attention
and respect—the
kind the crowd always has for the unconventional and extraordinary.
The chief characteristic of fashion is to impose and suddenly to accept as a
new rule or norm what was, until a minute before,
an exception or whim,
then to abandon it again after it has become a commonplace, everybody’s
“thing.” Fashion’s task, in
brief, is to maintain a continual process of
standardization: putting a rarity or novelty into general and universal use,
then passing on to another rarity or novelty when the first has
ceased to be
such. . . . Only modern art, because it expresses the avant-garde as its own
extreme or supreme moment, or simply
because it is the child of the
romantic aesthetic of originality and novelty, can consider as the typical—
and perhaps sole—form
of the ugly what we might call ci-devant beauty, the
beauty of the ancien regime, ex-beauty. Classical art, through the method of
imitation and the practice of repetition, tends toward the ideal of renewing,
in the
sense of integration and perfection. But for the modern art in general,
and for avant-garde in particular, the only irremediable
and absolute
aesthetic error is a traditional artistic creation, an art that imitates and
repeats itself. From the anxious
modern longing for what Remy de
Gourmont chose to call, suggestively, “le beau inedit” derives that
sleepless and fevered
experimentation which is one of the most
characteristic manifestations of the avant-garde; its assiduous labor is an
eternal web of Penelope, with the weave of its forms remade every day and
unmade
every night. Perhaps Ezra Pound intended to suggest both the
necessity and the difficulty of such an undertaking when he once defined the
beauty of art as “a brief gasp between one cliché and another.” The
connection between the avant-garde and fashion is therefore evident:
fashion too is a Penelope’s web; fashion too passes
through the phase of
novelty and strangeness, surprise and scandal, before abandoning the new
forms when they become cliché,
kitsch, stereotype. Hence the profound truth
of Baudelaire’s paradox, which gives to genius the task of creating
stereotypes. And from that follows,
by the principle of contradiction
inherent in the obsessive cult of genius in modern culture, that the avant-
garde is condemned
to conquer, through the influence of fashion, that very
popularity it once disdained—and this is the beginning of its end.
In fact,
this is the inevitable, inexorable destiny of each movement: to rise up
against the newly outstripped fashion of an old avant-garde
and to die when
a new fashion, movement, or avant-garde appears.
THE THEORY OF THE AVANT-GARDE, RENATO POGGIOLI, 1968
3. Late in 1862, during the American Civil War, General Ulysses S. Grant
made several efforts to take the Confederate fortress
at Vicksburg. The
fortress was at a critical point in the Mississippi River, the lifeline of the
South. If Grant’s Union army
took Vicksburg, it would gain control of the
river, cutting the South in half. Victory here could be the turning point of
the war. Yet by January 1863 the fortress’s commander, General James
Pemberton, felt confident he had weathered the storm.
Grant had tried to
take the fort from several angles to the north and had failed. It seemed that
he had exhausted all possibilities
and would give up the effort.
The fortress was located at the top of a two-hundred-foot escarpment on
the riverbank, where any boat that tried to pass was
exposed to its heavy
artillery. To its west lay the river and the cliffs. To the north, where Grant
was encamped, it was protected
by virtually impassable swamp. Not far east
lay the town of Jackson, a railroad hub where supplies and reinforcements
could
easily be brought in—and Jackson was firmly in Southern hands,
giving the Confederacy control of the entire corridor, north
and south, on
the river’s eastern bank. Vicksburg seemed secure from all directions, and
the failure of Grant’s attacks only
made Pemberton more comfortable. What
more could the Northern general do? Besides, he was in political hot water
among President
Abraham Lincoln’s enemies, who saw his Vicksburg
campaign as a monumental waste of money and manpower. The
newspapers were
portraying Grant as an incompetent drunk. The pressure
was tremendous for him to give it up and retreat back to Memphis to
the
north.
Grant, however, was a stubborn man. As the winter dragged on, he tried
every kind of maneuver, with nothing working—until,
on the moonless
night of April 16, Confederate scouts reported a Union flotilla of transport
ships and gunboats, lights off,
trying to make a run past the batteries at
Vicksburg. The cannons roared, but somehow the ships got past them with
minimal
damage. The next few weeks saw several more runs down the
river. At the same time, Union forces on the western side of the
river were
reported heading south. Now it was clear: Grant would use the transport
ships he had sneaked past Vicksburg to
cross the Mississippi some thirty
miles downriver. Then he would march on the fortress from the south.
Pemberton called for reinforcements, but in truth he was not overly
concerned. Even if Grant got thousands of men across the
river, what could
he do once there? If he moved north toward Vicksburg, the Confederacy
could send armies from Jackson and
points south to take him from the flank
and rear. Defeat in this corridor would be a disaster, for Grant would have
no line
of retreat. He had committed himself to a foolhardy venture.
Pemberton waited patiently for his next move.
Grant did cross the river south of Vicksburg, and in a few days his army
was moving northeast, heading for the rail line from
Vicksburg to Jackson.
This was his most audacious move so far: if he were successful, he would
cut Vicksburg off from its
lifeline. But Grant’s army, no different from any
other, needed lines of communication and supply. These lines would have
to
connect to a base on the eastern side of the river, which Grant had indeed
established at the town of Grand Gulf. All Pem-berton
had to do was send
forces south from Vicksburg to destroy or even just threaten Grand Gulf,
endangering Grant’s supply lines.
He would be forced to retreat south or
risk being cut off. It was a game of chess that Pemberton could not lose.
And so, as the Northern general maneuvered his armies with speed
toward the rail line between Jackson and Vicksburg, Pemberton
moved on
Grand Gulf. To Pemberton’s utter dismay, Grant ignored him. Indeed, so far
from dealing with the threat to his rear,
he pushed straight on to Jackson,
taking it on May 14. Instead of relying on supply lines to feed his army, he
plundered the
area’s rich farmlands. More, he moved so swiftly and
changed direction so fluidly that Pemberton could not tell which part
of his
army was the front, rear, or flank. Rather than struggle to defend lines of
communication or supply, Grant kept none.
No one had ever seen an army
behave in such a manner, breaking every rule in the military playbook.
A few days later, with Jackson under his control, Grant wheeled his
troops toward Vicksburg. Pemberton rushed his men back
from Grand Gulf
to block the Union general, but it was too late: beaten at the Battle of
Champion Hill, he was forced back
into the fortress, where his army was
quickly besieged by the Union forces. On July 4, Pemberton surrendered
Vicksburg, a
blow the South would never recover from.
Interpretation
We humans are conventional by nature. Once anyone succeeds at something
with a specific strategy or method, it is quickly
adopted by others and
becomes hardened into principle—often to everyone’s detriment when it is
applied indiscriminately. This
habit is a particular problem in war, for war is
such risky business that generals are often tempted to take the road well
traveled. When so much is necessarily unsafe, what has proven safe in the
past has amplified appeal. And thus for centuries
the rules have been that an
army must have lines of communication and supply and, in battle, must
assume a formation with
flanks and a front. Napoleon loosened these
principles, but their hold on military thinkers remained so strong that during
the American Civil War, some forty years after Napoleon’s death, officers
like Pemberton could not imagine an army behaving
according to any other
plan.
I have forced myself to contradict myself in order to avoid conforming to my
own taste.
MARCEL DUCHAMP, 1887–1968
It took great courage for Grant to disobey these conventions and cut
himself loose from any base, living instead off the rich
lands of the
Mississippi Basin. It took great courage for him to move his army without
forming a front. (Even his own generals,
including William Tecumseh
Sherman, thought he had lost his mind.) This strategy was hidden from
Pemberton’s view because
Grant kept up ordinary appearances by
establishing a base at Grand Gulf and forming front and rear to march
toward the rail
line. By the time Pemberton had grasped the extraordinary
nature of Grant’s free-flowing attack, he had been taken by surprise
and the
game was over. To our eyes Grant’s strategy might seem obvious, but it was
completely outside Pemberton’s experience.
To follow convention, to give inordinate weight to what has worked in
the past, is a natural tendency. We often ignore some
simple yet
unconventional idea that in every sense would upset our opponents. It is a
matter sometimes of cutting ourselves
loose from the past and roaming
freely. Going without a security blanket is dangerous and uncomfortable,
but the power to
startle people with the unexpected is more than worth the
risk. This is particularly important when we are on the defensive
or in a
weakened state. Our natural tendency at such times is to be conservative,
which only makes it easier for our enemies
to anticipate our moves and
crush us with their superior strength; we play into their hands. It is when the
tide is against
us that we must forget the books, the precedents, the
conventional wisdom, and risk everything on the untried and unexpected.
4. The Ojibwa tribe of the North American plains contained a warrior
society known as the Windigokan (No-flight Contraries).
Only the bravest
men, who had demonstrated bravery by their utter disregard for danger on
the battlefield, were admitted to
the Windigokan. In fact, because they had
no fear of death, they were considered no longer among the living: they
slept and
ate separately and were not held to the usual codes of behavior. As
creatures who were alive but among the dead, they spoke
and acted
contrarily: they called a young person an old man, and when one of them
told the others to stand still, he meant
charge forward. They were glum in
times of prosperity, happy in the depths of winter. Although there was a
clownish side to
their behavior, the Windigokan could inspire great fear. No
one ever knew what they would do next.
The Windigokan were believed to be inhabited by terrifying spirits called
Thunderers, which appeared in the form of giant
birds. That made them
somehow inhuman. On the battlefield they were disruptive and
unpredictable, and in raiding parties downright
terrifying. In one such raid,
witnessed by an outsider, they gathered first in front of the Ojibwa chief’s
lodge and yelled,
“We are not going to war! We shall not kill the Sioux! We
shall not scalp four of them and let the rest escape! We shall go
in
daytime!” They left camp that night, wearing costumes of rags and scraps,
their bodies plastered with mud and painted with
splotches of weird color,
their faces covered by frightening masks with giant, beaklike noses. They
made their way through
the darkness, stumbling over themselves—it was
hard to see through the masks—until they came upon a large Sioux war
party.
Although outnumbered, they did not flee but danced into the enemy’s
center. The grotesqueness of their dance made them seem
to be possessed
by demons. Some of the Sioux backed away; others drew close, curious and
confused. The leader of the Windigokan
shouted, “Don’t shoot!” The
Ojibwa warriors then pulled out guns hidden under their rags, killed four
Sioux, and scalped them.
Then they danced away, the enemy too terrified
by this apparition to pursue them.
After such an action, the mere appearance of the Windigokan was enough
for the enemy to give them a wide berth and not risk
any kind of encounter.
Interpretation
What made the Windigokan so frightening was the fact that, like the forces
of nature from which they claimed to derive their
powers, they could be
destructive for no apparent reason. Their mounting of a raid was not
governed by need or ordered by
the chief; their appearance bore no relation
to anything known, as if they had rolled on the ground or in trays of paint.
They might wander in the dark until they chanced on an enemy. Their
dancing was like nothing anyone had seen or imagined.
They might
suddenly start to kill and scalp, then stop at an arbitrary number. In a tribal
society governed by the strictest
of codes, these were spirits of random
destruction and irrationality.
The use of the unconventional can startle and give you an advantage, but
it does not often create a sense of terror. What
will bring you ultimate
power in this strategy is to follow the Windigokan and adapt a kind of
randomness that goes beyond
rational processes, as if you were possessed
by a spirit of nature. Do this all the time and you’ll be locked up, but do it
right, dropping hints of the irrational and random at the opportune moment,
and those around you will always have to wonder
what you’ll do next. You
will inspire a respect and fear that will give you great power. An ordinary
appearance spiced by
a touch of divine madness is more shocking and
alarming than an out-and-out crazy person. Remember: your madness, like
Hamlet’s,
must be strategic. Real madness is all too predictable.
A similar vision among the Siouan tribes turns the warrior into a Heyoka,
who also exhibits the clown-like behavior of the
Windigokan, the use of
sacking as a war shirt, and plastering the body with mud. . . . . . .
Psychologically the Heyoka was of immense importance, as were similar
characters among numerous other tribes. During periods of happiness and
plenty he saw only gloom and despair, and could be goaded into providing
hours of harmless
amusement when he gorged himself on buffalo ribs while
complaining there was no food in the camp, or declared he was dirty
and
proceeded to wash in a bath of mud. . . . . . .Yet behind this benign face of
the Heyoka there lurked the ever-present fear that he was possessed by the
spirit of
Iktomi, and was therefore unpredictable and potentially dangerous.
He, after all, was the only person who dared challenge
the super-naturals
even if he was in dread of a common camp dog and would run screaming in
fright if one approached too close.
Thus he made a mockery of the
pretensions of some of the warriors, but at the same time emphasized the
fact that the powers which guided and protected them in battle were of such
strength that only a Heyoka might
oppose them.
WARRIORS: WARFARE AND THE NATIVE AMERICAN INDIAN,
NORMAN BANCROFT HUNT, 1995
5. In April 1917, New York’s Society of Independent Artists prepared for its
first exhibition. This was to be a grand showcase
of modern art, the largest
in the United States to date. The exhibition was open to any artist who had
joined the society
(whose dues were minimal), and the response had been
overwhelming, with over twelve hundred artists contributing over two
thousand pieces.
The society’s board of directors included collectors like Walter Arensberg
and artists like Man Ray and the twenty-nine-year-old
Marcel Duchamp, a
Frenchman then living in New York. It was Duchamp, as head of the
Hanging Committee, who decided to make
the exhibition radically
democratic: he hung the works in alphabetical order, beginning with a letter
drawn from a hat. The
system led to cubist still lifes being hung next to
traditional landscapes, amateur photographs, and the occasional lewd work
by someone apparently insane. Some of the organizers loved this plan,
others were disgusted and quit.
A few days before the exhibition was to open, the society received the
strangest work so far: a urinal mounted on its back,
with the words R.
MUTT 1917 painted in large black letters on its rim. The work was called
Fountain, and it was apparently submitted by a Mr. Mutt, along with the
requisite membership fee. In viewing the piece for the first
time, the painter
George Bellows, a member of the society’s board, claimed it was indecent
and that the society could not
exhibit it. Arensberg disagreed: he said he
could discern an interesting work of art in its shape and presentation. “This
is what the whole exhibit is about,” he told Bellows. “An opportunity to
allow the artist to send in anything he chooses,
for the artist to decide what
is art, not someone else.”
Bellows was unmoved. Hours before the exhibition opened, the board
met and voted by a slim margin not to show the piece. Arensberg
and
Duchamp immediately resigned. In newspaper articles reporting this
controversy, the object was politely referred to as
a “bathroom fixture.” It
piqued a lot of curiosity, and an air of mystery pervaded the entire affair.
At the time of the exhibition, Duchamp was one of a group of artists who
published a magazine called The Blind Man. The magazine’s second issue
included a photograph of Fountain taken by the great photographer Alfred
Stieglitz, who lit the urinal beautifully so that a shadow fell over it like a
kind
of veil, giving it a slightly religious appearance, along with something
vaguely sexual in the arguably vaginal shape of the
urinal when laid on its
back. The Blind Man also ran an editorial, “The Richard Mutt Case,” that
defended the work and criticized its exclusion from the show: “Mr. Mutt’s
fountain is not immoral . . . no more than a bathtub is immoral. . . . Whether
Mr. Mutt with his own hands made the fountain
or not has no importance.
He CHOSE it. He took an ordinary article of life, placed it so that its useful
significance disappeared
under the new title and point of view—created a
new thought for that object.”
It soon became clear that the “creator” of Fountain was none other than
Duchamp. And over the years the work began to assume a life of its own,
even though it mysteriously disappeared
from Stieglitz’s studio and was
never found again. For some reason the photograph and the story of
Fountain inspired endless ideas about art and artmaking. The work itself
had strange powers to shock and compel. In 1953 the Sidney
Janis Gallery,
New York, was authorized by Duchamp to exhibit a replica of Fountain
over its entrance door, a sprig of mistletoe emerging from the bowl. Soon
more replicas were appearing in galleries, retrospective
exhibitions of
Duchamp’s work, and museum collections. Fountain became a fetish
object, something to collect. Replicas of it have sold for over $1 million.
Everyone seems to see what they want to see in the piece. Shown in
museums, it often still outrages the public, some disturbed
by the urinal
itself, others by its presentation as art. Critics have written extended articles
on the urinal, with all kinds
of interpretations: in staging Fountain,
Duchamp was urinating on the art world; he was playing with notions of
gender; the piece is an elaborate verbal pun; on
and on. What some of the
organizers of the 1917 show believed to be merely an indecent object
unworthy of being considered
art has somehow turned into one of the most
controversial, scandalous, and analyzed works of the twentieth century.
Interpretation
Throughout the twentieth century, many artists wielded influence by being
unconventional: the Dadaists, the surrealists, Pablo
Picasso, Salvador Dalí
— the list is long. But of all of them, it is Marcel Duchamp who has
probably had the greatest impact
on modern art, and what he called his
“readymades” are perhaps the most influential of all his works. The ready
mades are
everyday objects—sometimes exactly as they were made (a snow
shovel, a bottle rack), sometimes slightly altered (the urinal
laid on its back,
the mustache and goatee drawn on a reproduction of The Mona Lisa)
—“chosen” by the artist and then placed in a gallery or museum. Duchamp
was giving the ideas of art priority over its images.
His readymades, banal
and uninteresting in themselves, inspired all kinds of associations,
questions, and interpretations;
a urinal may be a seedy commonplace, but to
present it as art was utterly unconventional and stirred up angry, irritating,
delirious ideas.
Understand: in war, politics, and culture, what is unconventional, whether
it is Hannibal’s elephants and oxen or Duchamp’s
urinal, is never material
—or rather it is never just material. The unconventional can only arise out
of the mind: something surprises, is not what we expected. We usually base
our expectations on familiar conventions, clichés, habits of seeing, the
ordinary. Many artists, writers, and other producers
of culture seem to
believe it the height of unconventionality to create images, texts, and other
works that are merely weird,
startling, or shocking in some way. These
works may generate a momentary splash, but they have none of the power
of the unconventional
and extraordinary because they have no context to
rub against; they do not work against our expectations. No more than
strange,
they quickly fade from memory.
When striving to create the extraordinary, always remember: what is
crucial is the mental process, not the image or maneuver
itself. What will
truly shock and linger long in the mind are those works and ideas that grow
out of the soil of the ordinary
and banal, that are unexpected, that make us
question and contest the very nature of the reality we see around us. Most
definitely
in art, the unconventional can only be strategic.
Image:
The Plow. The ground must be prepared. The blades of the plow churn the
earth in constant motion, bringing air into the soil.
The process must go on
every year, or the most pernicious weeds will take over and the clumped
soil will choke off all life.
From the earth, plowed and fertilized, the most
nourishing and wondrous plants can emerge.
Authority: In general, in battle one engages the enemy with the
orthodox and gains victory through the unorthodox. . . . The
unorthodox and the orthodox mutually produce each other, just
like an endless cycle. Who can exhaust them? —Sun-tzu (fourth
century B.C.)
REVERSAL
There is never any value in attacking opponents from a direction or in a
way that they expect, allowing them to stiffen their
resistance—that is,
unless your strategy is suicide.
25
OCCUPY THE MORAL
HIGH GROUND
THE RIGHTEOUS STRATEGY
In a political world, the cause you are fighting for must seem
more just than the enemy’s. Think of this as moral terrain
that
you and the other side are fighting over; by questioning your
enemies’ motives and making them appear evil, you can narrow
their base of support and room to maneuver. Aim at the soft
spots in their public image, exposing any hypocrisies on their
part. Never assume that the justice of your cause is self-evident;
publicize and promote it. When you yourself come under
moral
attack from a clever enemy, do not whine or get angry; fight fire
with fire. If possible, position yourself as the underdog,
the
victim, the martyr. Learn to inflict guilt as a moral weapon.
THE MORAL OFFENSIVE
In 1513 the thirty-seven-year-old Giovanni de’ Medici, son of the illustrious
Florentine Lorenzo de’ Medici, was elected pope
and assumed the name
Leo X. The church that Leo now led was in many ways the dominant
political and economic power in Europe,
and Leo—a lover of poetry,
theater, and painting, like others in his famous family—wanted to make it
also a great patron of
the arts. Earlier popes had begun the building of the
basilica of St. Peter’s in Rome, the preeminent seat of the Catholic
Church,
but had left the structure unfinished. Leo wanted to complete this mighty
project, permanently associating it with
his name, but he would need to
raise a fair amount of capital to be able to pay for the best artists to work on
it.
And so in 1517, Leo launched a campaign to sell indulgences. Then as
now, it was Catholic practice for the faithful to confess
their sins to their
priest, who would enforce their contrition by assigning them a penance, a
kind of worldly punishment.
Today this might simply be a prayer or a
counting of the rosary, but penances were once more severe, including fasts
and pilgrimages—or
financial payments known as indulgences. The
nobility might pay an indulgence in the form of a saintly relic purchased for
their church, a large expense that would translate into the promise of a
reduced time spent in purgatory after death (purgatory
being a kind of
halfway house for those not evil enough for hell, not good enough for
heaven, so forced to wait); the lower
classes might pay a smaller fee to buy
forgiveness for their sins. Indulgences were a major source of church
income.
For this particular campaign, Leo unleashed a squadron of expert
indulgence salesmen across Europe, and the money began to
pour in. As his
chief architect for the completion of St. Peter’s he appointed the great artist
Raphael, who planned to make
the building a splendid work of art, Leo’s
lasting legacy to the world. All was going well, until, in October 1517,
news reached
the pope that a priest named Martin Luther (1483–1546)—
some tiresome German theologian—had tacked to the doors of the castle
church of Wittenberg a tract called The Ninety-five Theses. Like many
important documents of the time, the tract was originally
in Latin, but it had
been translated into German, printed up, and passed out among the public—
and within a few weeks all Germany
seemed to have read it. The Ninety-
five Theses was essentially an attack on the practice of selling indulgences.
It was up
to God, not the church, to forgive sinners, Luther reasoned, and
such forgiveness could not be bought. The tract went on to
say that the
ultimate authority was Scripture: if the pope could cite Scripture to refute
Luther’s arguments, the priest would
gladly recant them.
The pope did not read Luther’s writings—he preferred poetry to
theological discussions. And a single German priest surely
posed no threat
to the use of indulgences to fund worthy projects, let alone to the church
itself. But Luther seemed to be
challenging the church’s authority in a broad
sense, and Leo knew that an unchecked heresy could become the center of a
sect.
Within recent centuries in Europe, the church had had to put down
such dissident sects by the use of force; better to silence
Luther before it
was too late.
[Colonel John] Boyd paid particular attention to the moral dimension and
the effort to attack an adversary morally by showing the disjuncture
between professed beliefs and deeds. The name of the game for a moral
design for grand strategy is to use moral leverage to
amplify one’s spirit
and strength while exposing the flaws of competing adversary systems. In
the process, one should influence
the uncommitted, potential adversaries
and current adversaries so that they are drawn toward one’s philosophy and
are empathetic
toward one’s success.
THE MIND OF WAR: JOHN BOYD AND AMERICAN SECURITY,
GRANT T. HAMMOND, 2001
Leo began relatively gently, asking the respected Catholic theologian
Silvester Mazzolini, usually known as Prieras, to write
an official response
to Luther that he hoped would frighten the priest into submission. Prieras
proclaimed that the pope was
the highest authority in the church, even
higher than Scripture—in fact, that the pope was infallible. He quoted
various theological
texts written over the centuries in support of this claim.
He also attacked Luther personally, calling him a bastard and questioning
his motives: perhaps the German priest was angling for a bishopric? Prieras
concluded with the words, “Whoever says that the
Church of Rome may not
do what it is actually doing in the manner of indulgences is a heretic.” The
warning was clear enough.
Leo had much on his mind during these years, including turmoil in the
Ottoman Empire and a plan to launch a new crusade, but
Luther’s response
to Prieras got his attention right away. Luther wrote a text in which he
mercilessly took apart Prieras’s
writings—the church, he argued, had failed
to answer his charges and to base its arguments on Scripture. Unless its
authority
in granting indulgences and excommunicating heretics was rooted
in the Bible, it was not spiritual in nature but worldly,
political, and that
kind of authority could and should be challenged. Luther published his text
alongside Prieras’s, allowing
readers to compare the two and come to their
own conclusions. His direct quotation of Prieras, his audacious and
mocking tone,
and his use of recently developed printing technology to
spread his message far and wide—all this was quite shocking and new
to
church officials. They were dealing with a clever and dangerous man. It was
now clear to Leo that the war between the church
and Luther was a war to
the death.
As the pope pondered how to get the German priest to Rome and try him
as a heretic, Luther accelerated his campaign, continuing
to publish at an
alarming rate, his tone ever more vitriolic. In An Open Letter to the
Christian Nobility of the German Nation,
he claimed that Rome had used its
spurious authority to bully and cow the German people for centuries,
turning Germany’s kingdoms
into vassal states. The church, he said again,
was a political power, not a spiritual one, and to prop up its worldly rule
it
had resorted to lies, forged documents, whatever means necessary. In On
the Babylonian Captivity of the Church, he railed
against the pope’s lavish
lifestyle, the whoring among the church hierarchy, the blasphemous art Leo
funded. The pope had
gone so far as to have staged an immoral and bawdy
play by Machiavelli, called Man-dragola, within the Vatican itself. Luther
juxtaposed the righteous behavior advocated by the church with the way its
cardinals actually
lived. It was the pope and his entourage, Luther charged,
who were the real heretics, not he; in fact, the pope was the Antichrist.
The central feature of the “exterior maneuver” is to assure for oneself the
maximum freedom of action while at the same time
paralysing the enemy by
a multitude of deterrent checks, somewhat as the Lilliputians tied up
Gulliver. As with all operations
designed to deter, action will of course be
primarily psychological; political, economic, diplomatic and military
measures
will all be combined towards the same end. The procedures
employed to achieve this deterrent effect range from the most subtle to the
most brutal: appeal will be made
to the legal formulae of national and
international law, play will be made with moral and humanitarian
susceptibilities and
there will be attempts to prick the enemy’s conscience
by making him doubtful of the justice of his cause. By these methods,
opposition from some section of the enemy’s internal public opinion will be
roused and at the same time some sector of international
public opinion will
be whipped up; the result will be a real moral coalition and attempts will be
made to co-opt the more
unsophisticated sympathizers by arguments based
upon their own preconceived ideas. This climate of opinion will be
exploited
at the United Nations, for instance, or at other international
gatherings; primarily, however, it will be used as a threat to prevent the
enemy undertaking some particular action. . . . It is a point
worth noting
that, just as in military operations one captures a position on the ground
and thereby denies it to the enemy,
on the psychological plane it is possible
to take over abstract positions and equally deny them to the other side. The
[leaders of the] Soviet Union for instance, . . . have turned into their own
preserve the peace platform, that of the abolition of atomic weapons
(while
themselves continuing to develop them) and that of anti-colonialism while
themselves ruling the only colonial empire
still in existence. . . . It may
therefore be that these ideological positions occupied by the forces of
Marxism may one day
be “conquered” by the West; but this presupposes
that the latter in their indirect strategy have learned the value of thinking
and calculating
instead of merely trying to apply juridical or moral
principles which their enemy can use against them at every turn.
INTRODUCTION TO STRATEGY, ANDRÉ BEAUFRE, 1963
It seemed to Leo that Luther had responded to Prieras’s threat by raising
the temperature. Clearly the threat had been weak;
the pope had been too
lenient. It was time to show real force and end this war. So Leo wrote a
papal bull threatening Luther
with excommunication. He also sent church
officials to Germany to negotiate the priest’s arrest and imprisonment.
These officials,
however, came back with shocking news that altered
everything: in the few short years since the publication of The Ninety-five
Theses, Martin Luther, an unknown German priest, had somehow become a
sensation, a celebrity, a beloved figure throughout
the country. Everywhere
the pope’s officials went, they were heckled, even threatened with stoning.
Shop windows in almost
every German town contained paintings of Luther
with a halo over his head. “Nine-tenths of the Germans shout ‘Long live
Luther,’
” one official reported to Leo, “and the other tenth ‘Death to
Rome.’ ” Luther had somehow aroused the German public’s latent
resentment and hatred of the church. And his reputation was impeccable: he
was a bestselling author, yet he refused the income
from his writings,
clearly practicing what he preached. The more the church attacked him, the
more popular Luther became.
To make a martyr of him now could spark a
revolution.
Nevertheless, in 1521, Leo ordered Luther to appear in the town of
Worms before the Imperial Diet, a gathering of German princes,
nobles, and
clergy organized by the newly elected Holy Roman Emperor, Charles V.
Leo hoped to get the Germans to do his dirty
work, and Charles was
amenable: a political creature, worried by the antiauthoritarian sentiments
that Luther had sparked,
he wanted the dispute over. At the Diet he
demanded that the priest recant his teachings. But Luther, as usual, refused,
and
in dramatic fashion, uttering the memorable line “Here I stand. I cannot
do otherwise. God help me.” The emperor had no choice;
he condemned
Luther as a heretic and ordered him to return to Wittenberg to await his fate.
On the way home, however, Luther
was kidnapped and taken to Warburg
Castle. The kidnapping had actually been planned and executed by his
many supporters among
the aristocracy; he was safe. Living in the castle
under an assumed name, he was able to ride out the storm.
Leo died that year, and within months of his death, Luther’s ideas and the
reforms that he had advocated had spread throughout
Germany like
wildfire. By 1526 a Protestant party was officially recognized in different
parts of Europe. This was the birth
of the Reformation, and with it the vast
worldly power of the Catholic Church, at least as Leo had inherited it, was
irrevocably
broken. That obscure, pedantic Wittenberg priest had somehow
won the war.
Interpretation
Luther’s original intention in his Ninety-five Theses was to discuss a point
of theology: the relationship, or lack of it,
between God’s forgiveness and
papal indulgences. But when he read Prieras’s response to his argument,
something changed in
him. The pope and his men had failed to find
justification for indulgences in the Bible. There was much more they could
not
justify as well, such as the pope’s unlimited power to excommunicate.
Luther came to believe that the church needed drastic
reform.
Reformation, however, would require political power. If Luther simply
railed at the church’s wickedness from the pulpit or
among his fellow
priests, he would get nowhere. The pope and his men had attacked him
personally, questioning his motives;
now Luther in turn would go on the
offensive, fighting fire with fire.
Luther’s strategy was to make the war public, transforming his moral
cause into a political one. He did this by exploiting
the previous century’s
advances in printing technology: his tracts, written in vigorous, angry
language that appealed to the
masses, were widely disseminated. He chose
points of attack that would particularly outrage the German people: the
pope’s
decadent lifestyle, funded through the sale of indulgences; the use of
church power to meddle in German politics; on and on.
Perhaps most
devastating of all, Luther exposed the church’s hypocrisies. Through these
various tactics, he was able to spark
and stoke a moral anger that spread like
fire, forever tainting the public’s vision not just of the pope but of the
church
itself.
Luther knew that Leo would respond to him not with arguments based on
the Bible but with heavy-handed force, which, he also
knew, would only
make his cause shine all the brighter. And so with incendiary language and
arguments that questioned Leo’s
authority, he baited the pope into rash
counterattacks. Luther already led an exemplary life, but he took it further
by refusing
all income from his writings. This widely known move in effect
made his goodness theatrical, a matter for public consumption.
In a few
short years, Luther gained so much support among the masses that the pope
could not fight him without provoking a
revolution. By using morality so
consciously and publicly, he transformed it into a strategy for winning
power. The Reformation
was one of the greatest political victories in
history.
Understand: you cannot win wars without public and political support,
but people will balk at joining your side or cause unless
it seems righteous
and just. And as Luther realized, presenting your cause as just takes strategy
and showmanship. First,
it is wise to pick a fight with an enemy that you
can portray as authoritarian, hypocritical, and power-hungry. Using all
available media, you strike first with a moral offensive against the
opponent’s points of vulnerability. You make your language
strong and
appealing to the masses, and craft it, if you can, to give people the
opportunity to express a hostility they already
feel. You quote your
enemies’ own words back at them to make your attacks seem fair, almost
disinterested. You create a moral
taint that sticks to them like glue. Baiting
them into a heavy-handed counterattack will win you even more public
support.
Instead of trumpeting your own goodness—which would make you
seem smug and arrogant—you show it through the contrast between
their
unreasonable actions and your own crusading deeds. Aim at them the most
withering charge of all—that they are after
power, while you are motivated
by something higher and selfless.
Do not worry about the manipulations you will have to resort to if you are
to win this moral battle. Making a public show
that your cause is more just
than the enemy’s will amply distract people from the means you employ.
How should a regime pursue a counterguerrilla campaign? [Colonel John]
Boyd laid out an array of tools: Undermine the guerrillas’ cause and
destroy their cohesion by demonstrating integrity and competence of
government to represent
and serve the needs of the people rather than
exploit and impoverish them for the benefit of a greedy elite. (If you cannot
realize such a political program, Boyd noted, you might consider changing
sides now to avoid the rush later!) Take political initiative to root out and
visibly punish corruption. Select new leaders with recognized competence
as well as popular appeal. Ensure that they deliver justice, eliminate major
grievances, and connect the government with its grass roots.
THE MIND OF WAR: JOHN BOYD AND AMERICAN SECURITY,
GRANT T. HAMMOND, 2001
There always are concrete human groupings which fight other concrete
human groupings in the name of justice, humanity, order,
or peace. When
being reproached for immorality and cynicism, the spectator of political
phenomena can always recognize in
such reproaches a political weapon
used in actual combat.
—Carl Schmitt (1888–1985)
KEYS TO WARFARE
In almost all cultures, morality—the definition of good and evil—
originated as a way to differentiate one class of people
from another. In
ancient Greece, for example, the word for “good” was first associated with
the nobility, the higher classes
who served the state and proved their
bravery on the battlefield; the bad—the base, self-centered, and cowardly—
were generally
the lower classes. Over time a system of ethics evolved that
served a similar but more sophisticated function: to keep society
orderly by
separating the antisocial and “evil” from the social and “good.” Societies
use ideas about what is and is not moral
to create values that serve them
well. When these values fall behind the times or otherwise cease to fit,
morality slowly
shifts and evolves.
There are individuals and groups, however, who use morality for a much
different purpose—not to maintain social order but
to extract an advantage
in a competitive situation, such as war, politics or business. In their hands
morality becomes a weapon
they wield to attract attention to their cause
while distracting attention from the nastier, less noble actions inevitable
in
any power struggle. They tend to play on the ambivalence we all have about
conflict and power, exploiting our feelings
of guilt for their purposes. For
instance, they may position themselves as victims of injustice, so that
opposing them seems
wicked or insensitive. Or they may make such a show
of moral superiority that we feel ashamed to disagree with them. They
are
masters at occupying the high ground and translating it into some kind of
power or advantage.
Let us call these strategists “moral warriors.” There are generally two
types: unconscious and conscious. Unconscious moral
warriors tend to be
motivated by feelings of weakness. They may not be so good at the
straightforward game of power, so they
function by making other people
feel guilty and morally inferior—an unconscious, reflexive way of level-
ing the playing field.
Despite their apparent fragility, they are dangerous on
an individual level, because they seem so sincere and can have great
power
over people’s emotions. Conscious moral warriors are those who use the
strategy knowingly. They are most dangerous on
a public level, where they
can take the high ground by manipulating the media. Luther was a
conscious moral warrior, but,
being also a genuine believer in the morality
he preached, he used the strategy only to help him in his struggle with the
pope; slipperier moral warriors tend to use it indiscriminately, adapting it to
whatever cause they decide to take on.
It is a world not of angels but of angles, where men speak of moral
principles but act on power principles; a world where
we are always moral
and our enemies always immoral.
RULES FOR RADICALS, SAUL D. ALINSKY, 1909–1972
The way to combat moral warriors in general is indicated by certain
strategies that have evolved in modern warfare itself.
The French officer
and writer André Beaufre has analyzed the use of morality as a military
strategy in the contexts of the
French-Algerian wars of the 1950s and of the
Vietnam wars fought by first France and then the United States. Both the
Algerians
and the North Vietnamese worked hard to frame each of their
respective conflicts as a war of liberation fought by a nation
struggling for
its freedom against an imperialist power. Once this view was diffused in the
media and accepted by many in
the French and American publics, the
insurgents were able to court international support, which in turn served to
isolate
France and the United States in the world community. Appealing
directly to groups within these countries that were latently
or overtly
sympathetic to or at least ambivalent about their cause, they were able to
sap support for the war from within.
At the same time, they cleverly
disguised the many nasty maneuvers to which they themselves resorted to
fight their guerrilla
wars. As a result, in the eyes of the world, they
dominated the moral battlefield, enormously inhibiting France’s and
America’s
freedom of action. Stepping gingerly through a political and
moral minefield, these powers could not fight their wars in a
winnable
manner.
Beaufre calls the strategic use of morality an “exterior maneuver,” for it
lies outside the territory being fought over and
outside battlefield strategy. It
takes place in its own space—its own moral terrain. For Beaufre both
France and the United
States made the mistake of ceding the high ground to
the enemy. Because both countries had rich democratic traditions and
saw
their wars as justified, they assumed that others would perceive these
struggles the same way. They saw no need to fight
for the moral terrain—
and that was a fatal mistake. Nations today must play the public game,
deflecting their enemies’ attempts
to portray them as evil. Without
appearing to whine about what the other side is doing, they must also work
to expose their
enemies’ hypocrisies, taking the war to the moral court
themselves—fighting on apparently moral terms. Cede the moral terrain
to
the other side and you limit your freedom of action: now anything you
might have to do that is manipulative yet necessary
will feed the unjust
image the enemy has publicized, and you will hesitate to take such action.
This has great relevance to all forms of conflict. When your enemies try
to present themselves as more justified than you
are, and therefore more
moral, you must see this move for what it most often is: not a reflection of
morality, of right and
wrong, but a clever strategy, an exterior maneuver.
You can recognize an exterior maneuver in a number of ways. First, the
moral attack often comes out of left field, having nothing to do with what
you imagine the conflict is about. Something you
have done in a completely
different arena is dredged up as a way to drain your support or inject you
with guilt. Second, the
attack is often ad hominem; rational argument is met
with the emotional and personal. Your character, rather than the issue
you
are fighting over, becomes the ground of the debate. Your motives are
questioned and given the darkest turn.
Humanity as such cannot wage war because it has no enemy, at least not on
this planet. The concept of humanity excludes the
concept of the enemy,
because the enemy does not cease to be a human being— and hence there is
no specific differentiation
in that concept. That wars are waged in the name
of humanity is not a contradiction of this simple truth; quite the contrary,
it
has an especially intensive political meaning. When a state fights its
political enemy in the name of humanity, it is not a war for the sake of
humanity, but a war wherein
a particular state seeks to usurp a universal
concept against its military opponent. At the expense of its opponent, it tries
to identify itself with humanity in the same way as one can misuse peace,
justice, progress, and civilization in order to
claim these as one’s own and
to deny the same to the enemy. The concept of humanity is an especially
useful ideological instrument of imperialist expansion, and in its ethical-
humanitarian
form it is a specific vehicle of economic imperialism. Here
one is reminded of a somewhat modified expression of Proudhon’s: whoever
invokes humanity wants to cheat. To confiscate the word humanity, to
invoke and monopolize such a term probably has certain incalculable
effects, such as denying the enemy the quality of being human and
declaring
him to be an outlaw of humanity; and a war can thereby be
driven to the most extreme inhumanity.
THE CONCEPT OF THE POLITICAL, CARL SCHMITT, 1932
Once you realize you are under attack by a moral warrior using the
exterior maneuver, it is vital to keep control of your
emotions. If you
complain or lash out angrily, you just look defensive, as if you had
something to hide. The moral warrior
is being strategic; the only effective
response is to be strategic, too. Even if you know that your cause is just,
you can
never assume that the public sees it the same way. Appearances and
reputation rule in today’s world; letting the enemy frame
these things to its
liking is akin to letting it take the most favorable position on the battlefield.
Once the fight for moral
terrain has begun, you must fight to occupy the
high ground in the same way you would in a shooting war.
Like any form of warfare, moral conflict has both offensive and defensive
possibilities. When you are on the offense, you
are actively working to
destroy the enemy’s reputation. Before and during the American
Revolution, the great propagandist
Samuel Adams took aim at England’s
reputation for being fair-minded, liberal, and civilized. He poked holes in
this moral
image by publicizing England’s exploitation of the colonies’
resources and simultaneous exclusion of their people from democratic
processes. The colonists had had a high opinion of the English, but not after
Adams’s relentless campaign.
To succeed, Adams had to resort to exaggeration, picking out and
emphasizing the cases in which the English were heavy-handed.
His was
not a balanced picture; he ignored the ways in which the English had treated
the colonies rather well. His goal was
not to be fair but to spark a war, and
he knew that the colonists would not fight unless they saw the war as just
and the
British as evil. In working to spoil your enemy’s moral reputation,
do not be subtle. Make your language and distinctions
of good and evil as
strong as possible; speak in terms of black and white. It is hard to get
people to fight for a gray area.
Revealing your opponent’s hypocrisies is perhaps the most lethal
offensive weapon in the moral arsenal: people naturally hate
hypocrites.
This will work, however, only if the hypocrisy runs deep; it has to show up
in their values. Few will care about
some innocuous self-contradictory
comment made or vote taken long ago, but enemies who trumpet certain
values as inherent
to their side yet who do not always adhere to those values
in reality make juicy targets. The Algerian and North Vietnamese
propaganda campaigns were so destructive in part because of the
discrepancy they were able to show between the values of freedom
and
liberty espoused by France and the United States and the actions those
countries were taking to squash national independence
movements. Both
nations seemed hypocritical.
If a fight with your enemies is inevitable, always work to make them start
it. In 1861, President Abraham Lincoln maneuvered
carefully to make the
South shoot first at Fort Sumter, initiating the Civil War. That put Lincoln
on the moral high ground
and won over many ambivalent Northerners to his
side. Similarly, even if you are fighting a war of aggression, your goal to
take from your enemy, find a way to present yourself not as a conqueror but
as a liberator. You are fighting not for land
or money but to free people
suffering under an oppressive regime.
In general, in a conflict that is potentially nasty, in which you are certain
the enemy will resort to almost anything, it
is best that you go on the
offensive with your moral campaign and not wait for their attacks. Poking
holes in the other side’s
reputation is easier than defending your own. The
more you stay on the offensive, the more you can distract the public from
your own deficiencies and faults—and faults are inevitable in war. If you
are physically and militarily weaker than your enemy,
all the more reason to
mount an exterior maneuver. Move the battle to the moral terrain, where
you can hamstring and beat
a stronger foe.
The best defense against moral warriors is to give them no target. Live up
to your good name; practice what you preach, at
least in public; ally
yourself with the most just causes of the day. Make your opponents work so
hard to undermine your reputation
that they seem desperate, and their
attacks blow up in their faces. If you have to do something nasty and not in
harmony with
your stated position or public image, use a cat’s-paw—some
agent to act for you and hide your role in the action. If that
is not possible,
think ahead and plan a moral self-defense. At all costs avoid actions that
carry the taint of hypocrisy.
A stain on your moral reputation can spread like an infection. As you
scramble to repair the damage, you often inadvertently
publicize the doubts
it has opened up, which simply makes things worse. So be prudent: the best
defense against a moral attack
is to have inoculated yourself against it
beforehand, by recognizing where you may be vulnerable and taking
preventive measures.
When Julius Caesar crossed the Rubicon and initiated
the Civil War against Pompey, he was highly vulnerable to the charge
of
trying to usurp the authority of the Roman Senate in order to become a
dictator. He inoculated himself against these charges
by acting mercifully
toward his enemies in Rome, making important reforms, and going to the
extreme in showing his respect
for the Republic. By embracing some of the
principles of his enemies, he kept their attempts at moral infection from
spreading.
Wars are most often fought out of self-interest: a nation goes to war to
protect itself against an invading, or potentially
dangerous, enemy or to
seize a neighbor’s land or resources. Morality is sometimes a component in
the decision—in a holy war
or crusade, for example—but even here self-
interest usually plays a role; morality is often just a cover for the desire for
more territory, more riches, more power. During World War II, the Soviet
Union became a beloved ally of the United States,
playing a key role in the
defeat of Hitler, but after the war it became America’s darkest enemy.
American self-interest, not
the Soviets, had changed.
Successful wickedness hath obtained the name virtue . . . when it is for the
getting of the kingdom.
THOMAS HOBBES, 1588–1679
Wars of self-interest usually end when the winner’s interests are satisfied.
Wars of morality are often longer and bloodier:
if the enemy is seen as evil,
as the infidel, it must be annihilated before the war can end. Wars of
morality also churn up
uncontrollable emotions. Luther’s moral campaign
against Rome generated such hatred that in the subsequent invasion of the
Holy City by the troops of Charles V, in 1527, German soldiers went on a
six-month rampage against the church and its officials,
committing many
atrocities in what came to be known as “the sack of Rome.”
As in war, so in life. When you are involved in a conflict with another
person or group, there is something you are fighting
over, something each
side wants. This could be money, power and position, on and on. Your
interests are at stake, and there
is no need to feel guilty about defending
them. Such conflicts tend not to be too bloody; most people are at least
somewhat
practical and see the point in preventing a war from going on too
long. But those people who fight out of a moral sense can
sometimes be the
most dangerous. They may be hungry for power and are using morality as a
cover; they may be motivated by
some dark and hidden grievance; but in
any case they are after more than self-interest. Even if you beat them, or at
least
defend yourself against them successfully, discretion here may be the
better part of valor. Avoid wars of morality if you
can; they are not worth
the time and dirty feelings they churn up.
Image: Germs. Once they get inside and attack the body, they spread
quickly. Your attempts to destroy them often make them
stronger and
harder to root out. The best defense is prevention. Anticipate the attack and
inoculate yourself against it.
With such organisms you have to fight fire
with fire.
Authority: The pivot of war is nothing but name and
righteousness. Secure a good name for yourself and give the
enemy a bad
name; proclaim your righteousness and reveal the
unrighteousness of the enemy. Then your army can set forth in a
great momentum,
shaking heaven and earth. —Tou Bi Fu Tan, A
Scholar’s Dilettante Remarks on War (sixteenth century A.D.)
REVERSAL
A moral offensive has a built-in danger: if people can tell what you are
doing, your righteous stance may disgust and alienate
them. Unless you are
facing a vicious enemy, it is best to use this strategy with a light touch and
never seem shrill. Moral
battles are for public consumption, and you must
constantly gauge their effect, lowering or raising the heat accordingly.
26
DENY THEM TARGETS
THE STRATEGY OF THE VOID
The feeling of emptiness or void—silence, isolation,
nonengagement with others—is for most people intolerable. As
a human
weakness, that fear offers fertile ground for a powerful
strategy: give your enemies no target to attack, be dangerous
but
elusive and invisible, then watch as they chase you into the
void. This is the essence of guerrilla warfare. Instead of frontal
battles, deliver irritating but damaging side attacks and
pinprick bites. Frustrated at their inability to use their strength
against your vaporous campaign, your opponents will grow
irrational and exhausted. Make your guerrilla war part of a
grand
political cause— a people’s war—that crests in an
irresistible revolution.
THE LURE OF THE VOID
In 1807, Napoleon Bonaparte of France and Czar Alexander I of Russia
signed a treaty of alliance. Now the period’s two great
military powers were
linked. But this treaty was unpopular with the Russian court— among other
things it allowed Napoleon
nearly free rein in Poland, Russia’s traditional
“front yard.” Russian aristocrats worked to influence the czar to repudiate
it. Before too long, Alexander began to take actions that he knew would
displease the French, and by August 1811, Napoleon
had had enough: it
was time to teach Russia a lesson. He began to lay plans for an invasion.
The acquisition of this vast
territory to the east would make him the ruler of
the largest empire in history.
Some of Napoleon’s ministers warned him of the dangers of invading
such a vast country, but the emperor general felt supremely
confident. The
Russian army was undisciplined, and its officers were squabbling among
themselves. Two forces in Lithuania
were positioned to block an invasion
from the west, but intelligence had revealed that they were unprepared.
Napoleon would
march into a central position between these forces and
defeat them in detail. He would ensure victory by mobilizing an army
three
times larger than any he had previously led: 650,000 men would march into
Russia, 450,000 as part of the main attack
force, the rest to secure lines of
communication and supply. With an army this size, he could dominate even
the large spaces
of Russia, overwhelming the feeble enemy not only with
his usual brilliant maneuvers but with superior firepower.
Napoleon may have felt certain of victory, but he was not a reckless man.
As always, he studied the situation from every angle.
He knew, for instance,
that Russian roads were notoriously bad, local food supplies were meager,
the climate tended to extremes
of heat and cold, and the vast distances made
it much harder to encircle the enemy—there was always room to retreat. He
read
up on the failed invasion of Russia by the king of Sweden, Charles
XII, in 1709, and anticipated that the Russians might revert
to a scorched-
earth policy. His army would have to be as self-sufficient as possible (the
distances were too great to have
extended supply lines from Europe), but,
given its size, that would require incredible planning and organization.
To help provide for his army, Napoleon had vast storehouses close to the
borders of Russia filled with wheat and rice. He
knew it would be
impossible to provide fodder for the 150,000 horses of his army, and so,
thinking ahead, he decided they
would have to wait until June for the
invasion, when the grasses of the Russian plains would be rich and green.
At the last
minute, he learned Russia had very few mills to grind grain into
flour, so he added to his growing list the need to bring
materials to build
mills along the way. With the logistical problems addressed and his usual
well-devised strategy in hand,
Napoleon told his ministers that he foresaw
complete victory within three weeks. In the past, these predictions of
Napoleon’s
had been uncannily accurate.
In June 1812, Napoleon’s vast armada of men and supplies crossed into
Russia. Napoleon always planned for the unexpected,
but this time
unmanageable difficulties began to pile up almost immediately: rain, the
bad roads, the intense summer heat
brought the army’s movements to a
crawl. Within days more than 10,000 horses ate rank grass and died.
Supplies were failing
to reach the forward troops fast enough, and they had
to resort to foraging, but the uncooperative Russian peasants along
the
march not only refused to sell their food at any price but burned their hay
rather than let the French have it. More French
horses died when they were
forced to feed off the thatch in the roofs of houses, only to find the houses
collapsing on them.
The two Russian armies in Lithuania retreated too fast
to be caught, and as they went, they burned crops and destroyed all
storehouses of food. Dysentery quickly spread through the French troops;
some nine hundred men died each day.
In his effort to catch and destroy at least a part of his elusive enemy,
Napoleon was compelled to march ever farther east.
At points he came
tantalizingly close to the more northern of the two Russian armies, but his
exhausted men and horses could
not move fast enough to meet or encircle
it, and it easily escaped his traps each time. June bled into July. Now it
became
clear that the Russians would be able to join their two armies at
Smolensk, over 200 miles east of where Napoleon had intended
to fight
them and a mere 280 miles from Moscow. Napoleon had to call a halt and
rethink his plan.
Thousands of French soldiers had succumbed to disease and hunger
without a single battle’s being fought. The army was strung
out along a
500-mile line, parts of which were constantly harassed by small troops of
Cossacks on horseback, sowing terror
with their bloodthirsty raids.
Napoleon could not allow the chase to go on any longer—he would march
his men to Smolensk and
fight the decisive battle there. Smolensk was a
holy city, with great emotional significance to the Russian people. Surely
the Russians would fight to defend it rather than let it be destroyed. He
knew that if he could only meet the Russians in
battle, he would win.
And so the French moved on Smolensk, arriving there in mid-August,
their 450,000-man attack force reduced to 150,000 and worn
down by the
intense heat. Finally, as Napoleon had predicted, the Russians made a stand
here—but only briefly; after several
days of fighting, they retreated yet
again, leaving behind a burned and ruined city with nothing in it to feed on
or plunder.
Napoleon could not understand the Russian people, who seemed
to him suicidal—they would destroy their country rather than
surrender it.
In addition to wasting an ever-increasing proportion of French manpower,
the elusive Russian tactics also contributed to the
mental as well as
physical exhaustion of Napolean’s forces. Tip and run raids by small bands
of Cossacks were continuous and
exercised a baleful influence far in excess
of the military danger they represented. The French army became
increasingly subject
to fits of the jitters. Captain Roeder noted one typical
example in his diary. The Hessian troops were mustering for parade before
the Emperor’s
quarters at Vitebsk on August 17, when “everything was
suddenly thrown into ridiculous uproar because a few Cossacks had been
sighted, who were said to have carried off a forager. The entire garrison
sprang to arms, and when they had ridden out it was discovered that we
were really surrounded by only
a few dozen Cossacks who were dodging
about hither and thither. In this way they will be able to bring the whole
garrison
to hospital in about fourteen days without losing a single man.”
THE CAMPAIGNS OF NAPOLEON, DAVID G. CHANDLER, 1966
Now he had to decide whether to march on Moscow itself. It might have
seemed wise to wait through the winter at Smolensk,
but that would give
the czar time to raise a larger army that would prove too hard for Napoleon
to handle with his own depleted
forces. The French emperor felt certain the
czar would defend Moscow, the very heart and soul of Russia. Once
Moscow fell,
Alexander would have to sue for peace. So Napoleon marched
his haggard troops still farther east.
Now, at last, the Russians turned to face the French in battle, and on
September 7 the two armies clashed near the village
of Borodino, a mere
seventy-five miles from Moscow. Napoleon no longer had enough forces or
cavalry to attempt his usual flanking
maneuver, so he was forced to attack
the enemy head-on. The Russians fought bitterly, harder than any army
Napoleon had ever
faced. Even so, after hours of brutal fighting, the
Russians retreated yet again. The road to Moscow lay open. But the Russian
army was still intact, and Napoleon’s forces had suffered horrific casualties.
Seven days later Napoleon’s army, now reduced to 100,000 men,
straggled into an undefended Moscow. A French marshal wrote
to his wife
that the emperor’s “joy was overflowing. ‘The Russians,’ he thinks, ‘will
sue for peace, and I shall change the
face of the world.’ ” In earlier years,
when he had marched into Vienna and Berlin, he had been met as a
conquering hero,
with dignitaries turning over to him the keys to their
cities. But Moscow was empty: no citizens, no food. A terrible fire
broke
out almost immediately and lasted five days; all of the city’s water pumps
had been removed—an elaborate sabotage to
make Moscow still more
inhospitable.
Napoleon sent letters to the czar, offering generous terms of peace. At
first the Russians seemed willing to negotiate, but
the weeks went by, and it
finally became clear that they were dragging out the talks to buy time to
build up their army—and
to let winter grow closer.
Napoleon could not risk staying in Moscow another day; the Russians
would soon be able to encircle his now meager force. On
October 19 he
marched the remains of his army out of the Russian capital. His goal was to
get to Smolensk as fast as possible.
Now those undisciplined bands of
Cossacks that had harassed him on the road east had formed into larger
divisions—guerrilla
forces of 500 men—and every day they killed off more
and more French soldiers. Marching in constant fear, Napoleon’s men rarely
slept. Thousands succumbed to fatigue and hunger. Napoleon was forced to
lead them past the nightmarish fields of Borodino,
still crowded with
French corpses, many half eaten by wolves. The snow began to fall—the
Russian winter set in. The French
horses died from the cold, and every last
soldier had to trudge through the snow on foot. Barely 40,000 made it to
Smolensk.
The cold was worsening. There was no time to tarry in Smolensk.
Through some deft maneuvering, Napoleon managed to get his
troops
across the Berezina River, allowing them a clear line of retreat to the west.
Then, in early December, hearing of a
failed coup d’état at home in France,
he left his troops behind and headed for Paris. Of the 450,000 men in his
main attack
force, some 25,000 made it back. Few among the rest of the
army survived as well. Napoleon had miraculously escaped to fight
more
wars, but he would never recoup his losses in manpower and horses. Russia
was indeed his grave.
Interpretation
By the time Napoleon invaded Russia, Czar Alexander I had met him a
number of times in previous years and had come to know
him quite well.
The emperor, Alexander saw, was an aggressive man who loved any kind of
fight, even if the odds were stacked
against him. He needed battles as a
chance to put his genius in play. By refusing to meet him in battle,
Alexander could frustrate
him and lure him into a void: vast but empty
lands without food or forage, empty cities with nothing to plunder, empty
negotiations,
empty time in which nothing happened, and finally the dead of
winter. Russia’s harsh climate would make a shambles of Napoleon’s
organizational genius. And as it played out, Alexander’s strategy worked to
perfection. Napoleon’s inability to engage his
enemy got under his skin: a
few more miles east, one solid battle, and he could teach this cowardly foe a
lesson. His emotions—
irritation, anger, confusion—overwhelmed his
ability to strategize. How could he have come to believe, for instance, that
the fall of Moscow would force the czar to surrender? Alexander’s army
was still intact, the French had grown frighteningly
weak, and winter was
coming. Napoleon’s mind had succumbed to the powerful pull of the void
that he had entered, and that
led him far astray.
Alexander’s strategy wreaked havoc on the French soldiers as well, who
were renowned for their superior discipline and fighting
spirit. A soldier
can endure almost anything except the expectation of a battle that never
comes and a tension that is never
relieved. Instead of battle, the French got
endless raids and pinprick attacks that came out of nowhere, a continuous
threat
that gradually built into panic. While thousands of soldiers fell to
disease, many more simply lost the will to fight.
It is human nature to not be able to endure any kind of void. We hate
silence, long stretches of inactivity, loneliness. (Perhaps
this is related to
our fear of that final void, our own death.) We have to fill and occupy
empty space. By giving people nothing
to hit, being as vaporous as
possible, you play upon this human weakness. Infuriated at the absence not
just of a fight but
of any kind of interaction at all, people will tend to chase
madly after you, losing all power of strategic thought. It is
the elusive side,
no matter how weak or small its force, that controls the dynamic.
The bigger the enemy, the better this strategy works: struggling to reach
you, the oversize opponent presents juicy targets
for you to hit. To create
the maximum psychological disturbance, you must make your attacks small
but relentless, keeping
your enemy’s anger and frustration at a constant boil.
Make your void complete: empty negotiations, talks leading nowhere,
time
passing without either victory or defeat. In a world of accelerated pace and
activity, this strategy will have a powerfully
debilitating effect on people’s
nerves. The less they can hit, the harder they will fall.
Such was the system Spain used against us. One hundred and fifty to two
hundred guerrilla bands scattered all over Spain had sworn to kill thirty or
forty Frenchmen
a month each: that made six to eight thousand men a
month for all guerrilla bands together. The order was never to attack
soldiers traveling as a body, unless the guerrillas outnumbered them. But
they fired on all stragglers, attacked small escorts,
and sought to lay hands
on the enemy’s funds, couriers, and especially convoys. As all the
inhabitants acted as spies for
their fellow citizens, the guerrillas knew when
the convoys would leave and how strong their escorts would be, and the
bands
would make sure they were twice the size. They knew the country very
well, and they would attack furiously in the most favorable spot. Success
often crowned the undertaking;
but they always killed a lot of men, and the
goal was achieved. As there are twelve months in the year, we were losing
about eighty thousand men a year, without any pitched battles. The
war in
Spain lasted seven years, so over five hundred men were killed. . . . But that
includes only those killed by the guerrillas. Add the battles of Salamanca,
Talavera, and Vitoria, and several others that our troops lost; the sieges, . .
. the fruitless attack on Cádiz; add too the invasion and evacuation of
Portugal, the fevers and various illnesses that the temperature caused our
soldiers
to suffer, and you will see that we could add a further three
hundred thousand men to that number during those seven years.
. . . . . .
From what has been said, it will be apparent that the prime aim of this sort
of war is to bring about the destruction
of the enemy almost without him
noticing it, and as a drop of water dripping on a stone will eventually dig a
hole in the
stone, patience and perseverance are needed, always following
the same system. In the long run, the enemy will suffer more
from this than
he would from losing pitched battles.
ON PARTISANS AND IRREGULAR FORCES, J.F.A. LE MIÈRE DE
CORVEY, 1823
Most wars are wars of contact, both forces striving to keep in touch. . . .
The Arab war should be a war of detachment: to contain the enemy by the
silent threat of a vast unknown desert, not disclosing
themselves till the
moment of attack. . . . From this theory came to be developed ultimately an
unconscious habit of never
engaging the enemy at all. This chimed with the
numerical plea of never giving the enemy’s soldier a target.
—T. E. Lawrence, The Seven Pillars of Wisdom (1926)
KEYS TO WARFARE
Over the centuries organized war—in all its infinite variations, from
primitive to modern, Asian to Western—has always tended
to follow a
certain logic, which is so universal as almost to seem inherent to the
process. The logic is as follows: A leader
decides to take his country to war
and raises an army for that purpose. That army’s goal is to meet and defeat
the enemy in
a decisive battle that will force a surrender and favorable
peace terms. The strategist guiding the campaign must deal with
a specific
area, the theater of war. This area is most often relatively limited;
maneuvering in vast open spaces complicates
the possibility of bringing the
war to closure. Working within the theater of war, then, the strategist
contrives to bring
his army to the decisive battle in a way that will surprise
the enemy or put it at a disadvantage—it is cornered, or attacked
from both
front and rear, or must fight uphill. To keep his forces strong enough to
deliver a mortal blow, he concentrates
them rather than dispersing them.
Once battle begins, the army will naturally form a flank and rear that it must
protect against
encirclement, as well as lines of communication and supply.
It may take several battles to end the war, as each side works
to dominate
the key positions that will give it control of the theater, but military leaders
must try to end it as quickly
as possible. The longer it drags on, the more
the army’s resources are stretched to a breaking point where the ability to
fight collapses. Soldiers’ morale declines with time as well.
As with any human activity, however, this positive, orderly side generates
a negative, shadow side that contains its own form
of power and reverse
logic. The shadow side is guerrilla warfare. The rudiments of guerrilla
warfare originated thousands
of years ago, when smaller nations found
themselves invaded by more powerful neighbors; to survive, their armies
were forced
to flee the invader, for any direct engagement would have
destroyed them. It soon became clear that the longer they fled and
eluded
battle, the more they ruined the enemy’s strategies and confused it by not
conforming to the usual logic of engagement.
The next step was to take this further: these early guerrilla warriors
learned the value of operating in small, dispersed
bands as opposed to a
concentrated army, keeping in constant motion, never forming a front,
flank, or rear for the other side
to hit. The enemy would want to keep the
war confined to a particular space; better, then, to extend it over as much
territory
as possible, melting into the countryside, forcing the enemy to
disperse itself in the chase, opening itself up to raids and
pinprick attacks.
The enemy would naturally want a quick end to the war, so it was desirable
to drag it out as long as possible,
making time an offensive weapon that
consumed the enemy with friction and sagging morale.
In this way, over thousands of years and through trial and error, the art of
guerrilla warfare developed and was refined into
its present-day form.
Conventional military training and thought revolve around concentrating
for battle, maneuvering within
limited areas, and straining for the quick kill.
Guerrilla warfare’s reversal of this natural order of war makes it impossible
for a conventional army to counter—hence its power. In the shadow land of
reverse warfare, where none of the normal rules
apply, the conventional
army flounders. Done right, guerrilla warfare is virtually unbeatable.
The word “guerrilla”—“small war” in Spanish—was coined in reference
to the Peninsular War of 1808–14, which began when Napoleon
invaded
Spain. Melting into their country’s mountains and inhospitable terrain, the
Spaniards tortured the French, making
it impossible for them to profit from
their superior numbers and weaponry. Napoleon was bedeviled by an
enemy that attacked
without forming a front or rear. The Cossack fighters
who undid him in Russia in 1812 had learned a lot from the Spanish and
perfected the use of guerrilla warfare; their harassment caused far more
damage than anything the rather incompetent Russian
army could inflict.
This strategy has become a more powerful and prevalent tool in modern
warfare for several reasons: First, by exploiting technological
advances in
weaponry and explosives, a small guerrilla band can cause disproportionate
damage. Second, Napoleonic warfare
greatly expanded the size of
conventional armies, making them much more vulnerable to hit-and-run
tactics from light and mobile
forces. Finally, guerrilla war has been adopted
for political purposes, to great effect. By infusing local people with the
fervor of a cause, a revolutionary leader can covertly multiply his strength:
his civilian supporters can sabotage the enemy’s
invading force, provide
valuable intelligence, and turn the countryside into an armed camp.
The power of guerrilla warfare is essentially psychological. In
conventional warfare everything converges on the engagement
of two
armies in battle. That is what all strategy is devised for and what the martial
instinct requires as a kind of release
from tension. By postponing this
natural convergence indefinitely, the guerrilla strategist creates intense
frustration. The
longer this mental corrosion continues, the more
debilitating it gets. Napoleon lost to the Russians because his strategic
bearings were pushed off course; his mind fell before his army did.
Because it is so psychological, guerrilla strategy is infinitely applicable to
social conflict. In life as in war, our thoughts
and emotions naturally
converge on moments of contact and engagement with others. We find
people who are deliberately elusive,
who evade contact, extremely
disconcerting. Whether because we want to grab them and pin them down
or because we are so annoyed
with them that we want to hit them, they pull
us toward them, so that either way the elusive one controls the dynamic.
Some
people take this further, attacking us in ways that are evasive and
unpredictable. These opponents can gain a disturbing power
over our
minds, and the longer they keep it up, the more we are sucked into fighting
on their terms. With advances in technology
that make it easier to maintain
a vaporous presence, and the use of the media as both a screen and a kind of
guerrilla adjunct,
the power and effectiveness of this warfare in political or
social battle are greatly enhanced. In heated political times,
a guerrilla-style
campaign—allied with some cause—can be used to wage a people’s war
against large entities, corporations,
entrenched powers. In this kind of
public combat, everyone loves to fight on the guerrillas’ side because the
participants
are more deeply involved in the struggle, not mere cogs in a
giant machine.
Franklin Roosevelt was a kind of political guerrilla warrior. He liked to
fight evasively and strategized to deny the Republicans
any targets to hit.
He used the media to make himself seem to be everywhere and to be
waging a kind of people’s war against
moneyed interests. In classic
guerrilla manner, he also reorganized the Democratic Party to make it less
centralized, more
mobile and fluid for local battles. For Roosevelt, though,
the guerrilla approach was not so much a coherent strategy as a
style. As
many do, he unconsciously sensed the power in being evasive and fought
that way to great effect—but to make this
strategy really work, it is better to
use it consciously and rationally. Guerrilla strategy may be the reverse side
of war,
but it has its own logic, backward yet rigorous. You cannot just
improvise it anarchically; you must think and plan in a new
way—mobile,
dimensional, and abstract.
The primary consideration should always be whether a guerrilla-style
campaign is appropriate for the circumstances you are
facing. It is
especially effective, for instance, against an opponent who is aggressive yet
clever—a man like Napoleon. These
types cannot stand lack of contact with
an enemy. They live to maneuver, outwit, and outhit. Having nothing to
strike at neutralizes
their cleverness, and their aggression becomes their
downfall. It is interesting to note that this strategy works in love
as well as
in war and that here, too, Napoleon was its victim: it was by a guerrilla-
style seduction—by enticing him to chase
her, giving tantalizing lures but
offering him nothing solid to grasp—that Empress Josephine made him her
slave.
This strategy of the void works wonders on those who are used to
conventional warfare. Lack of contact is so outside their
experience that it
warps any strategic powers they have. Large bureaucracies are often perfect
targets for a guerrilla strategy
for the same reason: they are capable of
responding only in the most orthodox manner. In any event, guerrilla
warriors generally
need an opponent that is large, slow-footed, and with
bullying tendencies.
Once you have determined that a guerrilla war is appropriate, take a look
at the army you will use. A large, conventional
army is never suitable;
fluidity and the ability to strike from many angles are what counts. The
organizational model is the
cell—a relatively small group of men and
women, tight-knit, dedicated, self-motivated, and spread out. These cells
should
penetrate the enemy camp itself. This was how Mao Tse-tung
organized his army in the Chinese Revolution, infiltrating the
Nationalist
side, causing sabotage in the cities, leaving the deceptive and terrifying
impression that his men were everywhere.
When U.S. Air Force Colonel John Boyd joined the Pentagon in the late
1960s to help develop jet fighters, he faced a reactionary
bureaucracy
dominated by commercial interests rather than military ones. The Pentagon
was in dire need of reform, but a traditional
bureaucratic war— an attempt
to convince key staff directly and frontally of the importance of his cause—
would have been a
hopeless venture: Boyd would simply have been isolated
and funneled out of the system. He decided to wage a guerrilla war
instead.
His first and most important step was to organize cells within the Pentagon.
These cells were small and hard to detect,
giving the reactionaries nothing
to hit at when they realized they were in a war. Boyd recruited his guerrillas
from among
those dissatisfied with the status quo, especially the young—
young people are always more receptive to change, and they love
this style
of fighting.
With his cells in place, Boyd had constant intelligence as to what was
going on in the Pentagon and could anticipate the timing
and content of the
attacks on him. He could also use these cells to spread his influence through
word of mouth, infiltrating
ever deeper into the bureaucracy. The main
point is to avoid an organization’s formal channels and tendency for bigness
and
concentration. Opt for mobility instead; make your army light and
clandestine. You can also attach your guerrilla cells to
a regular army, much
as the Russian Cossacks supported the armies of Alexander. This mix of
conventional and unconventional
can prove highly effective.
Once you have organized your cells, you must find a way to lure the
enemy into attacking you. In war this is generally accomplished
by
retreating, then turning to strike at the enemy with constant small raids and
ambushes that cannot be ignored. This was
the classic strategy pursued by
T. E. Lawrence in Arabia during World War I. The nineteenth-century
American financial wizard
Jay Gould, a man who fought many guerrilla
wars in his business life, did something similar in his daily battles. His goal
was to create maximum disorder in the markets— disorder he could
anticipate and exploit. One of his main adversaries was the
highly
aggressive mogul Commodore Cornelius Vanderbilt, whom he engaged in a
war for control of the Erie Railroad in the late
1860s. Gould maintained an
incredibly elusive presence; he would work back channels to gain influence
in, for example, the
New York State legislature, which then enacted laws
undermining Vanderbilt’s interests. The furious Vanderbilt would go after
Gould and counterattack, but Gould would by then have moved on to some
other unexpected target. To deprive Vanderbilt of the
strategic initiative,
Gould upset him, fed his competitive and aggressive instincts, then goaded
him further by giving him
no target to counterattack.
Gould also made skillful use of the media. He might plant a newspaper
article that would suddenly sideswipe Vanderbilt, portraying
him as an evil
monopolist; Vanderbilt would have to respond, but that would only
publicize the charge—and meanwhile Gould’s
name would be nowhere in
evidence. The media in this instance are perfect as both the smoke screen
concealing guerrilla tactics
and the vehicle conveying them. Use the media
to goad your enemies, getting them to disperse their energies in defending
themselves
while you watch, or find a new target to raid and ambush.
Lacking a real battle to deal with, their frustration will mount
and lead them
to costly mistakes.
In conventional warfare the way you supply your army is a critical issue.
In guerrilla warfare, on the other hand, you live
off your enemies as much
as possible, using their resources, their energy, and their power as a kind of
supply base. Mao supplied
his army mostly with captured equipment and
food. Gould actually started out by infiltrating Vanderbilt’s inner circle as
a
financial partner, then using Vanderbilt’s immense resources to fund his
mayhem. Using the enemy’s matériel will help you
to endure the longer
length of any successful guerrilla campaign. In any event, you must plan to
live cheaply, marshaling
what you have for the long run.
In most conflicts time is a danger, bringing Murphy’s Law into play: if
anything can go wrong, it will. If your army is small
and relatively self-
sufficient, though, there is less to go wrong, and meanwhile you are
working to make sure that for the
enemy the passage of time is a nightmare.
Morale is sinking, resources are stretched, and even great planners like
Napoleon
are finding themselves with problems they could never have
foreseen. The effect is exponential: as unexpected problems crop
up, the
enemy starts making mistakes, which lead to more problems—and so it
goes.
Make time an offensive weapon in your strategizing. Design your
maneuvers to keep your enemies just barely going, always thinking
that one
more battle will do the trick. You want them to deteriorate slowly; a sudden
sharp setback, a clear view of the trap
you are laying for them, and they will
pull out before the damage is done. Let them take key positions that give
them the
illusion of success. They will hold on to them tenaciously as your
raids and pinprick attacks grow in number. Then, as they
weaken, increase
the pace of these attacks. Let them hope, let them think it is all still worth it,
until the trap is set.
Then break their illusion.
Just as you are extending time, contrary to convention, you are also
extending space. You want to bring the fight to areas
outside the theater of
war, to include public and international opinion, turning the war into a
political and global issue
and giving the enemy too large a space to defend.
Political support is invaluable to an underdog guerrilla campaign; the longer
the fight is drawn out, the more the enemy seems morally unjustified and
politically isolated. Always try to ally your guerrilla
campaign with a cause
you can defend as just and worthy.
You will win your guerrilla war in one of two ways. The first route is to
increase the level of your attacks as your enemies
deteriorate, then finish
them off, as the Russians finished off Napoleon. The other method is by
turning sheer exhaustion
to your advantage: you just let the enemy give up,
for the fight is no longer worth the aggravation. The latter way is the
better
one. It costs you less in resources, and it looks better: the enemy has fallen
on his own sword. But even a guerrilla
campaign cannot go on forever; at a
certain point time starts to work against you as well. If the ending is taking
too long,
you must go on the offensive and finish the enemy off. In the
Vietnam War, the North Vietnamese drew out the war to a point
where it
was also costing them too much. That was why they launched the Tet
Offensive in 1968—to greatly accelerate the deterioration
of the U.S. war
effort.
The essence of guerrilla warfare is fluidity. The enemy will always try to
adjust to what you are doing, attempting to find
its feet in this unfamiliar
terrain. You must be prepared to change and adopt whatever is contrary to
expectation: this might
mean occasionally fighting in a conventional
manner, concentrating your army to attack here or there, then dispersing
again.
Your goal is maximum disorder and unfamiliarity. Remember: this
war is psychological. It is more on the level of strategy
than anything else
that you give the enemy nothing to hold on to, nothing tangible to counter.
It is the enemies’ minds that
are grasping at air and their minds that fall
first.
Image: The Mosquito. Most animals present a front, back, and sides that
can be attacked or threatened. Mosquitoes, though,
give you nothing but an
irritating whir in the ear, from all sides and angles. You cannot hit them,
you cannot see them. Your
flesh, meanwhile, affords them endless targets.
Enough bites and you realize that the only solution is to stop fighting and
move as far away as possible.
Authority: Anything that has form can be overcome; anything
that takes shape can be countered. This is why sages conceal
their
forms in nothingness and let their minds soar in the void.
—Huainanzi (second century B.C.)
REVERSAL
A guerrilla strategy is extremely hard to counter, which is what makes it so
effective. If you find yourself in a fight with
guerrillas and you use
conventional methods to fight them, you play into their hands; winning
battles and taking territory
means nothing in this kind of war. The only
effective counterstrategy is to reverse the guerrillas’ reversal, neutralizing
their advantages. You must refuse them the freedom of time and space they
need for their mayhem. You must work to isolate
them—physically,
politically, and morally. Above all, you must never respond in a graduated
manner, by stepping up your forces
bit by bit, as the United States did in the
Vietnam War. You need a quick, decisive victory over such an opponent. If
this
seems impossible, it is better to pull out while you can than to sink into
the protracted war the guerrilla fighter is trying
to lure you into.
27
SEEM TO WORK FOR THE
INTERESTS OF OTHERS
WHILE FURTHERING
YOUR OWN
THE ALLIANCE STRATEGY
The best way to advance your cause with the minimum of effort
and bloodshed is to create a constantly shifting network of
alliances, getting others to compensate for your deficiencies, do
your dirty work, fight your wars, spend energy pulling you
forward. The art is in choosing those allies who fit the needs of
the moment and fill the gaps in your power. Give them gifts,
offer them friendship, help them in time of need—all to blind
them to reality and put them under subtle obligation to you.
At
the same time, work to sow dissension in the alliances of others,
weakening your enemies by isolating them. While forming
convenient coalitions, keep yourself free of negative
entanglements.
THE DOG, THE COCK AND THE FOX
A dog and a cockerel, having made friends, were strolling along a road
together. As evening fell, the cockerel flew up into
a tree to sleep there, and
the dog went to sleep at the foot of the tree, which was hollow. According to
his habit, the cockerel crowed just before daybreak. This alerted a fox
nearby, who ran up to the tree and called up to the cockerel: “Do come
down, sir, for I dearly wish to
embrace a creature who could have such a
beautiful voice as you!” The cockerel said: “I shall come down as soon as
you awaken the doorkeeper who is asleep at the foot of the tree.” Then, as
the fox went to look for the “doorkeeper,” the dog pounced briskly on him
and tore him to pieces. This fable teaches us that sensible men, when their
enemies attack them, divert them to someone better able to defend them
than they are themselves.
FABLES, AESOP, SIXTH CENTURY B.C.
THE PERFECT ALLY
In 1467, Charles, the thirty-four-year-old Count of Charlois, received the
news he had secretly longed for: his father, the
Duke of Burgundy— known
as Philip the Good—had died, making Charles the new duke. Father and
son had clashed over the years.
Philip was patient and practical and during
his reign had slowly managed to expand Burgundy’s already impressive
holdings.
Charles was more ambitious and more warlike. The empire he
inherited was immense, including Flanders, Holland, Zeeland, and
Luxembourg to the north of present-day France, and the important duchy of
Burgundy itself in northeastern France. Now, as
duke, Charles had the
power and resources at his command to realize his dreams of conquest into
Germany and beyond.
Two obstacles stood in his path. The first was the independent Swiss
cantons to Burgundy’s east. Charles would have to incorporate
this territory,
by force, before moving into southern Germany. The Swiss were fierce
warriors who would not take kindly to
any invasion. But in the end they
could hardly match the size and power of the duke’s army. The second
obstacle was King Louis
XI of France, Charles’s cousin and arch-rival since
childhood. France then was still a feudal state, composed of several duchies
like Burgundy, whose dukes owed allegiance to the king. But these duchies
were in fact independent powers and could form their
own league if the
king dared provoke them. Burgundy was the most powerful duchy of them
all, and everyone knew Louis dreamed
of swallowing it up and making
France a united power.
Charles, however, felt confident that he could best his older cousin in
both diplomacy and warfare. After all, Louis was weak,
even a little soft in
the head. How else to explain his strange infatuation with the Swiss
cantons? Almost from the beginning
of his reign, Louis had courted them
assiduously, treating them almost like equals to France. There were many
more powerful
states he could have allied himself with to increase France’s
power, but he seemed obsessed with the Swiss. Perhaps he felt
an affinity to
their simple lifestyle; for a king, he himself had rather peasant tastes. Louis
also had an aversion toward
warfare, preferring to buy peace, even at a high
price, than to fund an army.
It was imperative that Charles strike now, before Louis wised up and
started acting more like a king. Charles formed a plan
to realize his
ambitions and then some: he would first move into Alsace, between France
and Germany, and swallow up the weak
kingdoms in the area. Then he
would form an alliance with the great warrior king of England, Edward IV,
whom he would persuade
to land a large army at Calais. His own army
would link up with the English at Reims, in central France, where Edward
would
be crowned the country’s new king. The duke and Edward would
easily dispose of Louis’s weak army. The duke could then march
east,
across the Swiss cantons, while Edward would march south. Together they
would form the dominant power in Europe.
By 1474 everything was in place. Edward had signed on to the plan. The
duke began by marching on the upper Rhine, but just
as he began his
maneuvers, he learned that a large Swiss army had invaded his home
territory of Burgundy. This army was funded
by Louis XI himself. By this
action Louis and the Swiss were clearly sending a warning to the duke that
they would not look
kindly on any future invasion of the cantons, but
Charles had enough forces in Burgundy to drive the Swiss out. He was not
a
man to provoke in such a way; both parties would more than pay for their
rash invasion.
Since in all her decisions, whether by chance or by choice, Rome took all
steps necessary to make herself great, she did not
overlook fraud. She could
not at the start have been more deceitful than she was in the means she
took, as we were saying
just now, to acquire allies, since under this title she
made them all her servants, as was the case with the Latins and other
peoples round about. For she first availed herself of their arms in order to
subjugate neighbouring peoples and to build up
her reputation as a state,
and then, having subdued them, she increased to such an extent that she
could beat anyone. Nor
would the Latins ever have realised that in reality
they were mere slaves, if they had not seen the Samnites twice defeated
and
forced to accept Rome’s terms.
THE DISCOURSES, MACHIAVELLI, 1520
In the summer of 1475, the English army—the largest yet assembled for
an invasion of France—landed at Calais under the personal
leadership of
Edward IV. Charles went to meet Edward to finalize their plans and toast
their imminent conquests. He then quickly
returned to his own troops,
which were marching south through Lorraine in preparation for the great
linkup with the English
forces at Reims.
Suddenly some disturbing news reached Charles in the field: his spies at
the French court reported that Louis had opened up
secret negotiations with
Edward. Apparently Louis had persuaded the English king that Charles was
using him and could not
be trusted. Knowing that England’s finances were
weak, Louis had offered generous terms of peace, amounting to a large
annual
pension paid directly to the king and his court. He had entertained
the English with great feasts of food and ale. And then,
to the duke’s utter
disgust and amazement, Edward fell for it, signed the treaty, and took his
forces home.
The duke had barely had time to get over this bitter news when Louis
suddenly sent him envoys to broker a long-term truce
between France and
Burgundy. This was typical of the king—everything he did was inconsistent
and contradictory. What was he
thinking? Signing the truce would mean the
duke could now confidently march against the Swiss, knowing that France
would not
interfere. Perhaps the king was guided by his great fear of war?
Charles happily approved the truce.
The Swiss were outraged: Louis had been their friend, and now, at the
moment of imminent peril, he had abandoned them. But
the Swiss were
used to fighting on their own; they would simply have to mobilize every
man available.
In the dead of the winter of 1477, the duke, impatient for victory, crossed
the Jura Mountains heading east. The Swiss were
waiting for him near the
town of Grandson. This was the first time the duke had done battle with the
Swiss, and he was caught
off guard by what confronted him. It began with
the alarming bellow of Swiss battle horns, which echoed in the mountains,
creating a frightening din. Next, thousands of Swiss soldiers advanced
down the slope toward the Burgundians. They marched
with perfect
precision, packed tight in phalanxes from which their enormous pikes stuck
out like the spines of a giant hedgehog
in motion. Their flanks and rear
were protected by halberdiers swinging spiked battle-axes. It was a
terrifying sight. The
duke ordered attack after attack with his cavalry to
break up the phalanxes, only to watch them being slaughtered. His artillery
was hard to maneuver in the mountainous terrain. The Swiss fought with
incredible fierceness, and their phalanxes were impenetrable.
Six in the third place means: He finds a comrade. Now he beats the drum,
now he stops. Now he sobs, now he sings. Here the source of a man’s
strength lies not in himself but in his relation to other people. No matter
how close to them
he may be, if his center of gravity depends on them, he is
inevitably tossed to and fro between joy and sorrow. Rejoicing
to high
heaven, then sad unto death—this is the fate of those who depend upon an
inner accord with other persons whom they
love. . . .
THE I CHING, CHINA, CIRCA EIGHTH CENTURY B.C.
A reserve Swiss force, hidden in the woods on the Burgundian right,
suddenly emerged and attacked. The duke’s army fell into
a headlong
retreat; the battle ended in a slaughter, from which the duke, however,
escaped.
A few months later, it was the turn of the Swiss to go on the offensive by
marching into Lorraine. In January 1478 the duke
counterattacked with his
now enfeebled forces; again the Burgundians were routed, and this time the
duke did not escape. His
body was finally identified on the field of battle,
his head cloven in two by a Swiss halberd, his body pierced by pikes.
In the months after Charles’s death, Louis XI swallowed up Burgundy,
eliminating the last great feudal threat to a unified
France. The duke had
unknowingly fallen prey to Louis’s elaborate plan to destroy him without
wasting a single French soldier.
Interpretation
King Louis XI would eventually become known as the Spider King,
infamous for the elaborate webs he would weave to ensnare
his opponents.
His genius was to think far ahead and plot an indirect path to his goals—
and his greatest goal was to transform
France from a feudal state into a
unified great power. Burgundy was his largest obstacle, and one he could
not meet head-on:
his army was weaker than Charles’s, and he did not want
to provoke a civil war. Before he became king, though, Louis had fought
a
short campaign against the Swiss and had seen the brutal efficiency with
which their phalanxes fought and how they used
their mountainous terrain
to perfect advantage. He thought them unbeatable in war. Louis formed a
plan to bait Charles into
invading the cantons, where his military machine
would be destroyed.
The strands of Louis’s web were finely woven. First, he spent years
courting the Swiss, forging bonds that blinded them to
his ulterior purpose.
This alliance also befuddled the arrogant duke, who could not imagine how
Louis planned to make use
of such an ally. The king also knew that by
getting the Swiss to invade Burgundy in 1474, he would make the duke so
enraged
as to lose all patience in his desire for revenge.
When Edward landed at Calais, the king had foreseen the invasion and
was ready for it. Instead of trying to fight off this
mighty opponent, he
worked to coax the English king away from his alliance with Burgundy by
appealing to his self-interest:
without risking a single battle so far from
home, Edward would receive a financial payment too handsome to refuse.
Again thinking
far in advance, Louis knew that when he eventually
swallowed up the wealthy duchy of Burgundy, he would more than recoup
what
he was having to pay Edward. Abandoned by the English, Charles was
isolated, yet still determined to avenge the invasion of
Burgundy. At this
point Louis moved to sign a treaty with the duke, getting rid of the last
possible obstacle in Charles’s
path to the Swiss cantons. This new treaty
would infuriate his Swiss friends, but what did Louis care? Friendship
meant little
to him; the Swiss would fight to defend their land with or
without him. Patient and clear about his goals, Louis used alliances
as a
form of bloodless warfare, crushing his opponents by getting others to do
his work for him.
THE FOX AND THE BILLY-GOAT
A fox, having fallen into a well, was faced with the prospect of being stuck
there. But then a billy-goat came along to that
same well because he was
thirsty and saw the fox. He asked him if the water was good. The fox
decided to put a brave face on it and gave a tremendous speech about how
wonderful the water was down there, so very
excellent. So the billy-goat
climbed down the well, thinking only of his thirst. When he had a good
drink, he asked the fox
what he thought was the best way to get back up
again. The fox said:“Well, I have a very good way to do that. Of course, it
will mean our working together. If you just push your
front feet up against
the wall and hold your horns up in the air as high as you can, I will climb
up on to them, get out,
and then I can pull you up behind me.” The billy-
goat willingly consented to this idea, and the fox briskly clambered up the
legs, the shoulders, and finally the
horns of his companion. He found
himself at the mouth of the well, pulled himself out, and immediately
scampered off. The billy-goat shouted after him, reproaching him for
breaking their agreement of mutual assistance. . . .
FABLES, AESOP, SIXTH CENTURY B.C.
Almost all of us instinctively understand the importance of allies.
Because we operate by feel and emotion more often than
by strategy,
however, we frequently make the worst kinds of alliances. A common
mistake is to think that the more allies we
have, the better; but quality is
more important than quantity. Having numerous allies increases the chances
we will become
entangled in other people’s wars. Going to the other
extreme, we sometimes think a single powerful ally is all we need; but
allies like that tend to get what they can from us and then drop us when our
usefulness is exhausted, just as Louis dropped
the Swiss. It is in any case a
mistake to become dependent on one person. Finally, we sometimes choose
those who seem the
friendliest, who we think will be loyal. Our emotions
lead us astray.
Understand: the perfect allies are those who give you something you
cannot get on your own. They have the resources you lack.
They will do
your dirty work for you or fight your battles. Like the Swiss, they are not
always the most obvious or the most
powerful. Be creative and look for
allies to whom you in turn have something to offer as well, creating a link
of self-interest.
To lose such allies of convenience will not destroy you or
make you feel betrayed. You must think of them as temporary tools.
When
you no longer need such tools, there is no love lost in dumping them.
The forces of a powerful ally can be useful and good to those who have
recourse to them . . . but are perilous to those who
become dependent on
them.
— Niccolò Machiavelli, The Prince (1513)
FALSE ALLIANCES
In November 1966, Murray Bowen, a professor of clinical psychiatry at
Georgetown University and one of the world’s most influential
family
therapists, faced a brewing crisis within his own family back home in
Waverly, Tennessee. Bowen was the oldest of five
children. His family had
operated an important business in Waverly for several generations. The
third-oldest sibling, a brother
nicknamed June, had been running the
business for some time. Continually overworked and feeling under-
appreciated, June was
now asking for a controlling interest in the business.
Their father supported him, their mother did not. Members of the extended
family were taking sides. The situation was tense.
At the same time, a death in the family of June’s wife had made her so
despondent that it was beginning to affect her husband’s
health. A ripple
effect was spreading to the rest of the family, and Bowen’s sister, the
second-youngest and most unstable
sibling, was beginning to display all
kinds of nervous symptoms. Bowen feared most, though, for his father, who
had a weak
heart. As a family therapist, Bowen had studied a phenomenon
he called an “anxiety wave,” in which a peripheral event could
spark
enough emotional turmoil to lead to the death of the family’s oldest or most
vulnerable member. Somehow Bowen had to
find a way to defuse this
anxiety wave in his own family.
Heracles had performed these Ten Labours in the space of eight years and
one month; but Eurystheus, discounting the Second
and the Fifth, set him
two more. The Eleventh Labour was to fetch fruit from the golden apple-
tree, Mother Earth’s wedding
gift to Hera, with which she had been so
delighted that she planted it in her own divine garden. This garden lay on
the slopes of Mount Atlas, where the panting chariot-horses of the Sun
complete their journey, and where
Atlas’s sheep and cattle, one thousand
herds of each, wander over their undisputed pastures. When Hera found,
one day, that Atlas’s daughters, the Hesperides, to whom she had entrusted
the tree, were pilfering the
apples, she set the ever-watchful dragon Ladon
to coil around the tree as its guardian. . . . . . . When at last Heracles came
to the Po, the river-nymphs, daughters of Zeus and Themis, showed him
Nereus asleep. He
seized the hoary old sea-god and, clinging to him despite
his many Protean changes, forced him to prophesy how the golden
apples
could be won. . . . . . . Nereus had advised Heracles not to pluck the apples
himself, but to employ Atlas as his agent, meanwhile relieving
him of his
fantastic burden; therefore, on arriving at the Garden of the Hesperides, he
asked Atlas to do him this favor. Atlas would have undertaken almost any
task for the sake of
an hour’s respite, but he feared Ladon, whom Heracles
thereupon killed with an arrow shot over the garden wall. Heracles now
bent his back to receive the weight of the celestial globe, and Atlas walked
away, returning presently with three apples plucked
by his daughters. He
found the sense of freedom delicious. “I will take these apples to Eurystheus
myself without fail,” he
said, “if you hold up the heavens for a few moments
longer.” Heracles pretended to agree, but, having been warned by Nereus
not to accept any such offer, begged Atlas to support the globe
for only one
moment more, while he put a pad on his head. Atlas, easily deceived, laid
the apples on the ground and resumed
his burden; whereupon Heracles
picked them up and went away with an ironical farewell.
THE GREEK MYTHS, VOL. 2, ROBERT GRAVES, 1955
The problem for Bowen was that he was also going through a kind of
personal and professional crisis at the time. One of his
most influential
theories held that members of a family were healthy to the extent that they
could differentiate themselves
from their siblings and parents, establishing
their own identity, being able to make decisions on their own, while also
being
integrated and actively involved with the rest of the family. He saw
this as a difficult psychic task for anyone. A family
has a kind of group ego
and an interlocking emotional network; it requires a great deal of effort and
practice to establish
autonomy outside this system. Yet doing so, Bowen
believed, though crucial for everyone, was also professionally necessary
for
family therapists, who could not properly help others if they had been
unable to differentiate themselves from their own
families. They would
carry their personal problems into their practice.
And indeed here was Professor Bowen, a man in his early fifties who had
worked for years on his relationship to his family
but who found himself
sucked into the group dynamic, regressing emotionally, unable to think
straight, every time he went
home to Tennessee. That made him feel
profoundly frustrated and depressed. The time had come, he decided, to
attempt a radical
personal experiment on his next visit home.
In late January 1967, June Bowen received a lengthy letter from his brother
Murray. The two men had not written to each other
for some time; in fact,
June resented his brother and had avoided personal encounters with him for
several years, for he felt
that their mother always took Murray’s side, even
though it was June who was running the business. In the letter Murray
passed
on many gossipy stories about June that family members had told
him over the years, always careful to add that Murray had
better not let his
“sensitive” brother hear them. Murray said he was tired of these stories and
of being told how to manage
his brother. It would be better, he thought, to
communicate with June directly. He ended the letter by saying it would be
unnecessary for the two of them to see each other on his next visit home,
since he had told him everything he wanted to say.
He signed the letter
“Your Meddlesome Brother.”
The more June thought about this letter, the angrier it made him. Murray
had deliberately churned up division between June
and his family. Then, a
few days later, the two men’s younger sister also received a letter from
Murray, saying he had heard
about her emotional distress and had written
asking June to take care of her until he got home. He signed the letter “Your
Worried Brother.” This letter was as upsetting to the sister as June’s letter
had been to him: she was tired of people treating
her as if she were sick—
that only made her more anxious than she already was. After another short
interval, Murray sent a
third letter, this time to his mother. He mentioned
the letters he had written to the others. He was trying to defuse the
family
crisis, he said, by attracting all attention to himself. He wrote that he had
wanted to get his brother all roiled
up and that he had the material to push
even more buttons if necessary; but, he warned, it is never wise to share
intelligence
with “the enemy,” so his mother should keep all this to herself.
He signed the letter “Your Strategic Son.” Thinking he had
lost his mind,
his mother burned the letter.
News of these letters passed quickly through the family, stirring up a
hornet’s nest of accusations, concerns, and anxieties.
Everyone was in a
tizzy about them, but June was the center of the storm. He showed Murray’s
letter to his mother, whom it
greatly disturbed. June promised that on
Murray’s imminent visit home he would not only not avoid him but would
confront him
and really let him have it.
Murray arrived in Waverly in early February. On the second night of his
visit, at a dinner at his sister’s, June showed up
with his wife; the brothers’
father and mother were also present. The encounter lasted some two hours,
its main participants
Murray, June, and their mother. It was a bitter family
confrontation. A furious June threatened a lawsuit over Murray’s scurrilous
stories and accused his mother of conspiring with her favorite. When
Murray confirmed that he and his mother were in cahoots,
that it had all
been plotted years ago between him and Mom, she was outraged, denied
knowledge of any plot, and said she would
never tell Murray anything
again. June told his own stories about his professor brother; Murray
responded that they were amusing,
but he knew better ones. The entire
conversation centered on personal issues, and many repressed emotions
came to the surface.
But Murray remained strangely detached. He made
sure he took no sides; no one was quite happy with what he was saying.
The next day Murray showed up at June’s house—and June, for some
reason, was happy to see him. Murray told more gossipy stories,
including
one he had heard about how well June was handling the situation
considering all the stress he was under. June, feeling
quite emotional,
started to open up to his brother about his problems: he was really worried
about their sister, he said,
even thought she might be retarded. Later that
day Murray visited the sister and told her what June had said about her; she
was more than able to take care of herself, she replied, and had had enough
of the family’s intrusive concern. More visits
followed with other family
members. In each case, whenever someone tried to pass along some gossip
or get Murray to take his
or her side in the family constellation, he would
either deflect the attempt with a neutral comment or pass it along to the
person involved.
The day Murray left, everyone came to say good-bye. The sister seemed
more relaxed; so did the father. The family mood was
noticeably altered. A
week later Murray’s mother sent him a letter that ended, “With all its ups
and downs, your last trip
home was the greatest ever.” June now wrote
regularly to his brother. The conflict over controlling the family business
was
defused and settled. Murray’s visits home now became things everyone
looked forward to, even though he was still up to his
old tricks with stories
and such.
Murray later wrote about the incident and incorporated what it had taught
him into his training of other family therapists.
He considered it the turning
point in his career.
I regarded most of the people I met solely and exclusively as creatures I
could use as porters in my voyages of ambition.
Almost all these porters
sooner or later became exhausted. Unable to endure the long marches that I
forced on them at top speed and under all climatic conditions, they died on
the
way. I took others. To attach them to my service, I promised to get them
to where I myself was going to that end-station of
glory which climbers
desperately want to reach. . . .
THE SECRET LIFE OF SALVADOR DALÍ, SALVADOR DALÍ, 1942
Interpretation
Bowen’s strategy in the experiment he conducted on his family was simple:
he would make it impossible for any family member
to make him take sides
or hook him into any kind of alliance. He would also deliberately cause an
emotional tempest to break
up the stale family dynamic, particularly
targeting June and his mother, that dynamic’s centrifugal forces. He would
make
his family see things anew by getting them to talk about personal
matters rather than avoiding them. He would work on himself
to stay calm
and rational, squelching any desire either to please or to run away from
confrontation.
And in the midst of this experiment, Bowen experienced an unbelievable
feeling of lightness—a near euphoria. For the first
time in his life, he felt
connected to the family without being submerged by its emotional pulls. He
could engage, argue,
and banter without either regressing into childish
tantrums or striving to be falsely agreeable. The more he dealt with the
family this way, the easier it became.
Bowen also noticed the effect his behavior had on others. First, they
could not interact in their usual way: June could not
avoid him, his weak
sister could not internalize all the family’s problems, the mother could not
use him as a crutch. Next,
they found themselves drawn to him. His refusal
to take sides made it easier to open up to him. The stale family dynamic of
gossip, secret communications, and irritating alliances was broken up in one
visit. And, according to Bowen, it stayed that
way for the rest of his life.
Bowen transferred his theory and practice beyond the family. He thought
about his workplace, which had a family-like group
ego and emotional
system that infected him every time he was there: people would pull him
into alliances, criticize absent
colleagues, make it impossible for him to stay
detached. Avoiding these conversations solved nothing; it meant he was still
affected by the group dynamic, just unable to deal with it. Listening
patiently to people’s gossip while wishing they would
stop was equally
frustrating. Bowen had to take some kind of action to disrupt the dynamic—
and he found he could apply the
same tactics he had used on his family, to
great success. He purposefully stirred things up while staying free of
alliances.
And, as with his family, he noticed the tremendous power his
autonomy gave him in the group.
THE LION AND THE WILD ASS
A lion and a wild ass entered into an agreement to hunt wild beasts
together. The lion was to use his great strength, while
the ass would make
use of his greater speed. When they had taken a certain number of animals,
the lion divided up the spoils
into three portions. “I’ll take the first share
because I am the king,” he said. “The second share will be mine because I
have been your partner in the chase,” he said. “As for the third share,”
he
said to the wild ass, “this share will be a great source of harm to you,
believe me, if you do not yield it up to me. And,
by the way, get lost!” It is
suitable always to calculate your own strength, and not to enter into an
alliance with people stronger than yourself.
FABLES, AESOP, SIXTH CENTURY B.C.
No one can get far in life without allies. The trick, however, is to
recognize the difference between false allies and real
ones. A false alliance
is created out of an immediate emotional need. It requires that you give up
something essential about
yourself and makes it impossible for you to make
your own decisions. A true alliance is formed out of mutual self-interest,
each side supplying what the other cannot get alone. It does not require you
to fuse your own identity with that of a group
or pay attention to everyone
else’s emotional needs. It allows you autonomy.
Throughout your life you will find yourself in groups that demand fusion,
forcing you into all kinds of false alliances that
command your emotions.
You must find a way to the position of strength and power: able to interact
and engage with people
while staying autonomous. You deftly avoid false
alliances by taking provocative actions that make it impossible for people
to
entrap you. You shake up the dynamic as much as possible, targeting the
troublemakers and controllers. Once you are in
a position where you are
able to stay rational within the group, you can seem to join an alliance
without worrying about your
emotions running away with you. And you
will find that as the person who is simultaneously autonomous and part of
the group,
you will become a center of gravity and attention.
Enter into action under the cover of helping another’s interests, only to
further your own in the end. . . . This is the perfect
stratagem and disguise
for realizing your ambitions, for the advantages you seem to offer only
serve as lures to influence
the other person’s will. They think their interests
are being advanced when in truth they are opening the way for yours.
—Baltasar Gracian (1601–1658)
KEYS TO WARFARE
To survive and advance at all in life, we find ourselves constantly having to
use other people for some purpose, some need—to
obtain resources we
cannot get on our own, to give us protection of some sort, to compensate for
a skill or talent we do not
possess. As a description of human relationships,
however, the word “use” has ugly connotations, and in any case we always
like to make our actions seem nobler than they are. We prefer to think of
these interactions as relationships of assistance,
partnering, friendship.
This is not a matter of mere semantics; it is the source of a dangerous
confusion that will harm you in the end. When you
look for an ally, you
have a need, an interest you want met. This is a practical, strategic matter
upon which your success
depends. If you allow emotions and appearances
to infect the kinds of alliances you form, you are in danger. The art of
forming
alliances depends on your ability to separate friendship from need.
The state of Jin, located in modern Shaanhsi, grew steadily in strength by
swallowing small neighbors. There were two small
states, Hu and Yu, to its
south. In the spring of the nineteenth year under King Hui of Zhou (658
B.C), Duke Xian of Jin sent for a trusted minister, Xun
Xi, and declared his
intention to attack Hu. “We have little chance to gain advantage,” observed
Xun Xi after a pause. “Hu and Yu have always been very close. When we
attack one of them, the other will surely come
to its rescue. Pitched one to
one, neither of them is our match, but the result is far from certain if we
fight both of them
at the same time.” “Surely you are not saying we have no
way to cope with these two small states?” asked the duke. Xun Xi thought
for a while before replying. . . . “I have thought up a plan by which we will
be able to subdue both Hu and Yu. For the first step we should present the
Duke
of Yu with handsome gifts and ask him to lend us a path by which we
can attack Hu.” The duke asked, “But we have just offered gifts to Hu and
signed a friendly agreement with it. We can hardly make Yu believe
that we
want to attack Hu instead of Yu itself.” “That is not so difficult to work
out,” replied Xun Xi.“We may secretly order our men on the border to make
raids on Hu. When the men of Hu come to protest, we may use that as a
pretext to attack them. In this way Yu will be convinced
of our professed
intention.” The duke considered it a good plan. Before long, armed conflicts
broke out along the Jin-Hu border to the south. Thereupon the duke asked,
“Now we have good reason to convince Yu of our intention to attack Hu.
But it will not lend the
path to us unless it receives a good profit in return.
So what shall we use to bribe the Duke of Yu?” Xun Xi replied, “Though the
Duke of Yu is known to be very greedy, he will not be moved unless our gifts
are extremely precious.
So why not offer him fine horses from Qu and jade
from Chuiji?” The duke looked reluctant. “But these are the best treasures I
have. I can hardly bring myself to part with them.” “I am not surprised by
your doubts,” said Xun Xi. “Nevertheless, we are bound to subdue Hu now
that it has lost the shield
of Yu. After Hu is conquered, Yu will not be able to
survive on its own. Therefore, when you send these gifts to the Duke
of Yu,
you are simply consigning the jade to your external mansion and the horses
to your external stable. . . .” . . . When Xun Xi was ushered into the court of
Yu and presented the gifts, the Duke of Yu’s eyes bulged. . . .“The men of Hu
have repeatedly worked up disturbances along our border,” [said Xun Xi].
“To protect our people from the calamity of war, we have exerted the
highest restraint and concluded a peace treaty with
Hu. Nevertheless, the
impudent Hu takes our restraint for weakness and is now creating new
troubles by making invidious charges
against us. Therefore my lord was
compelled to order a punitive expedition against Hu, and he dispatched me
to ask your permission to
let our troops pass through your land. This way,
we can get around our border with Hu, where its defense is strong, and
launch
a surprise attack at its weak point. When we have defeated the men
of Hu, we shall present you with splendid trophies to testify
to our mutual
alliance and friendship.” . . . That summer the Jin troops attacked Hu by
way of Yu. The Duke of Yu led a band of force in person to join in the
expedition.
They defeated the Hu army and captured Xiayang, one of Hu’s
two major cities. The Duke of Yu received his share of the booty
and
believed he had nothing to regret for. . . . . . . In autumn of the twenty-
second year under King Hui of Zhou (655 B.C.), the Duke of Jin again sent
an envoy to borrow
a path from Yu [to Hu], and again the Duke of Yu gave
his consent. . . . . . . In the eighth month, the Duke of Jin led six hundred
war chariots and proceeded by way of Yu to attack Hu. They laid
siege to
Shangyang, the capital of Hu. . . . The city, after holding out for nearly four
months, finally yielded. The Duke
of Hu fled . . . and Hu as a feudal state
was destroyed. On their way back, the Jin troops halted at Yu. The Duke of
Yu came to welcome them, receiving the Duke of Jin into the capital. The
Jin troops seized the chance to storm
into the city. Taken totally off guard,
the Yu army submitted with little resistance, and the Duke of Yu was taken
prisoner. Duke Xian of Jin was extremely pleased when Xun Xi returned to
present him with the horses and jade as well as the captured
Duke of Yu.
THE WILES OF WAR: 36 MILITARY STRATEGIES FROM ANCIENT
CHINA, TRANSLATED BY SUN HAICHEN, 1991
The first step is to understand that all of us constantly use other people to
help and advance ourselves. (Bowen went so far
as to use his own family in
an experiment to solve a professional dilemma.) There is no shame in this,
no need to ever feel
guilty. Nor should we take it personally when we
realize that someone else is using us; using people is a human and social
necessity. Next, with this understanding in mind, you must learn to make
these necessary alliances strategic ones, aligning
yourself with people who
can give you something you cannot get on your own. This requires that you
resist the temptation to
let your decisions about alliances be governed by
your emotions; your emotional needs are what your personal life is for,
and
you must leave them behind when you enter the arena of social battle. The
alliances that will help you most are those
involving mutual self-interest.
Alliances infected with emotions, or with ties of loyalty and friendship, are
nothing but
trouble. Being strategic with your alliances will also keep you
from the bad entanglements that are the undoing of so many.
Think of your alliances as stepping-stones toward a goal. Over the course
of your life, you will be constantly jumping from
one stone to the next to
suit your needs. When this particular river is crossed, you will leave them
behind you. We will call
this constant shifting yet advancing use of allies
the “Alliance Game.”
Many key principles of the Alliance Game originated in ancient China,
which was composed of numerous states in continual flux—now
weak, now
powerful, now weak again. War was a dangerous affair, for a state that
invaded another would stir up a lot of mistrust
among the others and would
often find itself losing ground in the long run. Meanwhile, a state that
remained too loyal to
an ally might find itself pulled into a war from which
it could not break free and would go down in the process. The formation
of
proper alliances was in some ways a more important art than that of warfare
itself, and the statesmen adept at this art
were more powerful than military
leaders.
It was through the Alliance Game that the state of Chin was able to
slowly expand during the dangerous Warring States period
of 403–221 B.C.
Chin would make alliances with distant states and attack nearby ones; the
nearby state that Chin had invaded
could not get help from its outlying
neighbor because that neighbor was now allied to Chin. If Chin faced an
enemy that had
a key ally, it would work first to disrupt the alliance—
sowing dissension, spreading rumors, courting one of the two sides
with
money—until the alliance fell apart. Then Chin would invade first one of
the two states, then the other. Gradually, bit
by bit, it gobbled up
neighboring states until, in the late third century B.C., it was able to unify
China—a remarkable feat.
To play the Alliance Game right, today as in ancient China, you must be
realistic to the core, thinking far ahead and keeping
the situation as fluid as
possible. The ally of today may be the enemy of tomorrow. Sentiment has
no place in the picture.
If you are weak but clever, you can slowly leapfrog
into a position of strength by bouncing from one alliance to another.
The
opposite approach is to make a key alliance and stick with it, valuing trust
and an established relationship. This can
work well in stable times, but in
periods of flux, which are more common, it can prove to be your undoing:
differences in
interest will inevitably emerge, and at the same time it will
become hard to disentangle yourself from a relationship in which
so much
emotion has been invested. It is safer to bank on change, to keep your
options open and your alliances based on need,
not loyalty or shared values.
In the golden age of Hollywood, actresses had almost the least amount of
power of anyone. Careers were short; even a great
star would be replaced in
a few years by someone younger. An actress would stay loyal to her studio,
then watch helplessly
as the roles dried up. The actress who best bucked the
trend was Joan Crawford, who played her own version of the Alliance
Game. In 1933, for instance, she met the screenwriter Joseph Mankiewicz,
then a timid young man just starting out on what
would be an illustrious
career. Crawford recognized his talent immediately and went out of her way
to befriend him, much to
his amazement. He went on to write nine
screenplays for her, greatly lengthening her career.
Crawford would also court cameramen and photographers, who would
then work overtime to light her well and make her look good.
She might do
the same with a producer who controlled a screenplay with a role in it she
coveted. Crawford would often make
alliances with up-and-coming young
talent who valued a relationship with the star. Then she would gracefully
break or forget
the connection when it no longer served her needs. Nor
would she stay loyal to the studio, or indeed to anyone— only to herself.
Her unsentimental approach to her own shifting network of alliances
allowed her to avoid the trap that most actresses found
embedded in the
system.
The key to playing the game is to recognize who can best advance your
interests at that moment. This need not be the most
obviously powerful
person on the scene, the person who seems to be able to do most for you;
alliances that meet specific needs or answer particular deficiencies are often
more useful.
(Grand alliances between two great powers are generally the
least effective.) Because Louis XI had a weak army, the Swiss,
though
minor players on the European scene, were the allies he needed.
Recognizing this years in advance, he cultivated an
alliance that bewildered
his enemies. As an ambitious young congressional assistant in Washington,
Lyndon Johnson realized
he lacked all kinds of powers and talents to get
him to the top. He became a clever user of other people’s talents. Realizing
the importance of information in Congress, he made a point of befriending
and allying himself with those at key positions—whether
high or low—in
the information chain. He was particularly good with older men who
enjoyed the company of a lively young man
and the role of the father figure
giving advice. Slowly, from being a poor kid from Texas with no
connections, Johnson raised
himself to the top, through his network of
convenient alliances.
It is a common strategy in bicycle races not to go out in front but to stay
right behind the leader, a position that cuts
down wind resistance— the
leader faces the wind for you and saves you energy. At the last minute, you
sprint ahead. Letting
other people cut resistance for you and waste their
energy on your behalf is the height of economy and strategy.
One of the best stratagems in the Alliance Game is to begin by seeming
to help another person in some cause or fight, only
for the purpose of
furthering your own interests in the end. It is easy to find such people: they
have a glaring need, a temporary
weakness that you can help them to
overcome. Now you have put them under a subtle obligation to you, to use
as you will—to
dominate their affairs, to divert their energies in the
direction you desire. The emotions you create with your offer of help
will
blind the other person to your ulterior purpose.
The artist Salvador Dalí was particularly adept at this version of the
game: if someone needed to raise money, say, Dalí would
come to the
rescue, organizing a charity ball or other fund-raising event. The person in
need could hardly resist: Dalí was
friendly with royalty, Hollywood stars,
socialites. Soon he would be ordering all kinds of elaborate props for the
ball. For
his infamous “Night in a Surrealist Forest” in Pebble Beach,
California, in 1941, which was intended to benefit starving artists
in war-
torn Europe, Dalí requested a live giraffe, enough pine trees to create a fake
forest, the largest bed in the world,
a wrecked automobile, and thousands of
pairs of shoes from which to serve the first course. In the end the party was
a smash
and got all kinds of publicity, but, as so often with Dalí the bills far
exceeded the receipts; no money was left over for
the starving artists of
Europe. And strangely enough, all of the publicity was focused on Dalí
increasing his fame and winning
him more powerful allies.
A variation on the Alliance Game is to play the mediator, the center
around which other powers pivot. While remaining covertly
autonomous,
you make those around you fight for your allegiance. This was essentially
how Prince Klemens von Metternich, the
Austrian foreign minister during
the Napoleonic era and afterward, restored Austria as Europe’s principal
power. It helped
that Austria is located in the center of Europe and so is
strategically vital to the nations around it. Even during the reign
of
Napoleon, when Austria was at its weakest and Metternich had to cozy up
to the French, he kept his country free of lasting
entanglements. Without
bonding Austria to France by any legal alliance, for example, he tied
Napoleon to him emotionally by
arranging for the emperor to marry into the
Austrian royal family. Keeping all of the great powers—England, France,
Russia—at
arm’s length, he made everything revolve around Austria, even
though Austria itself was no longer a great military power.
The brilliance of this variation is that merely by assuming a central
position, you can wield tremendous power. For instance,
you place yourself
at a critical point in the information chain, giving you access to and control
over it. Or you produce
something other people depend on, giving you
incredible leverage. Or you play the mediator everyone needs to resolve a
dispute.
Whatever it is, you can maintain power in this central position only
by keeping yourself unentangled and courted by all. The
moment you enter
into any kind of lasting alliance, your power is greatly reduced.
A key component of the Alliance Game is the ability to manipulate other
people’s alliances and even destroy them, sowing dissension
among your
opponents so that they fight among themselves. Breaking your enemy’s
alliances is as good as making alliances yourself.
When Hernán Cortés
landed in Mexico in 1519, he faced hundreds of thousands of Aztecs with
500 men. Knowing that many smaller
Mexican tribes resented the powerful
Aztec Empire, he slowly worked to peel them away from their alliances
with the Aztecs.
By filling a tribal leader’s ears with horrible stories about
the Aztec emperor’s plans, for example, he might bait the man
into arresting
the Aztec envoys on their next visit. That of course would infuriate the
emperor, and now the tribe would be
isolated and in danger—and would
appeal to Cortés for protection. On and on Cortés went with this negative
version of the
Alliance Game, until the Aztecs’ allies had become his.
Your focus here is on stirring up mistrust. Make one partner suspicious of
the other, spread rumors, cast doubts on people’s
motives, be friendly to one
ally to make the other jealous. Divide and conquer. In this way you will
create a tide of emotions,
hitting first this side, then that, until the alliance
totters. Now former members of the alliance will feel vulnerable. Through
manipulation or outright invitation, make them turn to you for protection.
In facing an enemy that is composed of allies, no matter how large or
formidable, do not be afraid. As Napoleon said, “Give
me allies to fight.” In
war, allies generally have problems of command and control. The worst
kind of leadership is divided
leadership; compelled to debate and agree
before they act, allied generals usually move like snails. When fighting
large groups
of allies, as he often did, Napoleon always attacked first the
weak link, the junior partner. Collapse here could make the
whole fabric of
the alliance fall apart. He would also seek quick victory in battle, even a
small one, for no force is more
easily discouraged by a defeat than an allied
one.
Finally, you will of course be attacked for playing the Alliance Game.
People will accuse you of being feckless, amoral, treacherous.
Remember:
these charges are strategic themselves. They are part of a moral offensive
(see chapter 25). To advance their own
interests, your accusers are trying to
make you feel guilty or look bad. Do not let them get to you. The only real
danger
is that your reputation will eventually keep people from making
alliances with you—but self-interest rules the world. If you
are seen to have
benefited others in the past and as capable of doing the same in the present,
you will have suitors and playing
partners. Besides, you are loyal and
generous, as long as there is mutual need. And when you show that you
cannot be had by
the false lure of permanent loyalty and friendship, you
will actually find yourself treated with greater respect. Many will
be drawn
to your realistic and spirited way of playing the game.
Image: Stepping-stones. The stream runs fast and dangerous, but you must
cross it at some point. There lie some stones in
a haphazard line that can
get you to the other side. If you linger too long on one stone, you will lose
your balance. If you
go too fast or skip one, you will slip. Instead you must
jump lightly from one stone to the next and never look back.
Authority: Beware of sentimental alliances where the
consciousness of good deeds is the only compensation for noble
sacrifices.
—Otto von Bismarck (1815–1898)
REVERSAL
If you play the Alliance Game, so will those around you, and you cannot
take their behavior personally—you must keep dealing
with them. But there
are some types with whom any kind of alliance will harm you. You can
often recognize them by their overeagerness
to pursue you: they will make
the first move, trying to blind you with alluring offers and glittering
promises. To protect
yourself from being used in a negative way, always
look at the tangible benefits you will gain from this alliance. If the
benefits
seem vague or hard to realize, think twice about joining forces. Look at
your prospective allies’ past for signs
of greed or of using people without
giving in return. Be wary of people who speak well, have apparently
charming personalities,
and talk about friendship, loyalty, and selflessness:
they are most often con artists trying to prey on your emotions. Keep
your
eye on the interests involved on both sides, and never let yourself be
distracted from them.
28
GIVE YOUR RIVALS ENOUGH
ROPE TO HANG THEMSELVES
THE ONE-UPMANSHIP STRATEGY
Life’s greatest dangers often come not from external enemies
but from our supposed colleagues and friends, who pretend to
work for the common cause while scheming to sabotage us and
steal our ideas for their gain. Although, in the court in which
you serve, you must maintain the appearance of consideration
and civility, you also must learn to defeat these people. Work
to
instill doubts and insecurities in such rivals, getting them to
think too much and act defensively. Bait them with subtle
challenges that get under their skin, triggering an overreaction,
an embarrassing mistake. The victory you are after is to
isolate
them. Make them hang themselves through their own self-
destructive tendencies, leaving you blameless and clean.
Life is war against the malice of men.
BALTASAR GRACIAN, 1601–58
THE ART OF ONE-UPMANSHIP
Throughout your life you will find yourself fighting on two fronts. First is
the external front, your inevitable enemies—but
second and less obvious is
the internal front, your colleagues and fellow courtiers, many of whom will
scheme against you,
advancing their own agendas at your expense. The
worst of it is that you will often have to fight on both fronts at once,
facing
your external enemies while also working to secure your internal position,
an exhausting and debilitating struggle.
The solution is not to ignore the internal problem (you will have a short
life if you do so) or to deal with it in a direct
and conventional manner, by
complaining, acting aggressively, or forming defensive alliances.
Understand: internal warfare
is by nature unconventional. Since people
theoretically on the same side usually do their best to maintain the
appearance
of being team players working for the greater good,
complaining about them or attacking them will only make you look bad and
isolate you. Yet at the same time, you can expect these ambitious types to
operate underhandedly and indirectly. Outwardly
charming and cooperative,
behind the scenes they are manipulative and slippery.
You need to adopt a form of warfare suited to these nebulous yet
dangerous battles, which go on every day. And the unconventional
strategy
that works best in this arena is the art of one-upmanship. Developed by
history’s savviest courtiers, it is based
on two simple premises: first, your
rivals harbor the seeds of their own self-destruction, and second, a rival
who is made
to feel defensive and inferior, however subtly, will tend to act
defensive and inferior, to his or her detriment.
People’s personalities often form around weaknesses, character flaws,
uncontrollable emotions. People who feel needy, or who
have a superiority
complex, or are afraid of chaos, or desperately want order, will develop a
personality—a social mask—to
cover up their flaws and make it possible
for them to present a confident, pleasant, responsible exterior to the world.
But
the mask is like the scar tissue covering a wound: touch it the wrong
way and it hurts. Your victims’ responses start to go
out of control: they
complain, act defensive and paranoid, or show the arrogance they try so
hard to conceal. For a moment
the mask falls.
When you sense you have colleagues who may prove dangerous— or are
actually already plotting something—you must try first
to gather
intelligence on them. Look at their everyday behavior, their past actions,
their mistakes, for signs of their flaws.
With this knowledge in hand, you
are ready for the game of one-upmanship.
Begin by doing something to prick the underlying wound, creating doubt,
insecurity, and anxiety. It might be an offhand comment
or something that
your victims sense as a challenge to their position within the court. Your
goal is not to challenge them
blatantly, though, but to get under their skin:
they feel attacked but are not sure why or how. The result is a vague,
troubling
sensation. A feeling of inferiority creeps in.
You then follow up with secondary actions that feed their doubts. Here it
is often best to work covertly, getting other people,
the media, or simple
rumor to do the job for you. The endgame is deceptively simple: having
piled up enough self-doubt to
trigger a reaction, you stand back and let the
target self-destruct. You must avoid the temptation to gloat or get in a last
blow; at this point, in fact, it is best to act friendly, even offering dubious
assistance and advice. Your targets’ reaction
will be an overreaction. Either
they will lash out, make an embarrassing mistake, or reveal themselves too
much, or they will
get overly defensive and try too hard to please others,
working all too obviously to secure their position and validate their
self-
esteem. Defensive people unconsciously push people away.
First of all, a complete definition of the technical term “one-upman-ship”
would fill, and in fact has filled, a rather large
encyclopedia. It can be
defined briefly here as the art of placing a person “one-down.” The term
“one-down” is technically
defined as that psychological state which exists
in an individual who is not “one-up” on another person. . . . To phrase
these
terms in popular language, at the risk of losing scientific rigor, it can
be said that in any human relationship (and indeed
among other mammals)
one person is constantly maneuvering to imply that he is in a “superior
position” to the other person
in the relationship. This “superior position”
does not necessarily mean superior in social status or economic position;
many
servants are masters at putting their employers one-down. Nor does it
imply intellectual superiority as any intellectual knows who has been put
“one-down” by a muscular garbage collector
in a bout of Indian wrestling.
“Superior position” is a relative term which is continually being defined
and redefined by the ongoing relationship. Maneuvers
to achieve superior
position may be crude or they may be infinitely subtle. For example, one is
not usually in a superior
position if he must ask another person for
something. Yet he can ask for it in such a way that he is implying, “This is,
of course, what I deserve.”
THE STRATEGIES OF PSYCHOTHERAPY, JAY HALEY, 1963
At this point your opening action, especially if it is only subtly
aggressive, will be forgotten. What will stand out will
be your rivals’
overreaction and humiliation. Your hands are clean, your reputation
unsullied. Their loss of position is your
gain; you are one up and they are
one down. If you had attacked them directly, your advantage would be
temporary or nonexistent;
in fact, your political position would be
precarious: your pathetic, suffering rivals would win sympathy as your
victims,
and attention would focus on you as responsible for their undoing.
Instead they must fall on their swords. You may have given
them a little
help, but to whatever extent possible in their own eyes, and certainly in
everyone else’s, they must have only
themselves to blame. That will make
their defeat doubly galling and doubly effective.
To win without your victim’s knowing how it happened or just what you
have done is the height of unconventional warfare. Master
the art and not
only will you find it easier to fight on two fronts at the same time, but your
path to the highest ranks will
be that much smoother.
Never interfere with an enemy that is in the process of committing suicide.
—Napoleon Bonaparte (1769–1821)
HISTORICAL EXAMPLES
1. John A. McClernand (1812–1900) watched with envy as his friend and
fellow lawyer Abraham Lincoln rose to the U.S. presidency.
McClernand, a
lawyer and congressman from Springfield, Illinois, had had this ambition
himself. Shortly after the outbreak
of the Civil War, in 1861, he resigned his
congressional seat to accept a commission as a brigadier general in the
Union army.
He had no military experience, but the Union needed
leadership of any kind it could get, and if he proved himself in battle,
he
could rise fast. He saw this army position as his path to the presidency.
McClernand’s first post was at the head of a brigade in Missouri under
the overall command of General Ulysses S. Grant. Within
a year he was
promoted to major general, still under Grant. But this was not good enough
for McClernand, who needed a stage
for his talents, a campaign to run and
get credit for. Grant had talked to him of his plans for capturing the
Confederate
fort at Vicksburg, on the Mississippi River. The fall of
Vicksburg, according to Grant, could be the turning point in the
war.
McClernand decided to sell a march on Vicksburg as his own idea and use it
as a springboard for his career.
In September 1862, on leave in Washington, D.C., McClernand paid a
visit to President Lincoln. He was “tired of furnishing
brains” for Grant’s
army, he said; he had proved himself on the battlefield and was a better
strategist than Grant, who was
a little too fond of his whiskey. McClernand
proposed to go back to Illinois, where he was well known and could recruit
a
large army. Then he would follow the Mississippi River south to
Vicksburg and capture the fort.
Vicksburg was technically in Grant’s department, but Lincoln was not
sure the general could lead the audacious attack necessary.
He took
McClernand to see Secretary of War Edwin Stanton, another former lawyer,
who commiserated with his two visitors on
the difficulties of dealing with
military brass. Stanton listened to and liked McClernand’s plan. That
October the onetime
congressman left Washington with confidential orders,
giving him approval for his march on Vicksburg. The orders were a little
vague, and Grant was not informed of them, but McClernand would make
the best of them.
McClernand quickly recruited more soldiers than he had promised
Lincoln he would. He sent his recruits to Memphis, Tennessee,
where he
would soon join them to march on Vicksburg. But when he arrived in
Memphis, in late December 1862, the thousands
of men he had recruited
were not there. A telegram from Grant—dated ten days earlier and waiting
for him in Memphis—informed
him that the general was planning to attack
Vicksburg. If McClernand arrived in time, he would lead the attack; if not,
his
men would be led by General William Tecumseh Sherman.
McClernand was livid. The situation had clearly been orchestrated to
make it impossible for him to arrive in time to lead
his own recruits; Grant
must have figured out his plan. The general’s polite telegram covering his
bases made the whole affair
doubly infuriating. Well, McClernand would
show him: he would hurry downriver, catch up with Sherman, take over the
campaign,
and humiliate Grant by winning the credit and honor for
capturing Vicksburg.
McClernand did catch up with Sherman, on January 2, 1863, and
immediately assumed command of the army. He made an effort to
be
charming to Sherman, who, he learned, had been planning to raid
Confederate outposts around Vicksburg to soften up the
approach to the
fort. The idea was heaven-sent for McClernand: he would take over these
raids, win battles without Grant’s
name over his, earn himself some
publicity, and make his command of the Vicksburg campaign a fait
accompli. He followed Sherman’s
plan to the letter, and the campaign was a
success.
At this triumphant point, out of the blue, McClernand received a telegram
from Grant: he was to halt operations and wait for
a meeting with the
general. It was time for McClernand to play his trump card, the president;
he wrote Lincoln requesting
more explicit orders, and specifically an
independent command, but he got no reply. And now vague doubts began to
trouble
McClernand’s peace of mind. Sherman and other officers seemed
cool; somehow he had rubbed them the wrong way. Perhaps they
were
conspiring with Grant to get rid of him. Grant soon appeared on the scene
with detailed plans for a campaign against
Vicksburg under his own
direction. McClernand would lead a corps, which, however, was stationed
at the faraway outpost of
Helena, Arkansas. Grant made a point of treating
him politely, but everything together added up to a humiliating setback.
How to be one up— how to make the other man feel that something has
gone wrong, however slightly. The Lifeman is never caddish himself, but
how simply and certainly, often, he can make the other man feel a cad, and
over prolonged periods.
THE COMPLETE UPMANSHIP, STEPHEN POTTER, 1950
Now McClernand exploded, writing letter after letter to Lincoln and
Stanton to remind them of their earlier rapport and of
the support they had
once given him, and complaining bitterly about Grant. After days of fuming
and writing, McClernand finally
received a response from Lincoln—and, to
his shock and dismay, the president had somehow turned against him. There
had been
too many family quarrels among his generals, wrote Lincoln; for
the sake of the Union cause, McClernand should subordinate
himself to
Grant.
McClernand was crushed. He could not figure out what he had done or
how it had all gone wrong. Bitter and frustrated, he continued
to serve
under Grant but questioned his boss’s abilities to anyone who would listen,
including journalists. In June 1863,
after enough negative articles had been
printed, Grant finally fired him. McClernand’s military career was over, and
with
it his dreams of personal glory.
Interpretation
From the moment he met John McClernand, General Grant knew he had a
troublemaker on his hands. McClernand was the type of
man who thought
only of his own career—who would steal other people’s ideas and plot
behind their backs for the sake of personal
glory. But Grant would have to
be careful: McClernand was popular with the public, a charmer. So when
Grant figured out on
his own that McClernand was trying to beat him to
Vicksburg, he did not confront him or complain. Instead he took action.
Knowing that McClernand had an oversensitive ego, Grant recognized
that it would be relatively easy to push the man’s buttons.
By taking over
his subordinate’s recruits (technically in his department anyway) while
apparently covering his bases in the
telegram, he forced McClernand into a
rash response that seemed like insubordination to other military men and
made it clear
how far he was using the war for personal purposes. Once
McClernand had rushed to take his troops back from Sherman, Grant
stood
aside. He knew that a man like this— vain and obnoxious—would irritate
the hell out of his brother officers; they would
inevitably complain about
him to Grant, who, as a responsible officer, would have to pass the
complaints upward, apparently
without personal feelings in play. Treating
McClernand politely while indirectly checkmating him, Grant finally got
him to
overreact in the worst possible way, with his letters to Lincoln and
Stanton. Grant knew that Lincoln was tired of squabbling
within the Union
high command. While Grant could be seen working quietly to perfect his
plans for taking Vicksburg, McClernand
was acting petty and throwing
tantrums. The difference between the two men was all too clear. With this
battle won, Grant
repeated it, letting McClernand hang himself with his
unwise complaints to the press.
There are other ways to fray nerves. During the Gulf War, President Bush
kept pronouncing the name of the Iraqi leader as
“SAD-am,” which loosely
means “shoeshine boy.” On Capitol Hill, the ritual mispronunciation of a
member’s name is a time-tested way
to rattle opponents or haze newcomers.
Lyndon Johnson was a master of the practice. When Johnson was Senate
majority leader,
writes J. McIver Weatherford, he applied it with junior
members who voted the wrong way: “While slapping the young chap on the
back and telling him he understood, Johnson would break his name into
shreds as a metaphorical
statement of what would happen if the disloyalty
persisted.”
THE ART OF POLITICAL WARFARE, JOHN PITNEY, JR., 2000
You will often come across McClernands in your daily battles— people
who are outwardly charming but treacherous behind the
scenes. It does no
good to confront them directly; they are proficient at the political game. But
a subtle one-up campaign
can work wonders.
Your goal is to get these rivals to put their ambition and selfishness on
display. The way to do this is to pique their latent
but powerful insecurities
—make them worry that people do not like them, that their position is
unstable, that their path to
the top is not clear. Perhaps, like Grant, you can
take action that thwarts their plans in some way while hiding your own
beneath a veneer of politeness. You are making them feel defensive and
disrespected. All the dark, ugly emotions they strive
so hard to hide will
boil up to the surface; they will tend to lash out, overplaying their hand.
Work to make them grow emotional
and lose their habitual cool. The more
they reveal of themselves, the more they will alienate other people, and
isolation
will be their doom.
2. The Académie Française, founded by Cardinal Richelieu in 1635, is a
highly select body of France’s forty most learned scholars,
whose task it is
to oversee the purity of the French language. It was customary in the early
years of the academy that when
a seat became empty, potential members
would petition to fill it, but on the occasion of a vacant seat in 1694, King
Louis
XIV decided to go against protocol and nominated the bishop of
Noyon. Louis’s nomination certainly made sense. The bishop
was a learned
man, well respected, an excellent orator, and a fine writer.
The bishop, however, had another quality as well: an incredible sense of
self-importance. Louis was amused by this failing,
but most in the court
found it downright insufferable: the bishop had a way of making almost
everyone feel inferior, in piety,
erudition, family pedigree— whatever they
had.
Because of his rank, for instance, the bishop was accorded the rare
privilege of being able to have his coach drive up to
the front door of the
royal residence, while most others had to get out and walk from the
entrance doors of the driveway.
One time the archbishop of Paris was
walking along the driveway when the bishop of Noyon passed. From his
carriage the bishop
waved and signaled for the archbishop to approach him.
The archbishop expected him to alight and accompany him to the palace
on
foot. Instead Noyon had the carriage slow down and continued his drive to
the front door, leading the archbishop through
the window by the arm, as if
he were a dog on a leash, meanwhile chatting away superciliously. Then,
once the bishop did get
out of the carriage and the two men started up the
grand staircase, Noyon dropped the archbishop as if he were nobody.
Almost
everyone in the court had a story like this one to tell, and they all
nursed secret grudges against the bishop.
WHEN TO GIVE ADVICE
In my own view (but compare Motherwell) there is only one correct time
when the gamesman can give advice: and that is when
the gamesman has
achieved a useful though not necessarily a winning lead. Say three up and
nine to play at golf, or, in billiards, sixty-five to his opponent’s thirty. Most
of the accepted methods are effective. E.g. in billiards, the old phrase
serves. It runs like this: Gamesman: Look . . . may I say something?
Layman: What? Gamesman: Take it easy. Layman: What do you mean?
Gamesman: I mean— you know how to make the strokes, but you’re
stretching yourself on the rack all the time. Look. Walk up to the ball. Look
at the line. And make your stroke. Comfortable. Easy. It’s as simple as that.
In other words, the advice must be vague, to make certain it is not helpful.
But, in general, if properly managed, the mere giving of advice is sufficient
to place
the gamesman in a practically invincible position.
THE COMPLETE UPMANSHIP, STEPHEN POTTER, 1950
With Louis’s approval, however, it was impossible to not vote Noyon into
the academy. The king further insisted that his courtiers
attend the
inauguration of the bishop, since this was his first nominee to the illustrious
institution. At the inauguration,
customarily, the nominee would deliver a
speech, which would be answered by the academy’s director—who at the
time was a bold
and witty man called the abbé de Caumartin. The abbé
could not stand the bishop but particularly disliked his florid style
of
writing. De Caumartin conceived the idea of subtly mocking Noyon: he
would compose his response in perfect imitation of
the bishop, full of
elaborate metaphors and gushing praise for the newest academician. To
make sure he could not get into
trouble for this, he would show his speech
to the bishop beforehand. Noyon was delighted, read the text with great
interest,
and even went so far as to supplement it with more effusive words
of praise and high-flying rhetoric.
On the day of the inauguration, the hall of the academy was packed with
the most eminent members of French society. (None
dared incur the king’s
displeasure by not attending.) The bishop appeared before them,
monstrously pleased to command this
prestigious audience. The speech he
delivered had a flowery pomposity exceeding any he had given previously;
it was tiresome
in the extreme. Then came the abbé’s response. It started
slowly, and many listeners began to squirm. But then it gradually
took off,
as everyone realized that it was an elaborate yet subtle parody of the
bishop’s style. De Caumartin’s bold satire
captivated everyone, and when it
was over, the audience applauded, loudly and gratefully. But the bishop—
intoxicated by the
event and the attention— thought that the applause was
genuine and that in applauding the abbé’s praise of him, the audience
was
really applauding him. He left with his vanity inflated beyond all
proportion.
Soon Noyon was talking about the event to one and all, boring everyone
to tears. Finally he had the misfortune to brag about
it to the archbishop of
Paris, who had never gotten over the carriage incident. The archbishop
could not resist: he told Noyon
that the abbé’s speech was a joke on him
and that everyone in the court was laughing at the bishop’s expense. Noyon
could
not believe this, so he visited his friend and confessor Père La Chaise,
who confirmed that it was true.
Now the bishop’s former delight turned to the most bitter rage. He
complained to the king and asked him to punish the abbé.
The king tried to
defuse the problem, but he valued peace and quiet, and Noyon’s almost
insane anger got on his nerves. Finally
the bishop, wounded to the core, left
the court and returned to his diocese, where he remained for a long time,
humiliated
and humbled.
THE LION, THE WOLF AND THE FOX
A very old lion lay ill in his cave. All of the animals came to pay their
respects to their king except for the fox. The wolf, sensing an opportunity,
accused the fox in front of the lion: “The fox has no respect for you or your
rule. That’s why he hasn’t even come to visit you.” Just as the wolf was
saying this, the fox arrived, and he overheard these words. Then the lion
roared in rage at him, but the fox managed to say in his own defence: “And
who, of all those who have gathered
here, has rendered Your Majesty as
much service as I have done? For I have traveled far and wide asking
physicians for a remedy
for your illness, and I have found one.” The lion
demanded to know at once what cure he had found, and the fox said: “It is
necessary for you to flay a wolf alive,
and then take his skin and wrap it
around you while it is still warm.” The wolf was ordered to be taken away
immediately and flayed alive. As he was carried off, the fox turned to him
with a smile
and said: “You should have spoken well of me to His Majesty
rather than ill.”
FABLES, AESOP, SIXTH CENTURY B.C.
Interpretation
The bishop of Noyon was not a harmless man. His conceit had made him
think his power had no limits. He was grossly unaware
of the offense he
had given to so many people, but no one could confront him or bring his
behavior to his attention. The abbé
hit upon the only real way to bring such
a man down. Had his parody been too obvious, it would not have been very
entertaining,
and the bishop, its poor victim, would have won sympathy. By
making it devilishly subtle, and making the bishop complicit
in it as well,
de Caumartin both entertained the court (always important) and let Noyon
dig his own grave with his reaction—from
the heights of vanity to the
depths of humiliation and rage. Suddenly aware of how people saw him, the
bishop lost his balance,
even alienating the king, who had once found his
vanity amusing. Finally he had to absent himself from court, to many
people’s
relief.
The worst colleagues and comrades are often the ones with inflated egos,
who think everything they do is right and worthy
of praise. Subtle mockery
and disguised parody are brilliant ways of one-upping these types. You
seem to be complimenting
them, your style or ideas even imitating theirs,
but the praise has a sting in its tail: Are you imitating them to poke fun
at
them? Does your praise hide criticism? These questions get under their
skin, making them vaguely insecure about themselves.
Maybe you think
they have faults—and maybe that opinion is widely shared. You have
disturbed their high sense of self, and
they will tend to respond by
overreacting and overplaying their hand. This strategy works particularly
well on those who fancy
themselves powerful intellectuals and who are
impossible to best in any kind of argument. By quoting their words and
ideas
back at them in slightly grotesque form, you neutralize their verbal
strengths and leave them self-doubting and insecure.
3. Toward the middle of the sixteenth century, a young samurai, whose
name history has left behind, developed a novel way of
fighting: he could
wield two swords with equal dexterity in his right and left hands at the same
time. This technique was
formidable, and he was eager to use it to make a
name for himself, so he decided to challenge the most famous swordsman
of
his time, Tsukahara Bokuden, to a duel. Bokuden was now middle-aged
and in semiretirement. He answered the young man’s challenge
with a
letter: a samurai who could use a sword in his left hand with the same
effectiveness as his right had an unfair advantage.
The young swordsman
could not understand what he meant. “If you think my using a sword with
my left is unfair,” he wrote back,
“renounce the match.” Instead Bokuden
sent off ten more letters, each repeating in slightly different words the
charge about
the left hand. Each letter only made the challenger more
annoyed. Finally, however, Bokuden agreed to fight.
[Christy] Mathewson in his later years recounted a knockdown incident
from the first game of the 1911 World Series, which he won for
the Giants,
defeating the Philadelphia Athletics 2 to 1. Charles Albert “Chief” Bender
started for the Athletics, and Bender was throwing harder that day than
Mathew-son had ever seen him throw. Twice Bender
drilled Fred
Snodgrass, the Giants’ young center fielder. When Snodgrass came to bat
for the third time—in a “pinch”—Bender
smiled at him. “Look out, Fred-
die,” he said, “you don’t get hit this time.” Then he threw a fast ball at
Snodgrass’ head.
Snodgrass ducked. Ball one. “If you can’t throw better
than that,” Snodgrass shouted, “I won’t need to get a hit.” Bender
continued to smile. (“He had perfect teeth,” Mathewson remembered.) Then
he threw a fast-ball strike that overpowered
Snodgrass. “You missed that a
mile,” Bender said, grinning again. Snodgrass set his jaw in anger and
began overswinging. “Grinning chronically,” in Mathewson’s
phrase,
Bender struck out Snodgrass with a curve that broke down into the dirt.
Snodgrass was not afraid of Chief Bender’s
pitches. He was a solid hitter
who finished with a lifetime average of .275. What happened, Mathewson
said, was that a combiination, the knockdown pitches, the sarcastic banter,
the condescending grin, distracted Snodgrass. Then, having struck out his
man, Bender pushed the needle deeper and twisted it. “You ain’t a batter,
Freddie. You’re a backstop. You can never get anywhere without being hit!”
Although beaten that day, Chief Bender won two other games. The Athletics
won the World Series, 4 games to 2. Across six games,
the rattled Fred
Snod-grass, a .294 hitter all season, batted .105. But as Mathewson
interpreted the episode, he was a victim
of gamesmanship, obviously and
distinctly quite different from being terrorized. “Chief took Fred’s mind
right out of the
game,” Mathewson said.
THE HEAD GAME, ROGER KAHN, 2001
The young samurai was used to fighting on instinct and with great speed,
but as the duel began, he could not stop thinking
about his left hand and
Bokuden’s fear of it. With his left hand—he found himself calculating—he
would stab here, slash there.
His left hand could not fail; it seemed
possessed of its own power. . . . Then, suddenly, out of nowhere, Bokuden’s
sword
cut deeply across the challenger’s right arm. The duel was over. The
young samurai recovered physically, but his mind was forever unhinged: he
could not fight by instinct
anymore. He thought too much, and he soon gave
up the sword.
In 1605, Genzaemon, head of the renowned Yoshioka family of Kyoto
swordsmen, received the strangest challenge of his life.
An unknown
twenty-one-year-old samurai named Miyamoto Musashi, dressed like a
beggar in dirty, ragged clothes, challenged
him to a duel so haughtily that
Musashi must have thought himself the more famous swordsman.
Genzaemon did not feel he had
to pay attention to this youth; a man as
illustrious as he could not go through life accepting challenges from every
bumpkin
who crossed his path. Yet something about Musashi’s arrogance
got under his skin. Genzaemon would enjoy teaching this youth
a lesson.
The duel was set for five o’clock the following morning in a suburban field.
Genzaemon arrived at the appointed time, accompanied by his students.
Musashi was not there. Minutes turned into an hour.
The young man had
probably gotten cold feet and skipped town. Genzaemon sent a student to
look for the young samurai at the
inn where he was staying. The student
soon returned: Musashi, he reported, had been asleep when he arrived and,
when awakened,
had rather impertinently ordered him to send Genzaemon
his regards and say he would be there shortly. Genzaemon was furious
and
began to pace the field. And Musashi still took his time. It was two more
hours before he appeared in the distance, sauntering
toward them across the
field. He was wearing, too, a scarlet headband, not the traditional white
headband that Genzae-mon
wore.
Genzaemon shouted angrily at Musashi and charged forward, impatient
to have done with this irritating boor. But Musashi, looking
almost bored,
parried one blow after another. Each man was able to slash at the other’s
forehead, but where Genzaemon’s white
headband turned red with blood,
Musashi’s stayed the same color. Finally, frustrated and confused,
Genzaemon charged forward
yet again—right into Mushashi’s sword,
which struck his head and knocked him to the ground unconscious.
Genzaemon would later
recover, but he was so humiliated by his defeat that
he left the world of swordsmanship and entered the priesthood, where
he
would spend his remaining years.
Interpretation
For a samurai, losing a duel could mean death or public humiliation.
Swordsmen sought out any advantage—physical dexterity,
a superior
sword, the perfect technique—to avoid that fate. But the greatest samurais,
the Bokudens and Musashis, sought their
advantage in being able to subtly
push the opponent off his game, messing with his mind. They might try to
make him self-conscious,
a little too aware of his technique and style—a
deadly trap for anyone who must react in the moment. They might trick him
into focusing on the wrong thing—the left hand, the scarlet headband.
Particularly with conventional-minded opponents, they
might show up late,
sparking a frustration that would upset their timing and concentration. In all
of these cases, a change
in the enemy’s focus or mood would lead to a
mistake. To try to repair this mistake in the heat of the moment would lead
to
another, until the one-upped fighter might literally walk into the other
man’s sword.
Understand: what will yield the greatest effects in the game of one-
upmanship is a subtle disturbance in your opponents’ mood
and mind-set.
Be too direct—make an insulting comment, an obvious threat—and you
wake them to the danger you represent, stir
their competitive juices, bring
out the best in them. Instead you want to bring out the worst. A subtle
comment that makes
them self-conscious and gets under their skin will turn
them inward, get them lost in the labyrinth of their own thoughts.
A
seemingly innocent action that stirs an emotion like frustration, anger, or
impatience will equally cloud their vision.
In both cases they will tend to
misfire and start making mistakes.
This works particularly well against rivals who must perform in some
way—deliver a speech, say, or present a project: the
fixating thought or bad
emotion you create in them makes them lose touch with the moment and
messes up their timing. Do this
right, too, and no one will be aware of your
involvement in the bad performance, not even the rival you have one-
upped.
4. In January 1988, Senator Robert Dole of Kansas could smell victory in
his quest to become president of the United States.
His main opponent for
the Republican nomination was George H. W. Bush, the incumbent vice
president in the administration
of Ronald Reagan. In the Iowa caucuses, the
first test in the primary season, Bush had been lackluster and had finished a
distant third, behind Dole and televangelist Pat Robertson. Dole’s
aggressive campaigning had won him much attention—he had
the
momentum and was clearly the front-runner.
To Dole, however, there was one blemish to his great victory in Iowa. Lee
Atwater, Bush’s thirty-six-year-old campaign strategist,
had spread to the
media a story that questioned the integrity of the senator’s wife, former
secretary of transportation Elizabeth
Dole. The senator was an elected
politician of nearly three decades’ standing and had developed the
necessary thick skin,
but attacks on his wife, he felt, were beyond the pale.
He had a temper that his advisers worked hard to keep under wraps,
and
when the story broke, he lashed out at reporters— giving Atwater the
opportunity to say, “He can dish it out, but if someone
hits him back, he
starts whining.” Then Atwater sent Dole a ten-page letter enumerating the
many times the Kansas senator
had gone negative in the campaign, and this
letter, too, made its way into the media. Dole was furious. Despite his
victory
in Iowa, he could not get over seeing his wife dragged into the dirt.
He would get back at the Bush folk and Atwater.
Silence.—The way of replying to a polemical attack the most unpleasant for
both parties is to get annoyed and stay silent: for the
attacker usually
interprets the silence as a sign of contempt.
FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, 1844–1900
Next up was the New Hampshire primary. Victory here would put Dole
well on his way, and he was ahead in the polls, but this
time Bush came out
fighting and the race tightened up. The weekend before the vote, the Bush
people ran an ad portraying Dole
as a “straddler,” a man with two faces
whose senate votes depended on expediency, not sincere belief. Humorous,
deceptive,
bitingly negative, the ad had Atwater’s fingerprints all over it.
And the timing was perfect—too late for Dole to respond
with an ad of his
own. The ad helped propel Bush into the lead and, a few days later, to
victory.
Shortly after the results of the New Hampshire primary were in, NBC
newsman Tom Brokaw caught up with Bush and asked if he
had any
message for his rival. “Naw,” he replied with a smile, “just wish him well.”
Then Brokaw found Dole and asked the
same question. “Yeah,” said Dole
with a bitter scowl. “Stop lying about my record.”
In the days to come, Dole’s answer was rerun again and again on
television and discussed in the papers. It made him look like
a sore loser.
The press began to pile on, and Dole was ungracious—he seemed whiny. A
few weeks later, he went down to a crushing
defeat in South Carolina and
shortly thereafter an even worse string of losses in the Super Tuesday
primaries throughout the
South. Somewhere along the line, Dole’s
campaign had crashed and burned. Little did he suspect that it had all begun
in Iowa.
Interpretation
Lee Atwater believed that adults could be divided into two groups: the
overly mature and the childlike. The overly mature
are inflexible and
overserious, making them highly vulnerable in politics, particularly in the
age of television. Dole was
clearly the mature type, Atwater the child.
It didn’t take Atwater much research to see that Dole was hypersensitive
about attacks on his wife. Replaying old charges
against her in Iowa,
Atwater was able to get under the senator’s skin. He kept Dole’s blood
boiling with the letter that accused
him of starting the dirty campaigning,
and he upped the pressure with the perfectly timed ad that mocked Dole’s
record for
New Hampshire voters. Although Atwater was the one pushing
buttons, Dole’s outburst to Brokaw focused all attention on him
and his
unsportsmanlike behavior. Atwater, a genius at one-upmanship, now stood
back. Dole could only respond with more sourness,
compounding the
problem and leading to electoral suicide.
Glaciation . . . is the name for the set of gambits which are designed to
induce an awkward silence, or at any rate a disinclination
to talk, on the
part of possible opponents. The “freezing” effects of these gambits is
sometimes of immense power: . . . If someone else tells a funny story, do
not, whatever happens, tell your own funny story in reply, but listen intently
and not only refrain from laughing or smiling, but make no response,
change of expression or movement whatever. The teller of the funny story,
whatever the nature of his joke, will then suddenly feel that what he has
said is in bad taste.
Press home your advantage. If he is a stranger, and has
told a story about a man with one leg, it is no bad thing to pretend
that one
of your own legs is false, or at any rate that you have a severe limp. This
will certainly silence Opponent for the rest of the evening. . . . . . . If, for
instance, someone is being really funny or witty and there is a really
pleasant atmosphere of hearty and explosive
laughter, then (a) join in the
laughter at first. Next (b) gradually become silent. Finally (c) at some
pause in the conversation
be overheard whispering, “Oh for some real
talk.”
THE COMPLETE UPMANSHIP, STEPHEN POTTER 1950
The easiest types to one-up are those who are rigid. Being rigid does not
necessarily mean being humorless or charmless, but
it does mean being
intolerant of anything that breaks their code of acceptable behavior. Being
the target of some anarchic
or unconventional antic will trigger an
overreaction that makes them look sour, vindictive, unleaderlike. The calm
exterior
of the mature adult is momentarily blown away, revealing
something rather peevish and puerile.
Do not discourage such targets from getting personal: the more bitterly
they protest and criticize you, the worse they look.
They forget that the real
issue is how they are perceived by the people around them or, in an
electoral race, by the public.
Inflexible to the core, they can be induced to
make mistake after mistake with the slightest push.
5. In 1939, Joan Crawford (1904–77) talked her way into a relatively minor
role in the film The Women: the lower-class perfume salesgirl who steals the
husband of an elegant woman played by Norma Shearer. Crawford and
Shearer
were also bitter rivals in real life. Shearer was the wife of the movie
producer Irving Thalberg, who always managed to get
her the best parts.
Crawford hated her for that, and for her haughty manner. Thalberg had died
in 1936, but, to Crawford’s
disgust, the studio was still pampering Shearer.
Everyone in Hollywood knew of their mutual dislike and was waiting for
the
showdown. But Crawford was the consummate professional on the set,
and she kept matters civil.
The Crawford and Shearer characters in The Women share only one
scene: the climax of the movie, when Shearer finally confronts Crawford
about the affair with her husband.
The rehearsal went well, as did the
master shot showing the two actresses performing together. Then it came
time for close-ups.
Of course Norma Shearer went first. Crawford sat in a
chair off camera, delivering her lines to Shearer. (Many actors would
have
an assistant or the director feed the lines while they retired to their dressing
rooms, but Crawford always insisted
on reading them herself.)
Crawford was knitting an afghan at the time, and as she said her lines, she
knitted furiously, then stopped when it was time
for Shearer to respond. She
never looked Shearer in the eye. The needles made a loud clicking sound
that began to drive Shearer
crazy. Straining to stay polite, Shearer said,
“Joan, darling, I find your knitting distracting.” Pretending not to hear,
Crawford kept knitting. Finally Shearer, a woman famous for her elegance,
lost control: she screamed at Crawford, ordering her off the set and back to
her dressing room. As Crawford walked away, still not looking at Shearer,
the film’s director, George Cukor, ran to her side, but Shearer commanded
him to come back. Her voice had a bitter tone that
no one there had heard
before and few would forget—it was so unlike her. Or was it?
In 1962, Crawford and Bette Davis, longtime stars who had never
appeared in the same movie, were finally to costar, in Robert
Aldrich’s film
What Ever Happened to Baby Jane? Crawford and Davis had never been
thought to like each other too much, but Crawford had encouraged the
pairing—as good publicity,
it would help to extend their careers. Once
again their behavior was civil on set, but after the film came out, it was
Davis,
not Crawford, who was nominated for a Best Actress Oscar. Worse,
she immediately started crowing about it, proudly announcing
that she
would be the first actress to win three Oscars. Crawford had only one.
Inevitably a patient entering analysis begins to use ploys which have placed
him one-up in previous relationships (this is
called a “neurotic pattern”).
The analyst learns to devastate these maneuvers of the patient. A simple
way, for example, is
to respond inappropriately to what the patient says.
This places the patient in doubt about everything he has learned in
relationships
with other people. The patient may say, “Everyone should be
truthful,” hoping to get the analyst to agree with him and thereby
follow his
lead. He who follows another lead is one-down. The analyst may reply with
silence, a rather weak ploy in this circumstance,
or he may say, “Oh?” The
“Oh?” is given just the proper inflection to imply, “How on earth could you
have ever conceived such
an idea?” This not only places the patient in
doubt about his statement, but in doubt about what the analyst means by
“Oh?”
Doubt is, of course, the first step toward one-downness. When in
doubt the patient tends to lean on the analyst to resolve
the doubt, and we
lean on those who are superior to us. Analytic maneuvers designed to
arouse doubt in a patient are instituted early in analysis. For example, the
analyst may say,
“I wonder if that’s really what you’re feeling.” The use of
”really” is standard in analytic practice. It implies the patient has
motivations of which he is not aware. Anyone
feels shaken, and therefore
one-down, when this suspicion is placed in his mind.
STRATEGIES OF PSYCHOTHERAPY, JAY HALEY, 1963
Davis was the center of attention at the Oscars. Backstage before the
event, she was unusually gracious to Crawford—after
all, she could afford
to be; this was her night. (Only three other actresses were nominated, and
everyone expected Davis to
get it.) Crawford was equally polite. During the
ceremony, however, as Davis stood in the wings, waiting, she hoped, to
accept
the award, she got a shock: she lost. Anne Ban-croft won for her role
in The Miracle Worker. And there was more: as Davis stood taking it in, she
felt a hand on her arm. “Excuse me,” said Crawford, and she strode
past the
stunned Davis to accept the award on Bancroft’s behalf. (The Oscar winner
could not be there that night.) On what
was supposed to be Davis’s night of
glory, Crawford had somehow stolen the limelight, an unbearable affront.
Interpretation
A Hollywood actress has to be thick-skinned, and Joan Crawford was the
quintessence of the Hollywood actress: she had a huge
capacity to absorb
and deal with insults and disrespect. Whenever she could, though, she
plotted to get the last laugh on
her various nemeses, leaving them
humiliated. Crawford knew that people thought of her as somewhat of a
bitch, a tough, even
unpleasant woman. She felt this was unfair—she had
been kind to many—but she could live with it. What annoyed her was how
Shearer got away with playing the elegant lady when in fact, Crawford
believed, she was a nasty specimen beneath her charming
exterior. So
Crawford maneuvered to get Shearer to expose a side of herself that few
had seen. Just that glimmer was memorable
to the Hollywood community
and humiliating to Shearer.
With Davis it was all in the timing: Crawford ruined her night of glory
(which she had been gloating about for months) without
even saying a
mean word. Crawford knew that Bancroft would be unable to attend and
learned from inside information that she
would win, so she happily
volunteered to accept the prize on her behalf.
You will often find yourself nursing the desire to revenge yourself on
those who have mistreated you. The temptation is to
be direct, to say
something honest and mean, to let people know how you feel— but words
are ineffective here. A verbal spat
lowers you to the other person’s level and
often leaves you with a bad feeling. The sweeter revenge is an action that
gives
you the last laugh, leaving your victims with a sense of vague but
corrosive inferiority. Provoke them into exposing a hidden,
unpleasant side
to their character, steal their moment of glory—but make this the battle’s
last maneuver. That gives you the
double delight of showing you are no one
to mess with and inflicting a wound that sticks around. As they say, revenge
is a
dish best served cold.
Image:
The Mask. Every performer on the crowded stage is wearing a mask—a
pleasant, appealing face to show the audience. Should an
apparently
innocent bump from a fellow performer make a mask fall, a far less
pleasant look will be revealed, and one that
few will forget even after the
mask is restored.
Authority: We often give our rivals the means of our own
destruction.
—Aesop (sixth century B.C.)
REVERSAL
Sometimes outright war is best—when, for example, you can crush your
enemies by encirclement. In the ongoing relationships
of daily life, though,
one-upmanship is usually the wiser strategy. It may sometimes seem
therapeutic to outfight your rivals
directly; it may sometimes be appealing
to send an overtly intimidating message. But the momentary gains you may
earn with
a direct approach will be offset by the suspicions you arouse in
your colleagues, who will worry that someday you will strong-arm
them,
too. In the long run, it is more important to secure good feelings and
maintain appearances. Wise courtiers always seem
to be paragons of
civilized behavior, encasing their iron fist in a velvet glove.
29
TAKE SMALL BITES
THE FAIT ACCOMPLI
STRATEGY
If you seem too ambitious, you stir up resentment in other
people; overt power grabs and sharp rises to the top are
dangerous,
creating envy, distrust, and suspicion. Often the best
solution is to take small bites, swallow little territories, playing
upon people’s relatively short attention
spans. Stay under the
radar and they won’t see your moves. And if they do, it may
already be too late; the territory is yours,
a fait accompli. You
can always claim you acted out of self-defense. Before people
realize it, you have accumulated an empire.
PIECEMEAL CONQUEST
On June 17, 1940, Winston Churchill, prime minister of England, received
a surprise visit from the French general Charles
de Gaulle. The Germans
had begun their blitzkrieg invasion of the Low Countries and France a mere
five weeks earlier, and
they had advanced so far so fast that not only
France’s military but its government as well had already collapsed. The
French
authorities had fled, either to parts of France not yet occupied by the
Germans or to French colonies in North Africa. None,
however, had fled to
England—but here was General de Gaulle, a solitary exile seeking refuge
and offering his services to
the Allied cause.
The two men had met before, when de Gaulle had briefly served as
France’s undersecretary of state for war during the weeks
of the blitzkrieg.
Churchill had admired his courage and resolution at that difficult moment,
but de Gaulle was a strange
fellow. At the age of fifty, he had a somewhat
undistinguished military record and could hardly be considered an
important
political figure. But he always acted as if he were at the center of
things. And here he was now, presenting himself as the
man who could help
rescue France, although many other Frenchmen could be considered more
suitable for the role. Nevertheless,
de Gaulle might be someone whom
Churchill could mold and use for his purposes.
Within hours of de Gaulle’s arrival in England, the French military sued
for peace with the Germans. Under the agreement the
two nations worked
out, the unoccupied parts of France were to be ruled by a French
government friendly to the invaders and
based in Vichy. That same evening
de Gaulle presented Churchill with a plan: Broadcasting on BBC Radio, he
would address all
Frenchmen still loyal to a free France and would urge
them to not lose heart. He would also call on any who had managed to
get
to England to contact him. Churchill was reluctant: he did not want to
offend the new French government, with which he
might have to deal. But
de Gaulle promised to say nothing that could be read as treachery to the
Vichy government, and at
the last minute he was given permission.
De Gaulle delivered the speech much as he had outlined it—except that
he ended it with the promise he would be back on the
air the next day. This
was news to Churchill, yet once the promise had been made, it might look
bad to keep de Gaulle off
the air, and anything that would hearten the
French during these dark days seemed worthwhile.
In the next broadcast, de Gaulle was decidedly bolder. “Any Frenchman
who still has weapons,” he announced, “has the absolute
duty to continue
the resistance.” He even went so far as to instruct his fellow generals still in
France to disobey the enemy.
Those who rallied to him in England, he said,
would form part of a nation without territory to be called Free France and of
a new army to be called Fighting France, the spearhead of an eventual
liberation of mainland France from the Germans.
Occupied with other matters and believing de Gaulle’s audience to be
small, Churchill overlooked the general’s indiscretions
and allowed him to
continue his broadcasts—only to find that each new program made it harder
to pull the plug. De Gaulle was
transforming himself into a celebrity. The
performance of the French military and government during the blitzkrieg
had been
widely seen as a disgrace, and in the aftermath no one had stepped
forward to alter this perception of cowardice— except de
Gaulle. His voice
radiated confidence, and his face and tall figure stood out in photographs
and newsreels. Most important,
his appeals had effect: his Fighting France
grew from a few hundred soldiers in July 1940 to several thousand a month
later.
Soon de Gaulle was clamoring to lead his forces on a campaign to
liberate French colonies in Central and Equatorial Africa
from the Vichy
government. The area was mostly desert and rain forest and was far from
the more strategic regions of North
Africa on the Mediterranean, but it
contained some seaports that might be useful, and so Churchill gave de
Gaulle his backing.
The French forces were able to take Chad, Cameroon,
the French Congo, and Gabon with relative ease.
When de Gaulle returned to England late in 1940, he now had thousands
of square miles of territory under his control. His
command meanwhile had
swelled to close to 20,000 soldiers, and his bold venture had captured the
imagination of the British
public. No longer the low-order general who had
sought refuge months before, he was now a military and political leader.
And
de Gaulle was equal to this change in status: he was now making
demands of the English and acting in a rather aggressive manner.
Churchill
was beginning to regret giving him so much leeway.
The following year British intelligence discovered that de Gaulle had
been making important contacts among the growing French
Resistance
movement. The Resistance, which was dominated by communists and
socialists, had started off chaotic, lacking a
coherent structure. De Gaulle
had personally chosen an official in the prewar socialist government, Jean
Moulin, who had come
to England in October 1941, to help unify this
underground force. Of all de Gaulle’s maneuverings, this was the one that
could
benefit the Allies most directly; an efficient Resistance would be
invaluable. So, with Churchill’s blessing, Moulin was parachuted
into
southern France in early 1942.
Chien/Development (Gradual Progress)
This hexagram is made up of Sun (wood, penetration) above, i.e., without,
and Ken (mountain, stillness) below, i.e., within. A tree on a mountain
develops slowly according to the law of its being and consequently stands
firmly rooted. This gives the idea of a development that proceeds gradually,
step by step. The attributes of the trigrams also point to
this: within is
tranquility, which guards against precipitate actions, and without is
penetration, which makes development
and progress possible.
THE I CHING, CHINA, CIRCA EIGHTH CENTURY B.C.
By the end of that year, the increasingly imperious de Gaulle had so
offended many within the Allied governments and armies—particularly
U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt—that a plan was discussed to replace
him with someone more malleable. The Americans believed
they had found
the perfect man for the job: General Henri Giraud, one of France’s most
respected military officials, a man
with a record far more distinguished than
de Gaulle’s. Churchill approved, and Giraud was named commander in
chief of French
forces in North Africa. Sensing the allied plot, de Gaulle
requested a personal meeting with Giraud to dis- cuss the situation;
after
much bureaucratic wrangling, he was granted permission and arrived in
Algiers in May 1943.
The two men were at each other’s throats almost immediately, each
making demands to which the other could never agree. Finally
de Gaulle
compromised: proposing a committee that would prepare to lead a postwar
France, he drafted a document naming Giraud
as commander in chief of the
armed forces and copresident of France with de Gaulle. In return de Gaulle
got the committee
to be expanded in size and cleansed of officials with
Vichy connections. Giraud was satisfied and signed on. Shortly thereafter,
however, Giraud left Algiers for a visit to the United States, and de Gaulle,
in his absence, filled the expanded committee
with Gaullist sympathizers
and Resistance members. Upon Giraud’s return he discovered that he had
been stripped of much of
his political power. Isolated on a committee that
he had helped to form, he had no way to defend himself, and in a matter
of
months de Gaulle was named sole president, then commander in chief.
Giraud was quietly retired.
Roosevelt and Churchill watched these developments with increasing
alarm. They tried to intervene, making various threats,
but in the end they
were powerless. Those BBC broadcasts that had started out so innocently
were now listened to avidly by
millions of Frenchmen. Through Moulin, de
Gaulle had gained almost complete control of the French Resistance; a
break with
de Gaulle would put the Allies’ relationship with the Resistance
in jeopardy. And the committee that de Gaulle had helped
form to govern
postwar France was now recognized by governments around the world. To
take on the general in any kind of political
struggle would be a public-
relations nightmare destructive to the war effort.
Somehow this once undistinguished general had forged a kind of empire
under his control. And there was nothing anyone could
do about it.
Interpretation
When General Charles de Gaulle fled to England, he had one goal: to
restore the honor of France. He intended to do this by
leading a military and
political organization that would work to liberate France. He wanted his
country to be seen as an equal
among the Allies, rather than as a vanquished
nation dependent on others to regain its freedom.
Had de Gaulle announced his intentions, he would have been seen as a
dangerous mix of delusion and ambition. And had he grabbed
for power too
quickly, he would have shown those intentions. Instead, supremely patient
and with an eye on his goal, he took
one small bite at a time. The first bite
—always the most important—was to gain himself public exposure with
first one BBC
broadcast, then, through clever maneuvering, an ongoing
series. Here, exploiting his keen dramatic instincts and hypnotic
voice, he
quickly established a larger-than-life presence. This allowed him to create
and build up his military group Fighting
France.
He took his next bite by bringing those African territories under the
control of Fighting France. His control over a large
geographical area, no
matter how isolated, gave him unassailable political power. Then he
insinuated himself into the Resistance,
taking over a group that had been a
communist bastion. Finally he created—and, bite by bite, gained complete
control of—a
committee to govern the free France of the future. Because he
proceeded in such a piecemeal fashion, no one really noticed
what he was
up to. When Churchill and Roosevelt realized how far he had insinuated
himself into the Resistance, and into the
minds of the British and American
publics as France’s destined postwar leader, it was too late to stop him. His
preeminence
was a fait accompli.
It is not easy to make one’s way in this world, to strive with energy to get
what you want without incurring the envy or antipathy
of others who may
see you as aggressive and ambitious, someone to thwart. The answer is not
to lower your ambitions but rather
to disguise them. A piecemeal approach
to conquest of anything is perfect for these political times, the ultimate
mask of
aggression. The key to making it work is to have a clear sense of
your objective, the empire you want to forge, and then to
identify the small,
outlying areas of the empire that you will first gobble up. Each bite must
have a logic in an overall
strategy but must be small enough that no one
senses your larger intentions. If your bites are too big, you will take on
more
than you are ready for and find yourself overwhelmed by problems; if
you bite too fast, other people will see what you are
up to. Let the passage
of time masterfully disguise your intentions and give you the appearance of
someone of modest ambition.
By the time your rivals wake up to what you
have consumed, they risk being consumed themselves if they stand in your
way.
Ambition can creep as well as soar.
—Edmund Burke (1729–1797)
KEYS TO WARFARE
At first glance we humans might seem hopelessly violent and aggressive.
How else to account for history’s endless series of
wars, which continue
into the present? But in fact this is somewhat of an illusion. Standing out
dramatically from daily life,
war and conflict compel disproportionate
attention. The same can be said of those aggressive individuals in the public
realm
who are constantly grabbing for more.
The truth is that most people are conservative by nature. Desperate to
keep what they have, they dread the unforeseen consequences
and situations
that conflict inevitably brings. They hate confrontation and try to avoid it.
(That is why so many people resort
to passive aggression to get what they
want.) You must always remember this fact of human nature as you plot
your way through
life. It is also the foundation for any fait accompli
strategy.
The strategy works as follows: Suppose there is something you want or
need for your security and power. Take it without discussion
or warning and
you give your enemies a choice, either to fight or to accept the loss and
leave you alone. Is whatever you
have taken, and your unilateral action in
taking it, worth the bother, cost, and danger of waging war? Which costs
more, the
war (which might easily escalate into something large) or the
loss? Take something of real value and they will have to choose
carefully;
they have a big decision to make. Take something small and marginal,
though, and it is almost impossible for your
opponents to choose battle.
There are likely to be many more reasons for leaving you alone than for
fighting over something
small. You have played to your enemy’s
conservative instincts, which are generally stronger than their acquisitive
ones. And
soon your ownership of this property becomes a fait accompli,
part of the status quo, which is always best left alone.
Sooner or later, as part of this strategy, you will take another small bite.
This time your rivals are warier; they are starting
to see a pattern. But what
you have taken is once again small, and once again they must ask
themselves if fighting you is
worth the headache. They didn’t to do it before
—why now? Execute a fait accompli strategy subtly and well, as de Gaulle
did,
and even though a time may come when your goal becomes clear, and
when they regret their previous pacifism and consider war,
by that time you
will have altered the playing field: you are neither so small nor so easy to
defeat. To take you on now entails
a different kind of risk; there is a
different, more powerful reason for avoiding conflict. Only nibble at what
you want and
you never spark enough anger, fear, or mistrust to make
people overcome their natural reluctance to fight. Let enough time
pass
between bites and you will also play to the shortness of people’s attention
spans.
The key to the fait accompli strategy is to act fast and without discussion.
If you reveal your intentions before taking action,
you will open yourself to
a slew of criticisms, analyses, and questions: “How dare you think of taking
that bite! Be happy
with what you have!” It is part of people’s conservatism
to prefer endless discussion to action. You must bypass this with
a rapid
seizure of your target. The discussion is foreclosed. No matter how small
your bite, taking it also distinguishes
you from the crowd and earns you
respect and weight.
When Frederick the Great became king of Prussia in 1740, Prussia was a
minor European power. Frederick’s father had built
up the Prussian army, at
great expense, but had never really used it; the minute he put the army in
play, he knew, the other
European powers would have united against him,
fearing any threat to the status quo. Frederick, though massively ambitious,
understood what had kept his father in check.
The same year he took the throne, however, an opportunity presented
itself. Prussia’s great nemesis was Austria, where a new
leader, Maria
Theresa, had recently become empress. There were many who questioned
her legitimacy, though, and Frederick decided
to exploit this political
instability by moving his army into the small Austrian province of Silesia.
Maria Theresa, wanting
to prove her toughness, decided to fight to take it
back. The war lasted several years—but Frederick had judged the moment
well; he finally threatened to take more territory than Silesia alone, and in
the end the empress sued for peace.
All the conceptions born of impatience and aimed at obtaining speedy
victory could only be gross errors. . . . It was necessary to accumulate
thousands of small victories to turn them into a great success.
GENERAL VO NGUYEN GIAP, 1911–
Frederick would repeat this strategy again and again, taking over small
states here and there that weren’t worth fighting
for, at least not hard. In this
way, almost before anyone noticed, he made Prussia a great power. Had he
begun by invading
some larger territory, he would have shown his
ambitions too clearly and brought down upon himself an alliance of powers
determined
to maintain the status quo. The key to his piecemeal strategy
was an opportunity that fell into his lap. Austria was at a
weak moment;
Silesia was small, yet by incorporating this neighboring state, Prussia
enriched its resources and put itself
in position for further growth. The two
combined gave him momentum and allowed him space to slowly expand
from small to large.
The problem that many of us face is that we have great dreams and
ambitions. Caught up in the emotions of our dreams and the
vastness of our
desires, we find it very difficult to focus on the small, tedious steps usually
necessary to attain them.
We tend to think in terms of giant leaps toward our
goals. But in the social world as in nature, anything of size and stability
grows slowly. The piecemeal strategy is the perfect antidote to our natural
impatience: it focuses us on something small and
immediate, a first bite,
then how and where a second bite can get us closer to our ultimate
objective. It forces us to think
in terms of a process, a sequence of
connected steps and actions, no matter how small, which has immeasurable
psychological
benefits as well. Too often the magnitude of our desires
overwhelms us; taking that small first step makes them seem realizable.
There is nothing more therapeutic than action.
In plotting this strategy, be attentive to sudden opportunities and to your
enemies’ momentary crises and weaknesses. Do not
be tempted, however,
to try to take anything large; bite off more than you can chew and you will
be consumed with problems
and disproportionately discouraged if you fail
to cope with them.
The fait accompli strategy is often the best way to take control of a
project that would be ruined by divided leadership.
In almost every film
Alfred Hitchcock made, he had to go through the same wars, gradually
wresting control of the film from
the producer, the actors, and the rest of the
team. His struggles with screenwriters were a microcosm of the larger war.
Hitchcock
always wanted his vision for a film to be exactly reflected in the
script, but too firm a hand on his writer’s neck would
get him nothing
except resentment and mediocre work. So instead he moved slowly, starting
out by giving the writer room to
work loosely off his notes, then asking for
revisions that shaped the script his way. His control became obvious only
gradually,
and by that time the writer was emotionally tied to the project
and, however frustrated, was working for his approval. A very
patient man,
Hitchcock let his power plays unfold over time, so that producer, writer, and
stars understood the completeness
of his domination only when the film
was finished.
To gain control of any project, you must be willing to make time your
ally. If you start out with complete control, you sap
people’s spirit and stir
up envy and resentment. So begin by generating the illusion that you’re all
working together on a
team effort; then slowly nibble away. If in the
process you make people angry, do not worry. That’s just a sign that their
emotions are engaged, which means they can be manipulated.
Finally, the use of the piecemeal strategy to disguise your aggressive
intentions is invaluable in these political times,
but in masking your
manipulations you can never go too far. So when you take a bite, even a
small one, make a show of acting
out of self-defense. It also helps to appear
as the underdog. Give the impression your objectives are limited by taking a
substantial pause between bites—exploiting people’s short attention spans
—while proclaiming to one and all that you are a
person of peace. In fact, it
would be the height of wisdom to make your bite a little larger upon
occasion and then giving
back some of what you have taken. People see
only your generosity and your limited actions, not the steadily increasing
empire
you are amassing.
Image:
The Artichoke.
At first glance it seems unappetizing, even forbidding, with the meager
edible matter in its hard exterior. The reward, however,
comes in taking it a
part, devouring it leaf by leaf. Its leaves slowly become more tender and
tastier, until you arrive at
the succulent heart.
Authority: To multiply small successes is precisely to build one
treasure after another. In time one becomes rich without
realizing how it has come about. —Frederick the Great (1712–
1786)
REVERSAL
Should you see or suspect that you yourself are being attacked bite by bite,
your only counterstrategy is to prevent any further
progress or faits
accomplis. A quick and forceful response will usually be enough to
discourage the nibblers, who often resort
to this strategy out of weakness
and cannot afford many battles. If they are tougher and more ambitious, like
Frederick the
Great, that forceful response becomes more crucial still.
Letting them get away with their bites, however small, is too dangerous—
nip them in the bud.
30
PENETRATE THEIR MINDS
COMMUNICATION STRATEGIES
Communication is a kind of war, its field of battle the resistant
and defensive minds of the people you want to influence.
The
goal is to advance, to penetrate their defenses and occupy their
minds. Anything else is ineffective communication, self-
indulgent
talk. Learn to infiltrate your ideas behind enemy
lines, sending messages through little details, luring people into
coming
to the conclusions you desire and into thinking they’ve
gotten there by themselves. Some you can trick by cloaking your
extraordinary
ideas in ordinary forms; others, more resistant
and dull, must be awoken with extreme language that bristles
with newness.
At all cost, avoid language that is static, preachy,
and overly personal. Make your words a spark for action, not
passive
contemplation.
The most superficial way of trying to influence others is through talk that
has nothing real behind it. The influence produced
by such mere tongue
wagging must necessarily remain insignificant.
THE I CHING, CHINA, CIRCA EIGHTH CENTURY B.C.
VISCERAL COMMUNICATION
To work with the film director Alfred Hitchcock for the first time was
generally a disconcerting experience. He did not like
to talk much on the
sets of his movies—just the occasional sardonic and witty remark. Was he
deliberately secretive? Or just
quiet? And how could someone direct a film,
which entails ordering so many people about, without talking a lot and
giving
explicit instructions?
This peculiarity of Hitchcock’s was most troublesome for his actors.
Many of them were used to film directors coddling them,
discussing in
detail the characters they were to play and how to get into the role.
Hitchcock did none of this. In rehearsals
he said very little; on the set, too,
actors would glance over at him for his approval only to find him napping
or looking
bored. According to the actress Thelma Ritter, “If Hitchcock
liked what you did, he said nothing. If he didn’t, he looked
like he was
going to throw up.” And yet somehow, in his own indirect way, he would
get his actors to do precisely what he
wanted.
On the first day of shooting for The 39 Steps in 1935, Hitchcock’s two
leads, Madeleine Carroll and Robert Donat, arrived on the set a little tense.
That day they were
to act in one of the movie’s more complex scenes:
playing relative strangers who, however, had gotten handcuffed together
earlier in the plot and, still handcuffed, were forced to run through the
Scottish countryside (actually a sound stage) to
escape the film’s villains.
Hitchcock had given them no real sign of how he wanted them to act the
scene. Carroll in particular
was bothered by the director’s behavior. This
English actress, one of the most elegant film stars of the period, had spent
much of her career in Hollywood, where directors had treated her like
royalty; Hitchcock, on the other hand, was distant,
hard to figure out. She
had decided to play the scene with an air of dignity and reserve, the way she
thought a lady would
respond to the situation of being handcuffed to a
strange man. To get over her nervousness, she chatted warmly with Donat,
trying to put both him and herself in a collaborative mood.
When Hitchcock arrived on set, he explained the scene to the two actors,
snapped a pair of handcuffs on them, and proceeded
to lead them through
the set, across a dummy bridge and among other props. Then, in the middle
of this demonstration, he was
suddenly called away to attend to a technical
matter. He would return soon; they should take a break. He felt in his
pockets
for the key to the handcuffs—but no, he must have mislaid it, and
off he hurried, ostensibly to find the key. Hours went by.
Donat and Carroll
became increasingly frustrated and embarrassed; suddenly they had no
control, a most unusual feeling for
two stars on set. While even the
humblest crew members were free to go about their business, the two stars
were shackled together.
Their forced intimacy and discomfort made their
earlier banter impossible. They could not even go to the bathroom. It was
humiliating.
Hitchcock returned in the afternoon—he had found the key. Shooting
began, but as the actors went to work, it was hard for
them to get over the
experience of that day; the movie stars’ usual cool unflappability was gone.
Carroll had forgotten all
her ideas about how to play the scene. And yet,
despite her and Donat’s anger, the scene seemed to flow with unexpected
naturalness.
Now they knew what it was like to be tied together; they had
felt the awkwardness, so there was no need to act it. It came from within.
When you are trying to communicate and can’t find the point in the
experience of the other party at which he can receive and
understand, then,
you must create the experience for him. I was trying to explain to two staff
organizers in training how their problems in their community arose because
they had
gone outside the experience of their people: that when you go
outside anyone’s experience not only do you not communicate,
you cause
confusion. They had earnest, intelligent expressions on their faces and were
verbally and visually agreeing and
understanding, but I knew they really
didn’t understand and that I was not communicating. I had not got into their
experience. So I had to give them an experience.
RULES FOR RADICALS, SAUL D. ALINSKY, 1971
Four years later Hitchcock made Rebecca, with Joan Fontaine and
Laurence Olivier. Fontaine, at twenty-one, was taking her first leading role
and was horribly nervous
about playing opposite Olivier, who was widely
recognized as an actor of genius. Another director might have eased her
insecurities,
but Hitchcock was seemingly doing the opposite. He chose to
pass along gossip from the rest of the cast and crew: no one thought
she was
up to the job, he told her, and Olivier had really wanted his wife, Vivien
Leigh, to get her part. Fontaine felt terrified,
isolated, unsure—exactly the
qualities of her character in the film. She hardly needed to act. And her
memorable performance
in Rebecca was the start of a glorious career.
When Hitchcock made The Paradine Case, in 1947, his leading lady,
Ann Todd, was appearing in her first Hollywood movie and found it hard to
relax. So in the silence
on set before the director called, “Action!”
Hitchcock would tell her a particularly salacious story that would make her
laugh
or gasp in shock. Before one scene in which she had to lie on a bed in
an elegant nightgown, Hitchcock suddenly jumped on
her, yelling, “Relax!”
Antics like this made it easy for her to let go of her inhibitions and be more
natural.
When cast and crew were tired on set, or when they’d gotten too casual
and were chatting rather than concentrating on their
work, Hitchcock would
never yell or complain. Instead he might smash a lightbulb with his fist or
throw his teacup against
a wall; everyone would quickly sober up and
recover his or her focus.
Clearly Hitchcock mistrusted language and explanation, preferring action
to words as a way of communicating, and this preference
extended to the
form and content of his films. That gave his screenwriters a particularly
hard time; after all, putting the
film into words was their job. In story
meetings Hitchcock would discuss the ideas he was interested in—themes
like people’s
doubleness, their capacity for both good and evil, the fact that
no one in this world is truly innocent. The writers would
produce pages of
dialog expressing these ideas elegantly and subtly, only to find them edited
out in favor of actions and
images. In Vertigo (1958) and Psycho (1960), for
example, Hitchcock inserted mirrors in many scenes; in Spellbound (1945)
it was shots of ski tracks and other kinds of parallel lines; the murder in
Strangers on a Train (1951) was revealed through its reflection in a pair of
glasses. For Hitchcock, evidently, images like these revealed his
ideas of
the doubleness in the human soul better than words did, but on paper this
seemed somewhat contrived.
On set, the producers of Hitchcock’s films often watched in bewilderment
as the director moved the camera, not the actors,
to stage his scenes. It
seemed to make no sense, as if he loved the technical side of filmmaking
more than dialog and the
human presence. Nor could editors fathom his
obsession with sounds, colors, the size of the actors’ heads within the
frame,
the speed with which people moved—he seemed to favor these
endless visual details over the story itself.
And then the film would be a finished product, and suddenly everything
that had seemed peculiar about his method made perfect
sense. Audiences
often responded to Hitchcock’s films more deeply than they did to the work
of any other director. The images,
the pacing, the camera movements, swept
them along and got under their skin. A Hitchcock film was not just seen, it
was experienced,
and it stayed in the mind long after the viewing.
The letter set Cyrus thinking of the means by which he could most
effectively persuade the Persians to revolt, and his deliberations
led him to
adopt the following plan, which he found best suited to his purpose. He
wrote on a roll of parchment that Astyages had appointed him to command
the Persian army; then he summoned an assembly
of the Persians, opened
the roll in their presence and read out what he had written. “And now,” he
added, “I have an order for you: every man is to appear on parade with a
billhook.” . . . The order was obeyed. All the men assembled with their
billhooks, and Cyrus’ next command was that before the day was
out they
should clear a certain piece of rough land full of thorn bushes, about
eighteen or twenty furlongs square. This too
was done, whereupon Cyrus
issued the further order that they should present themselves again on the
following day, after having
taken a bath. Meanwhile Cyrus collected and
slaughtered all his father’s goats, sheep, and oxen in preparation for
entertaining the whole
Persian army at a banquet, together with the best
wine and bread he could procure. The next day the guests assembled, and
were told to sit down on the grass and enjoy themselves. After the meal
Cyrus asked them which they preferred— yesterday’s work or today’s
amusement; and they replied that it was indeed a far cry
from the previous
day’s misery to their present pleasures. This was the answer which Cyrus
wanted; he seized upon it at once
and proceeded to lay bare what he had in
mind. “Men of Persia,” he said, “listen to me: obey my orders, and you will
be able to enjoy a thousand pleasures as good as this
without ever turning
your hands to menial labour; but, if you disobey, yesterday’s task will be the
pattern of innumerable
others you will be forced to perform. Take my advice
and win your freedom. I am the man destined to undertake your liberation,
and it is my belief that you are a match for the Medes in war as in
everything else. It is the truth I tell you. Do not delay,
but fling off the yoke
of Astyages at once.” The Persians had long resented their subjection to the
Medes. At last they had found a leader, and welcomed with enthusiasm
the
prospect of liberty.
THE HISTORIES, HERODOTUS, 484–432 B.C.
Interpretation
In interviews Hitchcock often told a story about his childhood: When he
was around six, his father, upset at something he
had done, sent him to the
local police station with a note. The officer on duty read the note and locked
little Alfred in
a cell, telling him, “This is what we do to naughty boys.” He
was released after just a few minutes, but the experience marked
him
indelibly. Had his father yelled at him, as most boys’ fathers did, he would
have become defensive and rebellious. But
leaving him alone, surrounded
by frightening authority figures, in a dark cell, with its unfamiliar smells—
that was a much
more powerful way to communicate. As Hitchcock
discovered, to teach people a lesson, to really alter their behavior, you must
alter their experience, aim at their emotions, inject unforgettable images
into their minds, shake them up. Unless you are
supremely eloquent, it is
hard to accomplish this through words and direct expression. There are
simply too many people talking
at us, trying to persuade us of this or that.
Words become part of this noise, and we either tune them out or become
even
more resistant.
To communicate in a deep and real way, you must bring people back to
their childhood, when they were less defensive and more
impressed by
sounds, images, actions, a world of preverbal communication. It requires
speaking a kind of language composed
of actions, all strategically designed
to effect people’s moods and emotions, what they can least control. That is
precisely
the language Hitchcock developed and perfected over the years.
With actors he wanted to get the most natural performance out
of them, in
essence get them not to act. To tell them to relax or be natural would have
been absurd; it would only have made them more awkward and defensive
than they already were. Instead, just as his father had gotten him to feel
terror in a London police station, he got them
to feel the emotions of the
movie: frustration, isolation, loss of inhibition. (Of course he hadn’t mislaid
the handcuffs’ key somewhere
on the set of The 39 Steps, as Donat later
found out; the supposed loss was a strategy.) Instead of prodding actors
with irritating words, which come
from the outside and are pushed away,
Hitchcock made these feelings part of their inner experience—and this
communicated immediately
on- screen. With audiences, too, Hitchcock
never preached a message. Instead he used the visual power of film to
return them
to that childlike state when images and compelling symbols had
such a visceral effect.
It is imperative in life’s battles to be able to communicate your ideas to
people, to be able to alter their behavior. Communication
is a form of
warfare. Your enemies here are defensive; they want to be left alone with
their preexisting prejudices and beliefs.
The more deeply you penetrate their
defenses, the more you occupy their mental space, the more effectively you
are communicating.
In verbal terms, most people wage a kind of medieval
warfare, using words, pleas, and calls for attention like battle-axes
and
clubs to hit people over the head. But in being so direct, they only make
their targets more resistant. Instead you must
learn to fight indirectly and
unconventionally, tricking people into lowering their defenses—hitting their
emotions, altering
their experience, dazzling them with images, powerful
symbols, and visceral sensory cues. Bringing them back to that childlike
state when they were more vulnerable and fluid, the communicated idea
penetrates deep behind their defenses. Because you are
not fighting the
usual way, you will have an unusual power.
The priest Ryokan . . . asked Zen master Bukkan . . . for an explanation of
the four Dharma-worlds. . . . [Bukkan] said: “To explain the four Dharma-
worlds should not need a lot of chatter.” He filled a white tea cup with tea,
drank it up,
and smashed the cup to pieces right in front of the priest,
saying, “Have you got it?” The priest said: “Thanks to your here-and-now
teaching, I have penetrated right into the realm of Principle and Event.”
—Trevor Leggett, Samurai Zen: The Warrior Koans (1985)
THE MASTERMIND
In 1498 the twenty-nine-year-old Niccolò Machiavelli was appointed
secretary of Florence’s Second Chancery, which managed
the city’s foreign
affairs. The choice was unusual: Machiavelli was of relatively low birth,
had no experience in politics,
and lacked a law degree or other professional
qualification. He had a contact in the Florentine government, however, who
knew
him personally and saw great potential in him. And indeed, over the
next few years, Machiavelli stood out from his colleagues
in the Chancery
for his tireless energy, his incisive reports on political matters, and his
excellent advice to ambassadors
and ministers. He won prestigious
assignments, traveling around Europe on diplomatic missions—to various
parts of northern
Italy to meet with Cesare Borgia, to ferret out that ruthless
statesman’s intentions on Florence; to France to meet with King
Louis XII;
to Rome to confer with Pope Julius II. He seemed to be at the start of a
brilliant career.
Not all was well, however, in Machiavelli’s professional life. He
complained to his friends about the Chancery’s low pay;
he also described
doing all the hard work in various negotiations, only to see some powerful
senior minister brought on board
at the last moment to finish the job and
take the credit. Many above him, he said, were stupid and lazy, appointed to
their
positions by virtue of birth and connections. He was developing the art
of dealing with these men, he told his friends, finding
a way to use them
instead of being used.
Even more foolish is one who clings to words and phrases and thus tries to
achieve understanding. It is like trying to strike
the moon with a stick, or
scratching a shoe because there is an itchy spot on the foot. It has nothing
to do with the Truth.
ZEN MASTER MUMON, 1183–1260
Before Machiavelli’s arrival in the Chancery, Florence had been ruled by
the Medici family, who, however, had been unseated
in 1494, when the city
became a republic. In 1512, Pope Julius II financed an army to take
Florence by force, overthrow the
republic, and restore the Medicis to power.
The plan succeeded, and the Medicis took control, well in Julius’s debt. A
few
weeks later, Machiavelli was sent to prison, vaguely implicated in a
conspiracy against the Medicis. He was tortured but refused
to talk, whether
about his own involvement or that of others. Released from prison in March
1513, he retired in disgrace to
a small farm owned by his family a few miles
outside Florence.
Machiavelli had a close friend in a man called Francesco Vettori, who
had managed to survive the change in government and
to ingratiate himself
with the Medicis. In the spring of 1513, Vettori began to receive letters in
which Machiavelli described
his new life. At night he would shut himself
up in his study and converse in his mind with great figures in history, trying
to uncover the secrets of their power. He wanted to distill the many things
he himself had learned about politics and statecraft.
And, he wrote to
Vettori, he was writing a little pamphlet called De principatibus—later
titled The Prince—“where I dive as deep as I can into ideas about this
subject, discussing the nature of princely rule, what forms it takes,
how
these are acquired, how they are maintained, how they are lost.” The
knowledge and advice imparted in this pamphlet would
be more valuable to
a prince than the largest army—perhaps Vettori could show it to one of the
Medicis, to whom Machiavelli
would gladly dedicate the work? It could be
of great use to this family of “new princes.” It could also revive
Machiavelli’s
career, for he was despondent at his isolation from politics.
Vettori passed the essay along to Lorenzo de’ Medici, who accepted it
with much less interest than he did two hunting dogs
given to him at the
same time. Actually, The Prince perplexed even Vettori: its advice was
sometimes starkly violent and amoral, yet its language was quite
dispassionate and
matter-of-fact—a strange and uncommon mix. The author
wrote the truth, but a little too boldly. Machiavelli also sent the
manuscript
to other friends, who were equally unsure what to make of it. Perhaps it was
intended as satire? Machiavelli’s
disdain for aristocrats with power but no
brains was well known to his circle.
Soon Machiavelli wrote another book, later known as The Discourses, a
distillation of his talks with friends since his fall from grace. A series of
meditations on politics, the book contained
some of the same stark advice
as the earlier work but was more geared toward the constitution of a
republic than to the actions
of a single prince.
Over the next few years, Machiavelli slowly returned to favor and was
allowed to participate in Florentine affairs. He wrote
a play, Mandragola,
which, though scandalous, was admired by the pope and staged at the
Vatican; he was also commissioned to write a history
of Florence. The
Prince and The Discourses remained unpublished, but they circulated in
manuscript among the leaders and politicians of Italy. Their audience was
small,
and when Machiavelli died in 1527, the former secretary to the
republic seemed destined to return to the obscurity from which
he came.
After Machiavelli’s death, however, those two unpublished works of his
began to circulate outside Italy. In 1529, Thomas Cromwell,
the crafty
minister to Henry VIII of England, somehow got hold of a copy of The
Prince and, unlike the flightier Lorenzo de’ Medici, read it closely and
carefully. To him the book’s historical anecdotes made for
a lively and
entertaining read. The plain language was not bizarre but refreshing. Most
important, the amoral advice was in
fact indispensable: the writer explained
not only what a leader had to do to hold on to power but how to present his
actions
to the public. Cromwell could not help but adapt Machiavelli’s
counsel in his advice to the king.
Published in several languages in the decades after Machiavelli’s death,
The Prince slowly spread far and wide. As the centuries passed, it took on a
life of its own, in fact a double life: widely condemned
as amoral, yet
avidly read in private by great political figures down the ages. The French
minister Cardinal Richelieu made
it a kind of political bible. Napoleon
consulted it often. The American president John Adams kept it by his
bedside. With
the help of Voltaire, the Prussian king Frederick the Great
wrote a tract called The Anti-Machiavel, yet he shamelessly practiced many
of Machiavelli’s ideas to the letter.
As Machiavelli’s books reached larger audiences, his influence extended
beyond politics. Philosophers from Bacon to Hegel
found in his writings
confirmation for many of their own theories. Romantic poets such as Lord
Byron admired the energy of
his spirit. In Italy, Ireland, and Russia, young
revolutionaries discovered in The Discourses an inspiring call to arms and a
blueprint for a future society.
Over the centuries millions upon millions of readers have used Ma-
chiavelli’s books for invaluable advice on power. But could
it possibly be
the opposite—that it is Machiavelli who has been using his readers?
Scattered through his writings and through
his letters to his friends, some of
them uncovered centuries after his death, are signs that he pondered deeply
the strategy
of writing itself and the power he could wield after his death by
infiltrating his ideas indirectly and deeply into his readers’ minds,
transforming them into unwitting disciples of his amoral philosophy.
Yoriyasu was a swaggering and aggressive samurai. . . . In the spring of
1341 he was transferred from Kofu to Kamakura, where
he visited Master
Toden, the 45th teacher at Kenchoji, to ask about Zen. The teacher said, “It
is to manifest directly the Great Action in the hundred concerns of life.
When it is loyalty as a samurai,
it is the loyalty of Zen. ‘Loyalty’ is written
with the Chinese character made up of ‘centre’ and ‘heart,’ so it means the
lord in the centre of the
man. There must be no wrong passions. But when
this old priest looks at the samurai today, there are some whose heart centre
leans
towards name and money, and others where it is towards wine and
lust, and with others it is inclined towards power and bravado.
They are all
on those slopes, and cannot have a centred heart; how could they have
loyalty to the state? If you, Sir, wish
to practise Zen, first of all practise
loyalty and do not slip into wrong desires.” The warrior said, “Our loyalty
is direct Great Action on the battlefield. What need have we for sermons
from a priest?” The teacher replied, “You, Sir, are a hero in strife, I am a
gentleman of peace—we can have nothing to say to each other.” The
warrior then drew his sword and said, “Loyalty is in the hero’s sword, and
if you do not know this, you should not talk of loyalty.” The teacher replied,
“This old priest has the treasure sword of the Diamond King, and if you do
not know it, you should not
talk of the source of loyalty.” The samurai said,
“Loyalty of your Diamond Sword— what is the use of that sort of thing in
actual fighting?” The teacher jumped forward and gave one Katzu! shout,
giving the samurai such a shock that he lost consciousness. After some
time
the teacher shouted again and the samurai at once recovered. The teacher
said, “The loyalty in the hero’s sword, where
is it? Speak!” The samurai
was overawed; he apologized and took his departure.
SAMURAI ZEN: THE WARRIOR KOANS, TREVOR LEGGETT, 1985
Interpretation
Once retired to his farm, Machiavelli had the requisite time and distance to
think deeply about those matters that concerned
him most. First, he slowly
formulated the political philosophy that had long been brewing in his mind.
To Machiavelli the
ultimate good was a world of dynamic change in which
cities or republics were reordering and revitalizing themselves in perpetual
motion. The greatest evil was stagnation and complacency. The agents of
healthy change were what he called “new princes”—young,
ambitious
people, part lion, part fox, conscious or unconscious enemies of the
established order. Second, Machiavelli analyzed
the process by which new
princes rose to the heights of power and, often, fell from it. Certain patterns
were clear: the need
to manage appearances, to play upon people’s belief
systems, and sometimes to take decidedly amoral action.
Machiavelli craved the power to spread his ideas and advice. Denied this
power through politics, he set out to win it through
books: he would convert
readers to his cause, and they would spread his ideas, witting or unwitting
carriers. Machiavelli knew that the powerful are often reluctant to take
advice,
particularly from someone apparently beneath them. He also knew
that many of those not in power might be frightened by the
dangerous
aspects of his philosophy—that many readers would be attracted and
repelled at the same time. (The powerless want
power but are afraid of what
they might have to do to get it.) To win over the resistant and ambivalent,
Machiavelli’s books
would have to be strategic, indirect and crafty. So he
devised unconventional rhetorical tactics to penetrate deep behind
his
readers’ defenses.
First, he filled his books with indispensable advice—practical ideas on
how to get power, stay in power, protect one’s power.
That draws in readers
of all kinds, for all of us think first of our own self-interest. Also, no matter
how much a reader
resists, he or she realizes that ignoring this book and its
ideas might be dangerous.
Next, Machiavelli stitched historical anecdotes throughout his writing to
illustrate his ideas. People like to be shown ways
to fancy themselves
modern Caesars or Medicis, and they like to be entertained by a good story;
and a mind captivated by a
story is relatively undefended and open to
suggestion. Readers barely notice that in reading these stories—or, rather, in
reading Machiavelli’s cleverly altered versions of them—they are absorbing
ideas. Machiavelli also quoted classical writers,
adjusting the quotations to
suit his purposes. His dangerous counsels and ideas would be easier to
accept if they seemed to
be emerging from the mouth of a Livy or a Tacitus.
Finally, Machiavelli used stark, unadorned language to give his writing
movement. Instead of finding their minds slowing and
stopping, his readers
are infected with the desire to go beyond thought and take action. His
advice is often expressed in
violent terms, but this works to rouse his
readers from their stupor. It also appeals to the young, the most fertile
ground
from which new princes grow. He left his writing open-ended, never
telling people exactly what to do. They must use their
own ideas and
experiences with power to fill in his writing, becoming com- plicit partners
in the text. Through these various
devices, Machiavelli gained power over
his readers while disguising the nature of his manipulations. It is hard to
resist
what you cannot see.
The Lydian King Croesus had had Miltiades much in this thoughts so when
he learned of his capture, he sent a command to the
people of Lampsacus to
set him at liberty; if they refused, he was determined, he added, to “cut
them down like a pine-tree.”
The people of the town were baffled by
Croesus’ threat, and at a loss to understand what being cut down like a
pine-tree might
mean, until at last the true significance of the phrase
dawned upon a certain elderly man: the pine, he explained, was the
only
kind of tree which sent up no new shoots after being felled—cut down a pine
and it will die off completely. The explanation
made the Lampsacenes so
frightened of Croesus that they let Miltiades go.
THE HISTORIES, HERODOTUS, 484–432 B.C.
Understand: you may have brilliant ideas, the kind that could
revolutionize the world, but unless you can express them effectively,
they
will have no force, no power to enter people’s minds in a deep and lasting
way. You must focus not on yourself or on
the need you feel to express
what you have to say but on your audience—as intently as a general focuses
on the enemy he is
strategizing to defeat. When dealing with people who
are bored and have short attention spans, you must entertain them, sneaking
your ideas in through the back door. With leaders you must be careful and
indirect, perhaps using third parties to disguise
the source of the ideas you
are trying to spread. With the young your expression must be more violent.
In general, your words
must have movement, sweeping readers along, never
calling attention to their own cleverness. You are not after personal
expression,
but power and influence. The less people consciously focus on
the communicative form you have chosen, the less they realize
how far your
dangerous ideas are burrowing into their minds.
For some time I have never said what I believed, and never believed what I
said, and if I do sometimes happen to say what
I think, I always hide it
among so many lies that it is hard to recover it.
— Niccolò Machiavelli, letter to Francesco Guicciardini (1521)
KEYS TO WARFARE
For centuries people have searched for the magic formula that would give
them the power to influence others through words.
This search has been
mostly elusive. Words have strange, paradoxical qualities: offer people
advice, for instance, no matter
how sound, and you imply that you know
more than they do. To the extent that this strikes at their insecurities, your
wise
words may merely have the effect of entrenching them in the very
habits you want to change. Once your language has gone out
into the world,
your audience will do what they want with it, interpreting it according to
their own preconceptions. Often
when people appear to listen, nod their
heads, and seem persuaded, they are actually just trying to be agreeable—or
even just
to get rid of you. There are simply too many words inundating our
lives for talk to have any real, long-lasting effect.
This does not mean that the search for power through language is futile,
only that it must be much more strategic and based
on knowledge of
fundamental psychology. What really changes us and our behavior is not
the actual words uttered by someone
else but our own experience,
something that comes not from without but from within. An event occurs
that shakes us up emotionally,
breaks up our usual patterns of look- ing at
the world, and has a lasting impact on us. Something we read or hear from a
great
teacher makes us question what we know, causes us to meditate on the
issue at hand, and in the process changes how we think.
The ideas are
internalized and felt as personal experience. Images from a film penetrate
our unconscious, communicating in
a preverbal way, and become part of
our dream life. Only what stirs deep within us, taking root in our minds as
thought and
experience, has the power to change what we do in any lasting
way.
That same day Jesus went out of the house and sat beside the sea. And great
crowds gathered about him, so that he got into a boat and sat there; and the
whole crowd stood on the beach. And
he told them many things in parables,
saying: “A sower went out to sow. And as he sowed, some seeds fell along
the path, and the birds came and devoured them. Other seeds fell on rocky
ground,
where they had not much soil, and immediately they sprang up,
since they had no depth of soil, but when the sun rose they
were scorched;
and since they had no root they withered away. Other seeds fell upon
thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked
them. Other seeds fell on good
soil and brought forth grain, some a hundred-fold, some sixty, some thirty.
He who has ears, let
him hear.” Then the disciples came and said to him,
“Why do you speak to them in parables?” And he answered them, “To you
it has been given to know the secrets of the kingdom of heaven, but to them
it has not been
given. For to him who has will more be given, and he will
have abundance; but from him who has not, even what he has will be taken
away. This is why I speak to them in parables, because seeing they do not
see, and hearing they do not hear, nor do they understand. With them
indeed is fulfilled the prophecy of Isaiah which says: ‘You shall
indeed hear
but never understand, and you shall indeed see but never perceive.’”
MATTHEW 13:1–15
The historical figure who most deeply pondered the nature of
communication was surely Socrates, the great philosopher of classical
Athens. Socrates’ goal was simple: he wanted to make people realize that
their knowledge of the world was superficial, if
not downright false. Had he
tried to say this conventionally and directly, though, he would only have
made his audience more
resistant and would have strengthened their
intellectual smugness. And so, pondering this phenomenon, and through
much trial
and error, Socrates came up with a method. First came the setup:
he would make a show of his own ignorance, telling his audience
of mostly
young men that he himself knew little—that any wisdom he was reputed to
have was just talk. Meanwhile he would compliment
his listeners, feeding
their vanity by praising their ideas in an offhand way. Then, in a series of
questions constituting
a dialog with a member of his audience, he would
slowly tear apart the very ideas he had just praised. He would never directly
say anything negative, but through his questions he would make the other
person see the incompleteness or falsity of his ideas.
This was confusing; he
had just professed his own ignorance, and he had sincerely praised his
interlocutors. Yet he had somehow
raised a lot of doubts about what they
had claimed to know.
The dialog would lie in the minds of Socrates’ targets for several days,
leading them to question their ideas about the world
on their own. In this
frame of mind, they would now be more open to real knowledge, to
something new. Socrates broke down
people’s preconceptions about the
world by adopting what he called a “midwife” role: he did not implant his
ideas, he simply
helped to deliver the doubts that are latent in everyone.
The success of the Socratic method was staggering: a whole generation of
young Athenians fell under his spell and were permanently
altered by his
teachings. The most famous of these was Plato, who spread Socrates’ ideas
as if they were gospel. And Plato’s
influence over Western thought is
perhaps greater than that of anyone else. Socrates’ method was highly
strategic. He began
by tearing himself down and building others up, a way
of defusing his listeners’ natural defensiveness, imperceptibly lowering
their walls. Then he would lure them into a labyrinth of discussion from
which they could find no exit and in which everything
they believed was
questioned. According to Alcibiades, one of the young men whom Socrates
had bewitched, you never knew what
he really believed or what he really
meant; everything he said was a rhetorical stance, was ironic. And since
you were unsure
what he was doing, what came to the surface in these
conversations were your own confusion and doubt. He altered your
experience
of the world from within.
Think of this method as communication-in-depth. Normal discourse, and
even fine writing and art, usually only hits people on the surface. Our
attempts to communicate with
them become absorbed in all of the noise that
fills their ears in daily life. Even if something we say or do somehow
touches
an emotional chord and creates some kind of connection, it rarely
stays in their minds long enough to alter how they think
and act. A lot of the
time, these surface communications are fine; we cannot go through life
straining to reach everyone—that
would be too exhausting. But the power
to reach people more deeply, to alter their ideas and unpleasant behavior, is
sometimes
critical.
What you need to pay attention to is not simply the content of your
communication but the form—the way you lead people to
the conclusions
you desire, rather than telling them the message in so many words. If you
want people to change a bad habit,
for example, much more effective than
simply trying to persuade them to stop is to show them— perhaps by
mirroring their bad
behavior in some way—how annoying that habit feels to
other people. If you want to make people with low self-esteem feel better
about themselves, praise has a superficial effect;
instead you must prod
them into accomplishing something tangible, giving them a real experience.
That will translate into
a much deeper feeling of confidence. If you want to
communicate an important idea, you must not preach; instead make your
readers or listeners connect the dots and come to the conclusion on their
own. Make them internalize the thought you are trying
to communicate;
make it seem to emerge from their own minds. Such indirect
communication has the power to penetrate deep behind
people’s defenses.
In speaking this new language, learn to expand your vocabulary beyond
explicit communication. Silence, for instance, can be
used to great effect:
by keeping quiet, not responding, you say a lot; by not mentioning
something that people expect you
to talk about, you call attention to this
ellipsis, make it communicate. Similarly, the details—what Machia-velli
calls le cose piccole (the little things)—in a text, speech, or work of art have
great expressive power. When the famous Roman lawyer and orator
Cicero
wanted to defame the character of someone he was prosecuting, he would
not accuse or rant; instead he would mention
details from the life of the
accused—the incredible luxury of his home (was it paid for out of illegal
means?), the lavishness
of his parties, the style of his dress, the little signs
that he considered himself superior to the average Roman. Cicero
would
say these things in passing, but the subtext was clear. Without hitting
listeners over the head, it directed them to
a certain conclusion.
In any period it can be dangerous to express ideas that go against the
grain of public opinion or offend notions of correctness.
It is best to seem to
conform to these norms, then, by parroting the accepted wis- dom,
including the proper moral ending.
But you can use details here and there to
say something else. If you are writing a novel, for instance, you might put
your
dangerous opinions in the mouth of the villain but express them with
such energy and color that they become more interesting
than the speeches
of the hero. Not everyone will understand your innuendos and layers of
meaning, but some certainly will,
at least those with the proper
discernment; and mixed messages will excite your audience: indirect forms
of expression—silence,
innuendo, loaded details, deliberate blunders—
make people feel as if they were participating, uncovering the meaning on
their
own. The more that people participate in the communication process,
the more deeply they internalize its ideas.
Irony.—Irony is in place only as a pedagogic tool, employed by a teacher in
dealing with any kind of pupil: its objective is humiliation,
making
ashamed, but of that salutary sort which awakens good resolutions and
inspires respect and gratitude towards him who
treats us thus of the kind we
feel for a physician. The ironist poses as unknowing, and does so so well
that the pupils in
discussion with him are deceived, grow bold in their belief
they know better and expose themselves in every way; they abandon
circumspection and reveal themselves as they are—up to the moment when
the lamp they have been holding up to the face of the
teacher sends its
beams very humiliatingly back on to themselves.—Where such a
relationship as that between teacher and pupil
does not obtain, irony is ill-
breeding, a vulgar affectation. All ironical writers depend on the foolish
species of men who
together with the author would like to feel themselves
superior to all others and who regard the author as the mouthpiece
of their
presumption.— Habituation to irony, moreover, like habituation to sarcasm,
spoils the character, to which it gradually lends the quality
of a malicious
and jeering superiority: in the end one comes to resemble a snapping dog
which has learned how to laugh but
forgotten how to bite.
HUMAN, ALL TOO HUMAN, FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, 1878
In putting this strategy into practice, avoid the common mistake of
straining to get people’s attention by using a form that
is shocking or
strange. The attention you get this way will be superficial and short-lived.
By using a form that alienates
a wide public, you narrow your audience;
you will end up preaching to the converted. As the case of Machiavelli
demonstrates,
using a conventional form is more effective in the long run,
because it attracts a larger audience. Once you have that audience,
you can
insinuate your real (and even shocking) content through details and subtext.
In war almost everything is judged by its result. If a general leads his
army to defeat, his noble intentions do not matter;
nor does the fact that
unforeseen factors may have thrown him off course. He lost; no excuse will
do. One of Machiavelli’s
most revolutionary ideas was to apply this
standard to politics: what matters is not what people say or intend but the
results
of their actions, whether power is increased or decreased. This is
what Machiavelli called the “effective truth”—the real
truth, in other words,
what happens in fact, not in words or theories. In examining the career of a
pope, for instance, Machiavelli
would look at the alliances he had built and
the wealth and territory he had acquired, not at his character or religious
proclamations.
Deeds and results do not lie. You must learn to apply the
same barometer to your attempts at communication, and to those of
other
people.
If a man says or writes something that he considers revolutionary and that
he hopes will change the world and improve mankind,
but in the end hardly
anyone is affected in any real way, then it is not revolutionary or
progressive at all. Communication
that does not advance its cause or
produce a desired result is just self-indulgent talk, reflecting no more than
people’s
love of their own voice and of playing the role of the moral
crusader. The effective truth of what they have written or said
is that
nothing has been changed. The ability to reach people and alter their
opinions is a serious affair, as serious and
strategic as war. You must be
harsher on yourself and on others: failure to communicate is the fault not of
the dull-witted
audience but of the unstrategic communicator.
Image:
The Stiletto. It is long and tapered to a point. It requires no sharpening. In
its form lies its perfection as an instrument
to penetrate cleanly and deeply.
Whether thrust into the flank, the back, or through the heart, it has a fatal
effect.
Authority: I cannot give birth to wisdom myself and the
accusation that many make against me, that while I question
others,
I myself bring nothing wise to light due to my lack of
wisdom, is accurate. The reason for this is as follows: God
forces
me to serve as a midwife and prevents me from giving
birth. —Socrates (470–399 B.C.)
REVERSAL
Even as you plan your communications to make them more consciously
strategic, you must develop the reverse ability to decode
the subtexts,
hidden messages, and unconscious signals in what other people say. When
people speak in vague generalities,
for example, and use a lot of abstract
terms like “justice,” “morality,” “liberty,” and so on, without really ever
explaining
the specifics of what they are talking about, they are almost
always hiding something. This is often their own nasty but necessary
actions, which they prefer to cover up under a screen of righteous verbiage.
When you hear such talk, be suspicious.
Meanwhile people who use cutesy, colloquial language, brimming with
clichés and slang, may be trying to distract you from
the thinness of their
ideas, trying to win you over not by the soundness of their arguments but by
making you feel chummy
and warm toward them. And people who use
pretentious, flowery language, crammed with clever metaphors, are often
more interested
in the sound of their own voices than in reaching the
audience with a genuine thought. In general, you must pay attention
to the
forms in which people express themselves; never take their content at face
value.
31
DESTROY FROM WITHIN
THE INNER-FRONT
STRATEGY
A war can only really be fought against an enemy who shows
himself. By infiltrating your opponents’ ranks, working from
within
to bring them down, you give them nothing to see or
react against—the ultimate advantage. From within, you also
learn their
weaknesses and open up possibilities of sowing
internal dissension. So hide your hostile intentions. To take
something you want, do not fight those who have it, but rather
join them—then either
slowly make it your own or wait for the
moment to stage a coup d’état. No structure can stand for long
when it rots from within.
Athene now inspired Prylis, son of Hermes, to suggest that entry should be
gained into Troy by means of a wooden horse; and
Epeius, son of
Panopeus, a Phocian from Parnassus, volunteered to build one under
Athene’s supervision. Afterwards, of course,
Odysseus claimed all the credit
for this stratagem . . . . . . [Epeius] built an enormous hollow horse of fir
planks, with a trap-door fitted into one flank, and large letters cut on the
other which
consecrated it to Athene: “In thankful anticipation of a safe
return to their homes, the Greeks dedicate this offering to
the Goddess.”
Odysseus persuaded the bravest of the Greeks to climb fully armed up a
rope-ladder and through the trap-door
into the belly of the horse. . . .
Among them were Menelaus, Odysseus, Diomedes, Sthenelus, Acamas,
Thoas, and Neoptolemus. Coaxed, threatened, and bribed,
Epeius himself
joined the party. He climbed up last, drew the ladder in after him and, since
he alone knew how to work the
trap-door, took his seat beside the lock. At
nightfall, the remaining Greeks under Agamemnon followed Odysseus’s
instructions, which were to burn their camp, put out
to sea and wait off
Tenedos and the Calydnian Islands until the following evening. . . . . . . At
the break of day, Trojan scouts reported that the camp lay in ashes and that
the Greeks had departed, leaving a
huge horse on the seashore. Priam and
several of his sons went out to view it and, as they stood staring in wonder,
Thymoetes was the first to break the
silence. “Since this is a gift to Athene,”
he said, “I propose that we take it into Troy and haul it up to her
citadel.”“No,
no!” cried Capys. “Athene favoured the Greeks too long; we
must either burn it at once or break it open to see what the belly contains.”
But Priam declared: “Thymoetes is right. We will fetch it in on rollers. Let
nobody desecrate Athene’s property.” The horse proved too broad to
be
squeezed through the gates. Even when the wall had been breached, it stuck
four times. With enormous efforts the Trojans
then hauled it up to the
citadel; but at least took the precaution of repairing the breach behind
them. . . . At midnight . . . Odysseus ordered Epeius to unlock the trapdoor. .
. . Now the Greeks poured silently through the moonlit streets, broke into
the
unguarded houses, and cut the throats of the Trojans as they slept.
THE GREEK MYTHS, VOL. 2, ROBERT GRAVES, 1955
THE INVISIBLE ENEMY
Late in 1933, Adolf Hitler appointed the forty-six-year-old Rear Admiral
Wilhelm Canaris chief of the Abwehr, the secret intelligence
and
counterespionage service of the German General Staff. Hitler had recently
won dictatorial powers as the ruler of Germany,
and, with an eye on future
conquests in Europe, he wanted Canaris to make the Abwehr an agency as
efficient as the British
Secret Service. Canaris was a slightly odd choice for
the position. He came from the aristocracy, was not a member of the
Nazi
Party, and had not had a particularly outstanding military career. But Hitler
saw traits in Canaris that would make him
a superior spymaster: cunning in
the extreme, a man made for intrigue and deception, he knew how to get
results. He would
also owe his promotion exclusively to Hitler.
In the years to come, Hitler would have reason to feel proud of his
choice. Canaris rigorously reorganized the Abwehr and
extended its spy
networks throughout Europe. Then, in May 1940, he provided exceptional
intelligence for the blitzkrieg invasion
of France and the Low Countries
early in World War II. And so, in the summer of that same year, Hitler gave
Canaris his most
important task to date: providing intelligence for
Operation Sealion, a plan to conquer England. After the blitzkrieg and
the
evacuation of the Allied army at Dunkirk, the British seemed deeply
vulnerable, and knocking them out of the war at this
point would ensure
Hitler’s conquest of Europe.
A few weeks into the job, however, Canaris reported that the Germans
had underestimated the size of the English army and air
force. Sealion
would require resources much larger than the Führer had anticipated; unless
Hitler was willing to commit many
more troops, it could turn into a mess.
This was highly disappointing news for Hitler, who had wanted to knock
out England
in one quick blow. With his eye on an imminent invasion of
Russia, he was unwilling to commit large numbers to Sealion or
to spend
years subduing the British. Having come to trust Canaris, he abandoned the
planned invasion.
That same summer General Alfred Jodl came up with a brilliant plan to
damage England in another way: using Spain as a base
of operations, he
would invade the British-owned island of Gibraltar, cutting off England’s
sea routes through the Mediterranean
and the Suez Canal to its empire in
India and points east—a disastrous blow. But the Germans would have to
act fast, before
the English caught on to the threat. Excited by the prospect
of ruining England in this indirect way, Hitler once again asked
Canaris to
assess the plan. The Abwehr chief went to Spain, studied the situation, and
reported back. The moment a German
army moved into Spain, he said, the
English would see the plan, and Gibraltar had elaborate defenses. The
Germans would also
need the cooperation of Francisco Franco, dictator of
Spain, who Canaris believed would not be sufficiently helpful. In short:
Gibraltar was not worth the effort.
There were many around Hitler who believed that taking Gibraltar was
eminently realizable and could mean overall victory in
the war against
Britain. Shocked at Canaris’s report, they vocally expressed their doubts
about the intelligence he had been
providing all along. His enigmatic nature
—he spoke little and was impossible to read—only fueled their suspicions
that he
was not to be trusted. Hitler heard his staff out, but a meeting with
Generalissimo Franco to discuss the Gibraltar plan indirectly
corroborated
everything Canaris had said. Franco was difficult and made all kinds of silly
demands; the Spanish would be impossible
to deal with; the logistics were
too complicated. Hitler quickly lost interest in Jodl’s plan.
In the years that followed, German officials in increasing numbers would
come to suspect Canaris of disloyalty to the Third
Reich, but no one could
pin anything concrete on him. And Hitler himself had great faith in the
Abwehr chief and sent him
on critical top-secret missions. One such
assignment occurred in the summer of 1943, when Marshal Pietro
Badoglio, the former
chief of the Italian General Staff, arrested Benito
Mussolini, dictator of Italy and Hitler’s staunchest ally. The Germans
feared
that Badoglio might secretly open talks with General Dwight D.
Eisenhower for Italy’s surrender—a devastating blow
to the Axis that Hitler
could forestall, if necessary, by sending an army to Rome, arresting
Badoglio, and occupying the capital.
But was it necessary?
Hitler’s armies were needed elsewhere, so Canaris was dispatched to
assess the likelihood of Italy’s surrender. He met with
his counterpart in the
Italian government, General Cesare Amé, then arranged for a meeting
between high-ranking members of
both countries’ intelligence services. At
the meeting, Amé, emphatically denied that Badoglio had any intention of
betraying
Germany; in fact, the marshal was fiercely loyal to the cause. And
Amé was very convincing. Hitler accordingly left Italy
alone. A few weeks
later, however, Badoglio indeed surrendered to Eisenhower, and the
valuable Italian fleet moved into Allied
hands. Ca-naris had been fooled—
or was it Canaris who had done the fooling?
General Walter Schellenberg, chief of the foreign intelligence branch of
the SS, began to investigate the Badoglio fiasco
and found two men in
Amé’s service who had listened in on one of Canaris’s talks with their boss.
Canaris, they reported,
had known of Badoglio’s intentions to surrender all
along and had collaborated with Amé to deceive Hitler. Surely this time
the
Abwehr chief had been caught in the act and would pay with his life.
Schellenberg accumulated a thick dossier of other
actions that cast more
doubts on Canaris. He presented it to Heinrich Himmler, head of the SS,
who, however, told his subordinate
to keep quiet—he would present the
dossier to Hitler when the time was right. Yet, to Schellenberg’s dismay,
months went by
and Himmler did nothing, except eventually to retire
Canaris with honors from the service.
Shortly after Canaris’s retirement, his diaries fell into the hands of the SS.
They revealed that he had conspired against
Hitler from the beginning of
his service as Abwehr chief, even plotting to assassinate the Führer in
schemes that had only
barely misfired. Canaris was sent to a concentration
camp, where, in April 1945, he was tortured and killed.
Interpretation
Wilhelm Canaris was a devoutly patriotic and conservative man. In the
earliest days of the Nazi Party’s rise to power, he
had come to believe that
Hitler would lead his beloved Germany to destruction. But what could he
do? He was just one man,
and to raise his voice against Hitler would get
him no more than a little publicity and an early death. Canaris cared only
about results. So he kept quiet, and, when offered the job of Abwehr chief,
he seized his opportunity. At first he bided his
time, gaining credibility by
his work in the Abwehr and getting to understand the inner workings of the
Nazi government. Meanwhile
he secretly organized a group of like-minded
conspirators, the Schwarze Kapelle (Black Orchestra), who would hatch
several
plots to kill Hitler. From his position in the Abwehr, Canaris was to
some extent able to protect the Schwarze Kapelle from
investigation. He
also quietly gathered intelligence on the dirtiest secrets of high-ranking
Nazis like Himmler and let them
know that any move against him would
result in revelations that would ruin them.
Assigned to prepare for Operation Sealion, Canaris doctored the
intelligence to make England look much more formidable than
it was.
Assigned to investigate an invasion of Gibraltar, he secretly told the
Spanish that to let Germany use their country
would spell disaster:
Germany would never leave. Hence Franco’s alienating treatment of Hitler.
In both of these cases, Canaris
exploited Hitler’s impatience for quick and
easy victories to discourage him from ventures that could have easily and
irrevocably
turned the war in his favor. Finally, in the case of Badoglio,
Canaris understood Hitler’s weak spot—a paranoid concern with
the loyalty
of others—and coached Amé on how to appeal to this weakness and make a
show of Italy’s devotion to the Axis cause.
The results of Canaris’s work
from the inside are astounding: one man played a major role in saving
England, Spain, and Italy
from disaster, arguably turning the tide of the war.
The resources of the German war machine were essentially at his disposal,
to disrupt and derail its efforts.
As the story of Canaris demonstrates, if there is something you want to
fight or destroy, it is often best to repress your
desire to act out your
hostility, revealing your position and letting the other side know your
intentions. What you gain in
publicity, and perhaps in feeling good about
expressing yourself openly, you lose in a curtailment of your power to cause
real damage, particularly if the enemy is strong.
Instead the ultimate strategy is to seem to stay on the enemy side,
burrowing deep into its heart. From there you can gather
valuable
information: weaknesses to attack, incriminating evidence to publicize.
Here subtle maneuvers, like passing along
false information or steering
your opponent into a self-destructive policy, can have large effects—much
larger than anything
you could do from the outside. The enemy’s powers
become weapons you can use against it, a kind of turncoat armory at your
disposal. It is hard for most people to imagine that someone who outwardly
plays the part of a loyal supporter or friend can
secretly be a foe. This
makes your hostile intentions and maneuvers relatively easy to cloak. When
you are invisible to the
enemy, there is no limit to the destructive powers at
your command.
Speak deferentially, listen respectfully, follow his command, and accord
with him in everything. He will never imagine you
might be in conflict with
him. Our treacherous measures will then be settled.
—Tai Kung, Six Secret Teachings (circa fourth century B.C.)
THE FRIENDLY TAKEOVER
In the summer of 1929, André Breton, the thirty-three-year-old leader of
Paris’s avant-garde surrealist movement, saw a private
screening of a film
called Un Chien Andalou. It was directed by a Spanish member of the
group, Luis Buñuel, and its first image showed a man slicing open a
woman’s eye
with a knife. This, Breton exclaimed, was the first surrealist
film. Un Chien Andalou generated excitement in part because of the
contribution to it of a new artist on the scene, Salvador Dalí, a friend and
collaborator
of Buñuel’s. The director spoke highly to Breton of his fellow
Spaniard, whose paintings, he said, could certainly be considered
surrealist
and whose personality was supremely peculiar. Soon others, too, were
talking about Dalí, discussing what he called
his “paranoid-critical” method
of painting: he delved deep into his dreams and unconscious and interpreted
the images he found
there, no matter what their content, in delirious detail.
Dalí still lived in Spain, but Breton was suddenly seeing his name
everywhere he went. Then, in November 1929, the twenty-five-year-old
Dalí, had his first major show in a Paris gallery, and
Breton was transfixed
by the images. He wrote of the exhibition, “For the first time the windows
of the mind had opened wide.”
The late 1920s were a difficult period for Breton. The movement he had
founded some five years earlier was stagnating, its
members constantly
bickering over ideological points that bored Breton to tears. In truth,
surrealism was on the verge of
becoming passé. Perhaps Dalí could offer
the fresh blood it needed: his art, his ideas, and his provocative character
might
make surrealism something people talked about again. With all this in
mind, Breton invited Dalí into the movement, and the
Spaniard happily
accepted. Dalí moved to Paris and established himself there.
For the next few years, Breton’s strategy seemed to be working. Dalí’s
scandalous paintings were the talk of Paris. His exhibitions
caused riots.
Suddenly everyone was interested in surrealism again, even younger artists.
But by 1933, Breton was beginning
to rue his inclusion of Dalí. He had
begun to get letters from the Spaniard expressing great interest in Hitler as a
source
of paranoiac inspiration. Only the surrealists, Dalí felt, were capable
of “saying pretty things on the subject” of Hitler;
he even wrote of sexually
charged dreams about Hitler. As news of Dalí’s infatuation with the Führer
spread within the movement,
it provoked a great deal of argument. Many
surrealists had communist sympathies and were disgusted by the Spanish
artist’s
musings. To make matters worse, he included in one enormous
painting an image of Lenin in a grotesque pose—exposing oversized
buttocks (nine feet long), propped on a crutch. Many in the surrealist group
admired Lenin; was Dalí being deliberately provocative?
After Breton told
Dalí he disliked this rendition of the human buttocks and anus, a delirious
profusion of anus images suddenly
began to populate the artist’s paintings.
Throughout his revolutionary and missionary travels, Hasan [leader of the
Nizari Ismailis] was searching for an impregnable fortress from which to
conduct his resistance to the Seljuk empire. In about 1088, he finally
chose
the castle of Alamut, built on a narrow ridge on a high rock in the heart of
the Elburz Mountains in a region known
as the Rudbar. The castle
dominated an enclosed cultivated valley thirty miles long and three miles
across at its widest,
approximately six thousand feet above sea level.
Several villages dotted the valley, and their inhabitants were particularly
receptive to the ascetic piety of Hasan. The
castle was accessible only with
the greatest difficulty through a narrow gorge of the Alamut River. . . .
Hasan employed a careful strategy to take over the castle, which had been
granted to its current Shiite owner, named Mahdi,
by the Seljuk sultan
Malikshah. First, Hasan sent his trusted dai Husayn Qai-ni and two others
to win converts in the neighboring villages. Next, many of the residents and
soldiers of Alamut were secretly converted to Ismailism. Finally, in
September 1090, Hasan
himself was secretly smuggled into the castle.
When Mahdi realized that Hasan had in fact quietly taken over his fortress,
he left peacefully. . . .
THE TEMPLARS AND THE ASSASSINS, JAMES WASSERMAN, 2001
By early 1934, Breton could stand no more, and he issued a statement,
cosigned by several members, proposing Dalí’s expulsion
from the
surrealist group. The movement was split down the middle; Dalí had both
supporters and enemies. Finally a meeting
was called to debate the issue.
Dalí had a fever and a sore throat; he came to the meeting wearing half a
dozen layers of
clothing and with a thermometer in his mouth. As Breton
paced the room, listing the reasons for his banishment, Dalí began
to take
off and put on his overcoat, jacket, and sweaters, trying to regulate his
temperature. It was hard for anyone to pay
attention to Breton.
Finally Dalí was asked to respond. “I had painted both Lenin and Hitler
on the basis of dreams,” he said, the thermometer
in his mouth making him
spit many of his words. “Lenin’s anamorphic buttock was not insulting, but
the very proof of my fidelity
to surrealism.” He continued to put on and
take off clothing. “All taboos are forbidden, or else a list has to be made of
those to be observed, and let Breton formally state that the kingdom of
surrealist poetry is nothing but a little domain used
for the house arrest of
those convicted felons placed under surveillance by the vice squad or the
Communist Party.”
The members of the circle were perplexed to say the least: Dalí had
turned their meeting into a kind of surrealist performance,
both making fun
of the creative freedom they advocated and claiming it for himself. He had
also made them laugh. A vote to
exclude him would only confirm the
accusations he had leveled at them. For the time being, they decided to
leave him alone,
but in the meeting’s aftermath it was clear that the
surrealist movement was now more divided than ever.
At the end of that year, Dalí disappeared to New York. Word came back
to Paris that he had completely conquered the art world
in America, making
surrealism the hottest movement around. In the years to come, he would
actually emigrate to the United
States, and his face would grace the cover of
Time magazine. From New York his fame spread far, wide, and around the
world. Meanwhile the surrealists themselves faded quietly
from public
view, marginalized by other art movements. In 1939, Breton, disgusted by
his lack of control over Dalí finally
expelled the Spanish artist from the
group, but by then it hardly mattered: Dalí himself had become
synonymous with surrealism,
and it would stay that way long after the
surrealist movement had died.
Interpretation
Salvador Dalí was an extremely ambitious man. Although he appeared
eccentric to say the least, his diaries show the extent
to which he applied
strategy to get what he wanted. Languishing in Spain early on in his career,
he saw the importance of
capturing the Paris art world, the center of the
modern-art movement, if he were to rise to the heights of fame. And if he
were to make it in Paris, his name would have to be attached to some kind
of movement—that would demonstrate his avant-garde
status and give him
free publicity. Considering the nature of his work and paranoiac-critical
method, surrealism was the only
logical choice. Of course it helped that
Dalí's good friend Buñuel was already a member of the group and that his
lover, Gala,
was also the wife of Paul Eluard, one of surrealism’s principal
authors and thinkers. Through Buñuel, Gala, and a few others
(people Dalí
called “messengers” and “porters”), he spread his name strategically
throughout Paris and aimed himself directly
at Breton. In truth, Dalí
despised any kind of organized group and actively disliked Breton, but both
could be useful to him.
By insinuating his presence through others and
suggesting that he was a surrealist avant la lettre, he cleverly managed to
get Breton to invite him into the group.
Now, as a true surrealist, an official insider, Dalí could continue to wage
his insidious war. At first he made a show of
being a loyal member of the
group, the platform from which he spent several years winning over Paris
with his striking paintings.
The surrealists were grateful for the new life he
had given them, but in reality he was using their name and presence to
propel
his career. Then, once his fame was secure, he proceeded to
dynamite the group from the inside. The weaker the surrealists
were
internally, the more he could dominate them publicly. Dalí deliberately
chose Hitler and Lenin as images he knew would
disgust many in the
group. That would both bring out Breton’s totalitarian side and cause a
major split among the members.
Dalí's “performance” at the meeting to
expel him was a surrealist masterpiece in itself, and a strategic blow to any
vestiges
of group unity. Finally, when the movement was riven with
division, he scampered off to New York to complete his campaign.
Appropriating the seductive name of surrealism for himself, he would go
down in history as its most famous member, far more
famous than Breton.
It is hard to make your way in the world alone. Alliances can help, but if
you are starting out, it is hard to get the right
people interested in an alliance
with you; there is nothing in it for them. The wisest strategy is often to join
the group
that can best serve your long-term interests, or the one with which
you have the most affinity. Instead of trying to conquer
this group from the
outside, you burrow your way into it. As an insider you can gather valuable
information about how it functions
and particularly about its members’
hypocrisies and weaknesses—knowledge you can use to wage insidious
intraorganizational
warfare. From the inside you can divide and conquer.
Remember: your advantage here is that, unlike the other members, you
have no sentimental attachment to the group; your only
allegiance is to
yourself. That gives you the freedom you need to make the manipulative
and destructive maneuvers that will
propel you to the fore at the others’
expense.
If you decide to wage a war for the total triumph of your individuality, you
must begin by inexorably destroying those who
have the greatest affinity
with you.
—Salvador Dalí (1904–1989)
KEYS TO WARFARE
The most common form of defense in old-fashioned warfare was the
fortress or walled city, and military leaders strategized
for centuries about
how to take such structures. The fortress presented a simple problem: it was
designed to be impenetrable,
to require such an effort to take it that unless
doing so was strategically essential, an army would tend to pass it by. The
conventional strategy against the fortress was to scale or breach its walls,
using siege engines and battering rams. Often
that meant first besieging it,
creating around it circles known as “lines of circumvallation and
contravallation” that would
prevent supplies and reinforcements from
coming in and the defenders from leaving. The city’s inhabitants would
slowly starve
and weaken, making it possible eventually to breach the walls
and take the castle. These sieges tended to be quite long and
bloody.
Over the centuries, however, certain enlightened strategists hit upon a
different way to bring down the walls. Their strategy
was based on a simple
premise: the apparent strength of the fortress is an illusion, for behind its
walls are people who are
trapped, afraid, even desperate. The city’s leaders
have essentially run out of options; they can only put their faith in
the
fortress’s architecture. To lay siege to these walls is to mistake the
appearance of strength for reality. If in fact
the walls are hiding great
weakness within, then the proper strategy is to bypass them and aim for the
interior. This can
be done literally, by digging tunnels beneath the walls,
undermining their strength—a conventional military strategy. A better,
more devious route is to infiltrate people inside them or to work with the
city’s disaffected inhabitants. This is known as
“opening an inner front”—
finding a group on the inside who will work on your behalf to spread
discontent and will eventually
betray the fortress into your hands, sparing
you a long siege.
To attack or to intervene.—We often make the mistake of actively opposing a
tendency or party or age because we happen to have seen only its external
side, its deliquescence or the “faults of its virtues” necessarily adhering to
it—perhaps because we ourselves have participated in them to a marked
degree. Then we turn our back
on them and go off in an opposite direction;
but it would be better if we sought out their good and strong side instead or
evolved and developed it in ourself. It requires, to be sure, a more
penetrating eye and a more favorable inclination to advance
what is
imperfect and evolving than to see through it in its imperfection and deny it.
HUMAN, ALL TOO HUMAN, FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE, 1878
In late January 1968, the North Vietnamese launched the famous Tet
Offensive against the South Vietnamese and American armies.
Among their
targets was Hue, the ancient capital of Vietnam and a city of great religious
significance for the Vietnamese
people. In the center of Hue is a massive
fort called the Citadel, and within the Citadel is the Imperial Palace
compound,
the heart and soul of Hue. The Citadel has incredibly thick and
high walls and is surrounded on all sides by water. In 1968
it was guarded
by American soldiers and their allies. Yet the North Vietnamese were
somehow able to take the Citadel with
remarkable ease. They held it for
several weeks, then disappeared from Hue as if by magic after a massive
U.S. counterattack.
The Citadel was unimportant to them as a physical or
strategic possession; what they were after was the symbolism of being
able
to take it, showing the world that American invincibility was a myth.
The capture of the Citadel was a remarkable feat, and this is how it was
done. Months before Tet, the North Vietnamese began
to infiltrate men into
the city and to organize those of their sympathizers who already lived in
Hue and worked inside the
Citadel. They got hold of detailed plans of the
fortress, which allowed them to dig elaborate tunnels under its walls. They
were also able to leave stockpiles of weapons at key points. During the Tet
holiday, they infiltrated even more of their men
into the city, dressed as
peasants. Confederates inside the fortress helped them to overrun some of
the guard posts and open
the gates. Melting into the local population, they
made it impossible for the Citadel’s defenders to distinguish friend from
foe. Finally, having reconnoitered the location of the concentrated
command structure inside the Citadel, the North Vietnamese
were able to
take it out right away, leaving the defenders unable to communicate with
one another. This created mass confusion,
and in the process the defense of
the Citadel collapsed.
The North Vietnamese called this strategy the “blooming lotus.” It has
deep roots in Asian military thinking, and its applications
go far beyond
war. Instead of focusing on the enemy’s formidable front, on capturing key
points in the periphery of its defenses
and finding a way through them (the
traditional Western approach), the lotus strategy aims first and foremost at
the center—the
soft and vulnerable parts within. The goal is to funnel
soldiers and confederates into this central area by whatever means
possible
and to attack it first in order to spread confusion. Rather than trying to
penetrate defenses, it infiltrates them.
This includes the minds of the enemy
soldiers and officers—strategizing to get under their skin, to unbalance their
reasoning
powers, to soften them up from within. As with the lotus flower,
everything unfolds from the center of the target.
The basic principle here is that it is easiest to topple a structure—a wall, a
group, a defensive mind—from the inside out.
When something begins to
rot or fall apart from within, it collapses of its own weight—a far better way
to bring it down than
ramming yourself against its walls. In attacking any
group, the lotus strategist thinks first of opening an inner front.
Confederates
on the inside will provide valuable intelligence on the
enemy’s vulnerabilities. They will silently and subtly sabotage him.
They
will spread internal dissension and division. The strategy can weaken the
enemy to the point where you can finish him
off with a penetrating blow; it
can also bring down the enemy in and of itself.
A prince need trouble little about conspiracies when the people are well
disposed, but when they are hostile and hold him
in hatred, then he must
fear everything and everybody.
NICCOLÒ MACHIAVELLI, 1469–1527
A variation on the lotus strategy is to befriend your enemies, worming
your way into their hearts and minds. As your targets’
friend, you will
naturally learn their needs and insecurities, the soft interior they try so hard
to hide. Their guard will
come down with a friend. And even later on,
when you play out your treacherous intentions, the lingering resonance of
your
friendship will still confuse them, letting you keep on manipulating
them by toying with their emotions or pushing them into
overreactions. For
a more immediate effect, you can try a sudden act of kindness and
generosity that gets people to lower
their defenses—the Trojan Horse
strategy. (For ten long years, the Greeks battered the walls of Troy to no
effect; the simple
gift of a wooden horse let them sneak a few men into
Troy and open the gates from within.)
The lotus strategy is widely applicable. When confronted by something
difficult or thorny, do not be distracted or discouraged
by its formidable
outer appearance; think your way into the soft core, the center from which
the problem blossoms. Perhaps
the source of your problem is a particular
person; perhaps it is yourself and your own stale ideas; perhaps it is the
dysfunctional
organization of a group. Knowing the problem’s core gives
you great power to change it from the inside out. Your first thought
must
always be to infiltrate to the center—whether in thought or in action—never
to whale away at the periphery or just pound
at the walls.
If there is someone on the inside whom you need to get rid of or thwart,
the natural tendency is to consider conspiring with
others in your group
who feel the same way. In most conspiracies the goal is some large-scale
action to topple the leader
and seize power. The stakes are high, which is
why conspiracies are so often difficult and dangerous. The main weakness
in
any conspiracy is usually human nature: the higher the number of people
who are in on the plot, the higher the odds that someone
will reveal it,
whether deliberately or accidentally. As Benjamin Franklin said, “Three
may keep a secret if two of them are
dead.” No matter how confident you
may be of your fellow conspirators, you cannot know for certain what is
going on in their
minds—the doubts they may be having, the people they
may be talking to.
There are a few precautions you can take. Keep the number of
conspirators as small as possible. Involve them in the details
of the plot
only as necessary; the less they know, the less they have to blab. Revealing
the schedule of your plan as late
as possible before you all act will give
them no time to back out. Then, once the plan is described, stick to it.
Nothing
sows more doubts in conspirators’ minds than last-minute changes.
Even given all this insurance, keep in mind that most conspiracies
fail and,
in their failure, create all kinds of unintended consequences. Even the
successful plot to assassinate Julius Caesar
led not to the restoration of the
Roman Republic, as the conspirators intended, but eventually to the
undemocratic regime
of the emperor Augustus. Too few conspirators and
you lack the strength to control the consequences; too many and the
conspiracy
will be exposed before it bears fruit.
In destroying anything from within, you must be patient and resist the
lure of large-scale, dramatic action. As Canaris showed,
the placement of
little wrenches in the machinery is just as destructive in the long run, and
safer because harder to trace.
Consider the ability to dissuade your
opponents from acting aggressively or to make their plans misfire as a kind
of battlefield
victory, even if your triumph is surreptitious. A few such
victories and your enemy will fall apart from within.
Finally, morale plays a crucial part in any war, and it is always wise to
work to undermine the morale of the enemy troops.
The Chinese call this
“removing the firewood from under the cauldron.” You can attempt this
from the outside, through propaganda,
but that often has the opposite effect,
reinforcing the cohesion of soldiers and civilians in the face of an alien
force trying
to win them over. It is much more effective to find
sympathizers within their ranks, who will spread discontent among them
like a disease. When soldiers see those on their own side having doubts
about the cause they are fighting for, they are generally
demoralized and
vulnerable to more disaffection. If their leaders overreact to this threat by
punishing grumblers, they play
into your hands, representing themselves as
unjust and heavy-handed; if they leave the problem alone, it will only
spread;
and if they start to see enemies everywhere around them, their
paranoia will cloud their strategic abilities. Using an inner
front to spread
dissension is often enough to give you the advantage you need to
overwhelm the enemy.
Image: The Termite.
From deep within the structure of the house, the termite silently eats away
at the wood, its armies patiently boring through
beams and supports. The
work goes unnoticed, but not the result.
Authority: The worst [military policy is] to assault walled cities.
. . . If your commander, unable to control his temper,
sends your
troops swarming at the walls, your casualties will be one in
three and still you will not have taken the city.
. . . Therefore the
expert in using the military subdues the enemy’s forces without
going to battle, takes the enemy’s walled
cities without
launching an attack. —Sun-tzu (fourth century B.C.)
REVERSAL
There are always likely to be disgruntled people in your own group who
will be liable to turning against you from the inside.
The worst mistake is to
be paranoid, suspecting one and all and trying to monitor their every move.
Your only real safeguard
against conspiracies and saboteurs is to keep your
troops satisfied, engaged in their work, and united by their cause. They
will
tend to police themselves and turn in any grumblers who are trying to
foment trouble from within. It is only in unhealthy
and decaying bodies that
cancerous cells can take root.
32
DOMINATE WHILE
SEEMING TO SUBMIT
THE PASSIVE-AGGRESSION
STRATEGY
Any attempt to bend people to your will is a form of aggression.
And in a world where political considerations are paramount,
the most effective form of aggression is the best-hidden one:
aggression behind a compliant, even loving exterior. To follow
the passive-aggressive strategy, you must seem to go along with
people, offering no resistance. But actually you dominate
the
situation. You are noncommittal, even a little helpless, but that
only means that everything revolves around you. Some
people
may sense what you are up to and get angry. Don’t worry—just
make sure you have disguised your aggression enough that
you
can deny it exists. Do it right and they will feel guilty for
accusing you. Passive aggression is a popular strategy; you
must learn how to defend yourself against the vast legions of
passive-aggressive
warriors who will assail you in your daily
life.
Gandhi and his associates repeatedly deplored the inability of their people
to give organized, effective, violent resistance
against injustice and tyranny.
His own experience was corroborated by an unbroken series of reiterations
from all the leaders
of India—that India could not practice physical warfare
against her enemies. Many reasons were given, including weakness, lack of
arms, having been beaten into submission, and other arguments of a similar
nature. . . . . . . Confronted with the issue of what means he could employ
against the British, we come to the other criteria previously
mentioned; that
the kind of means selected and how they can be used is significantly
dependent upon the face of the enemy,
or the character of his opposition.
Gandhi’s opposition not only made the effective use of passive resistance
possible but
practically invited it. His enemy was a British administration
characterized by an old, aristocratic, liberal tradition, one
which granted a
good deal of freedom to its colonials and which always had operated on a
pattern of using, absorbing, seducing,
or destroying, through flattery or
corruption, the revolutionary leaders who arose from the colonial ranks.
This was the kind of opposition that would have tolerated and ultimately
capitulated before the tactic of passive resistance.
RULES FOR RADICALS, SAUL D. ALINSKY, 1971
THE GUILT WEAPON
In December 1929 the group of Englishmen who governed India were
feeling a little nervous. The Indian National Congress—the
country’s main
independence movement—had just broken off talks over the proposal that
Britain would gradually return autonomous
rule to the subcontinent. Instead
the Congress was now calling for nothing less than immediate and total
independence, and
it had asked Mahatma Gandhi to lead a civil-
disobedience campaign to initiate this struggle. Gandhi, who had studied
law in
London years before, had invented a form of passive-resistant protest
in 1906, while working as a barrister in South Africa.
In India in the early
1920s, he had led civil-disobedience campaigns against the British that had
created quite a stir, had
landed him in prison, and had made him the most
revered man in the country. For the British, dealing with him was never
easy;
despite his frail appearance, he was uncompromising and relentless.
Although Gandhi believed in and practiced a rigorous form of
nonviolence, the colonial officers of the British Raj were fearful:
at a time
when the English economy was weak, they imagined him organizing a
boycott of British goods, not to mention mass
demonstrations in the streets
of India’s cities, a police nightmare.
The man in charge of the Raj’s strategy in combating the independence
movement was the viceroy of India, Lord Edward Irwin.
Although Irwin
admired Gandhi personally, he had decided to respond to him rapidly and
with force—he could not let the situation
get out of hand. He waited
anxiously to see what Gandhi would do. The weeks went by, and finally, on
March 2, Irwin received
a letter from Gandhi— rather touching in its
honesty—that revealed the details of the civil-disobedience campaign he
was about
to launch. It was to be a protest against the salt tax. The British
held a monopoly on India’s production of salt, even though
it could easily
be gathered by anyone on the coast. They also levied a rather high tax on it.
This was quite a burden for
the poorest of the poor in India, for whom salt
was their only condiment. Gandhi planned to lead a march of his followers
from his ashram near Bombay (present-day Mumbai) to the coastal town of
Dandi, where he would gather sea salt left on the
shore by the waves and
encourage Indians everywhere to do the same. All this could be prevented,
he wrote to Irwin, if the
viceroy would immediately repeal the salt tax.
Irwin read this letter with a sense of relief. He imagined the sixty-year-
old Gandhi, rather fragile and leaning on a bamboo
cane, leading his ragtag
followers from his ashram—fewer than eighty people—on a two-hundred-
mile march to the sea, where
he would gather some salt from the sands.
Compared to what Irwin and his staff had been expecting, the protest
seemed almost
ludicrously small in scale. What was Gandhi thinking? Had
he lost touch with reality? Even some members of the Indian National
Congress were deeply disappointed by his choice of protest. In any event,
Irwin had to rethink his strategy. It simply would
not do to harass or arrest
this saintly old man and his followers (many of them women). That would
look very bad. It would
be better to leave him alone, avoiding the
appearance of a heavy-handed response and letting the crisis play out and
die down.
In the end the ineffectiveness of this campaign would somewhat
discredit Gandhi, breaking his spell over the Indian masses.
The
independence movement might fracture or at least lose some momentum,
leaving England in a stronger position in the long
run.
As Irwin watched Gandhi’s preparations for the march, he became still
more convinced that he had chosen the right strategy.
Gandhi was framing
the event as almost religious in quality, like Lord Buddha’s famous march
to attain divine wisdom, or Lord
Rama’s retreat in the Ramayana. His
language became increasingly apocalyptic: “We are entering upon a life-
and-death struggle,
a holy war.” This seemed to resonate with the poor, who
began to flock to Gandhi’s ashram to hear him speak. He called in
film
crews from all over the world to record the march, as if it were a
momentous historical event. Irwin himself was a religious
man and saw
himself as the representative of a God-fearing, civilized nation. It would
redound to England’s credit to be seen
to leave this saintly man untouched
on his procession to the sea.
Gandhi and his followers left their ashram on March 12, 1930. As the
group passed from village to village, their ranks began
to swell. With each
passing day, Gandhi was bolder. He called on students throughout India to
leave their studies and join
him in the march. Thousands responded. Large
crowds gathered along the way to see him pass; his speeches to them grew
more
and more inflammatory. He seemed to be trying to bait the English
into arresting him. On April 6 he led his followers into
the sea to purify
themselves, then collected some salt from the shore. Word quickly spread
throughout India that Gandhi had
broken the salt law.
It is impossible to win a contest with a helpless opponent since if you win
you have won nothing. Each blow you strike is
unreturned so that all you
can feel is guilt for having struck while at the same time experiencing the
uneasy suspicion that
the helplessness is calculated.
STRATEGIES OF PSYCHOTHERAPY, JAY HALEY, 1963
Irwin followed these events with increasing alarm. It dawned on him that
Gandhi had tricked him: instead of responding quickly
and decisively to
this seemingly innocent march to the sea, the viceroy had left Gandhi alone,
allowing the march to gain
momentum. The religious symbolism that
seemed so harmless had stirred the masses, and the salt issue had somehow
become a
lightning rod for disaffection with English policy. Gandhi had
shrewdly chosen an issue that the English would not recognize
as
threatening but that would resonate with Indians. Had Irwin responded by
arresting Gandhi immediately, the whole thing
might have died down. Now
it was too late; to arrest him at this point would only add fuel to the fire. Yet
to leave him alone
would show weakness and cede him the initiative.
Meanwhile nonviolent demonstrations were breaking out in cities and
villages
all over India, and to respond to them with violence would only
make the demonstrators more sympathetic to moderate Indians.
Whatever
Irwin did, it seemed, would make things worse. And so he fretted, held
endless meetings, and did nothing.
In the days to come, the cause rippled outward. Thousands of Indians
traveled to India’s coasts to collect salt as Gandhi
had. Large cities saw
mass demonstrations in which this illegal salt was given away or sold at a
minimal price. One form of
nonviolent protest cascaded into another—a
Congress-led boycott of British goods, for one. Finally, on Irwin’s orders,
the
British began to respond to the demonstrations with force. And on May
4 they arrested Gandhi and took him to prison, where
he would stay for nine
months without trial.
Huang Ti, the legendary Yellow Emperor and reputed ancestor of the Chou
dynasty, the historical paradigm of concord and civilization,
is said to have
brought harmony from chaos, tamed the barbarians and wild beasts,
cleared the forests and marshes, and invented
the “five harmonious
sounds,” not through an act of epic bloodshed, but through his superior
virtue, by adapting and yielding
to “natural conditions” and to the Will of
Heaven. Confucianism henceforth repudiates as unworkable the idea of
military solutions to human problems. Huang Ti’s most notable heir, we are
told, was Ti Yao, a gentleman who “naturally and without effort,”
embraced reverence,
courteousness, and intelligence. Nevertheless, during
his reign, the Deluge, mythology’s universal symbol of anomie, threatened
to inundate the land. Thus
it fell upon him to appoint a successor to
preserve the order of his own son. Ti Yao chose the most qualified man for
the
job, the venerable Shun, who had in various tests already demonstrated
a capacity to harmonize human affairs through righteousness.
. . . . . . Shun
in turn selected Yu the Sage to engineer an end to the flood. Because Yu
refused wine and always acted appropriately, moving with and not resisting
nature, the Way of Heaven (T’ien Tao) was revealed to him. He
subsequently harnessed the river waters not by fighting against them with a
dam, but by yielding to
them and clearing for them a wider channel within
which to run. Were it not for Yu, so the story goes, who herein personified
the wisdom of both Confucius and Lao-tzu, the Taoist prophet,
we would all
be fish.
RELIGIOUS MYTHOLOGY AND THE ART OF WAR, JAMES A. AHO,
1981
Gandhi’s arrest sparked a conflagration of protest. On May 21 a group of
2,500 Indians marched peacefully on the government’s
Dha-rasana Salt
Works, which was defended by armed Indian constables and British
officers. When the marchers advanced on the
factory, they were struck
down with steel-plated clubs. Instructed in Gandhi’s methods of
nonviolence, the demonstrators made
no attempt to defend themselves,
simply submitting to the blows that rained down on them. Those who had
not been hit continued
to march until almost every last one had been
clubbed. It was a nauseating scene that got a great deal of play in the press.
Similar incidents all over India helped to destroy the last sentimental
attachment any Indians still had toward England.
To end the spiraling unrest, Irwin was finally forced to negotiate with
Gandhi, and, on several issues, to give ground—an
unprecedented event for
an English imperialist viceroy. Although the end of the Raj would take
several years, the Salt March
would prove to be the beginning of the end,
and in 1947 the English finally left India without a fight.
Interpretation
Gandhi was a deceptively clever strategist whose frail, even saintly
appearance constantly misled his adversaries into underestimating
him. The
key to any successful strategy is to know both one’s enemy and oneself, and
Gandhi, educated in London, understood
the English well. He judged them
to be essentially liberal people who saw themselves as upholding traditions
of political
freedom and civilized behavior. This self-image— though
riddled with contradictions, as indicated by their sometimes brutal
behavior
in their colonies—was deeply important to the English. The Indians, on the
other hand, had been humiliated by many
years of subservience to their
English overlords. They were largely unarmed and in no position to engage
in an insurrection
or guerrilla war. If they rebelled violently, as other
colonies had done, the English would crush them and claim to be acting
out
of self-defense; their civilized self-image would suffer no damage. The use
of nonviolence, on the other hand—an ideal
and philosophy that Gandhi
deeply valued and one that had a rich tradition in India—would exploit to
perfection the English
reluctance to respond with force unless absolutely
necessary. To attack people who were protesting peacefully would not jibe
with the Englishman’s sense of his own moral purity. Made to feel confused
and guilty, the English would be paralyzed with
ambivalence and would
relinquish the strategic initiative.
The Salt March is perhaps the quintessential example of Gandhi’s
strategic brilliance. First, he deliberately chose an issue
that the British
would consider harmless, even laughable. To respond with force to a march
about salt would have given an
Englishman trouble. Then, by identifying
his apparently trivial issue in his letter to Irwin, Gandhi made space for
himself
in which to develop the march without fear of repression. He used
that space to frame the march in an Indian context that
would give it wide
appeal. The religious symbolism he found for it had another function as
well: it heightened the paralysis
of the British, who were quite religious
themselves in their own way and could not countenance repressing a
spiritual event.
Finally, like any good showman, Gandhi made the march
dramatically visual and used the press to give it maximum exposure.
Once the march gained momentum, it was too late to stop it. Gandhi had
sparked a fire, and the masses were now deeply engaged
in the struggle.
Whatever Irwin did at this point would make the situation worse. Not only
did the Salt March become the model
for future protests, but it was clearly
the turning point in India’s struggle for independence.
Many people today are as ambivalent as the English were about having
power and authority. They need power to survive, yet
at the same time they
have an equally great need to believe in their own goodness. In this context
to fight people with any
kind of violence makes you look aggressive and
ugly. And if they are stronger than you are, in effect you are playing into
their hands, justifying a heavy-handed response from them. Instead it is the
height of strategic wisdom to prey upon people’s
latent guilt and liberal
ambivalence by making yourself look benign, gentle, even passive. That
will disarm them and get past
their defenses. If you take action to challenge
and resist them, you must do it morally, righteously, peacefully. If they
cannot help themselves and respond with force, they will look and feel bad;
if they hesitate, you have the upper hand and
an opening to determine the
whole dynamic of the war. It is almost impossible to fight people who
throw up their hands and
do not resist in the usual aggressive way. It is
completely confusing and disabling. Operating in this way, you inflict guilt
as if it were a kind of weapon. In a political world, your passive, moralistic
resistance will paralyze the enemy.
I was a believer in the politics of petitions, deputations and friendly
negotiations. But all these have gone to dogs. I know
that these are not the
ways to bring this Government round. Sedition has become my religion.
Ours is a nonviolent war.
—Mahatma Gandhi (1869–1947)
PASSIVE POWER
Early in 1820 a revolution broke out in Spain, followed a few months later
by one in Naples, which at that time was a city-state
incorporated within the
Austrian Empire. Forced to accept liberal constitutions modeled on that of
revolutionary France some
thirty years earlier, the kings of both countries
had reason to fear that they also faced the same fate as the French king
of
that period, Louis XVI, beheaded in 1793. Meanwhile the leaders of
Europe’s great powers—England, Austria, and Prussia—
quaked at the
thought of unrest and radicalism spreading across their borders, which had
only recently been stabilized by
the defeat of Napoleon. They all wanted to
protect themselves and halt the tide of revolution.
The devotion of his soldiers to him, affirmed in many stories, must be a fact.
[Julius Caesar] could not have done what he did without it. The speech in
which it is always said he quelled a mutiny with a single word, calling his
men not fellow-soldiers as was
his custom, but citizens, civilians, shows a
great deal more about his methods than the mere clever use of a term. It
was a most critical moment for him. He was in Rome after Pompey’s defeat,
on the point of sailing for Africa, to put down
the powerful senatorial army
there. In the city he was surrounded by bitter enemies. His whole
dependence was his army, and
the best and most trusted legion in it
mutinied. They nearly killed their officer; they marched to Rome and
claimed their
discharge; they would serve Caesar no longer. He sent for
them, telling them to bring their swords with them, a direction
perfectly
characteristic of him. Everything told of him shows his unconcern about
danger to himself. Face to face with them,
he asked them to state their case
and listened while they told him all they had done and suffered and been
poorly rewarded
for, and demanded to be discharged. His speech in answer
was also characteristic, very gentle, very brief, exactly to the point: “You
say well, citizens. You have worked hard—you have suffered much. You
desire your discharge. You have it. I discharge you all. You shall have your
recompense. It shall never be said of me that I made use of you when
I was
in danger, and was ungrateful to you when danger was past.” That was all,
yet the legionaries listening were completely broken to his will. They cried
out that they would never leave
him; they implored him to forgive them, to
receive them again as his soldiers. Back of the words was his personality,
and
although that can never be recaptured, something of it yet comes
through the brief, bald sentences: the strength that faced tranquilly
desertion at a moment of great need; the pride that would not utter a word
of appeal or
reproach; the mild tolerance of one who knew men and
counted upon nothing from them.
THE ROMAN WAY, EDITH HAMILTON, 1932
In the midst of this general unease, Czar Alexander I of Russia (1777–
1825) suddenly proposed a plan that to many seemed a
cure more
dangerous than the disease. The Russian army was the largest and most
feared in Europe; Alexander wanted to send
it to both Spain and Naples,
crushing the two rebellions. In exchange he would insist that the kings of
both realms enact
liberal reforms that would grant their citizens greater
freedoms, making them more content and diluting their desire for
revolution.
Alexander saw his proposal as more than a practical program to
safeguard Europe’s monarchies; it was part of a great crusade,
a dream he
had nurtured since the earliest days of his reign. A deeply religious man
who saw everything in terms of good and
evil, he wanted the monarchies of
Europe to reform themselves and create a kind of Christian brotherhood of
wise, gentle rulers
with himself, the czar, at their helm. Although the
powerful considered Alexander a kind of Russian madman, many liberals
and even revolutionaries throughout Europe saw him as their friend and
protector, the rare leader sympathetic to their cause.
It was even rumored
that he had made contacts with various men of the left and had intrigued
with them.
The czar went further with his idea: now he wanted a conference of the
major powers to discuss the future of Spain, Naples,
and Europe itself. The
English foreign minister, Lord Castlereagh, wrote letter after letter trying to
dissuade him of the
need for the meeting. It was never wise to meddle in the
affairs of other countries, Castlereagh said; Alexander should leave
England
to help stop the unrest in Spain, its close ally, while Austria did the same for
Naples. Other ministers and rulers
wrote to Alexander as well, using similar
arguments. It was critical to show a united front against his plan. Yet one
man—the
Austrian foreign minister, Prince Klemens von Metternich—
responded to the czar in a much different fashion, and it was shocking
to
say the least.
Metternich was the most powerful and respected minister in Europe. The
quintessential realist, he was always slow to take
bold action or to involve
Austria in any kind of adventure; security and order were his primary
concerns. He was a conservative,
a man who believed in the virtues of the
status quo. If change had to come, it should come slowly. But Metternich
was also
something of an enigma—an elegant courtier, he spoke little yet
always seemed to get his way. Now not only was he supporting
Alexander’s
call for a conference, but he also seemed open to the czar’s other ideas.
Perhaps he had undergone a change of
heart and was moving to the left in
his later years? In any event, he personally organized the conference for
October of that
year in the Austrian-held city of Troppau, in the modern-
day Czech Republic.
Alexander was delighted: with Metternich on his side, he could realize
his ambitions and then some. When he arrived in Troppau
for the
conference, however, the representatives of the other powers in attendance
were less than friendly. The French and
the Prussians were cool;
Castlereagh had refused to come altogether. Feeling somewhat isolated,
Alexander was delighted again
when Metternich proposed they hold private
meetings to discuss the czar’s ideas. For several days, and for hours on end,
they
holed themselves up together in a room. The czar did most of the
talking; Metternich listened with his usual attentive air,
agreeing and
nodding. The czar, whose thinking was somewhat vague, strained to explain
his vision of Europe as best he could,
and the need for the leaders at the
conference to display their moral unity. He could not help but feel frustrated
at his
inability to make his ideas more specific.
Several days into these discussions, Metternich finally confessed to the
czar that he, too, saw a moral danger brewing in
Europe. Godless revolution
was the scourge of the time; giving in to the radical spirit, showing any sign
of compromise, would
eventually lead to destruction at the hands of these
satanic forces. During the Troppau conference, a mutiny had broken out
in a
regiment of Russian guards; Metternich warned Alexander that this was the
first symptom of a revolutionary infection
attacking Russia itself. Thank
God the czar, a pillar of moral strength, would not give in. Alexander would
have to serve
as the leader of this counterrevolutionary crusade. This was
why Metternich had become so excited by the czar’s ideas about
Naples and
Spain and how he had interpreted them.
The czar was swept up in Metternich’s enthusiasm: together they would
stand firm against the radicals. Somehow, though, the
result of their
conversation was not a plan for Russia to invade Naples and Spain; indeed,
Alexander speculated instead that
it might not be the time to press the kings
of those countries to reform their governments—that would just weaken
both monarchs.
For the time being, the leaders’ energy should go into
halting the revolutionary tide. In fact, the czar began to repent of
some of
his more liberal ideas, and he confessed as much to Metternich. The
conference ended with a statement of grand common
purpose among the
powers—much of its language the czar’s—and an agreement that Austrian
troops, not Russian ones, would return
the king of Naples to full power,
then leave him to pursue the policies of his choice.
After Alexander returned to Russia, Metternich wrote to praise him for
leading the way. The czar wrote back in fervor: “We
are engaged in a
combat with the realm of Satan. Ambassadors do not suffice for this task.
Only those whom the Lord has placed
at the head of their peoples may, if
He gives His blessings, survive the contest . . . with this diabolic force.” In
fact,
the czar wanted to go further; he had returned to the idea of marching
his army into Spain to put down the revolution there.
Met-ternich responded
that that would not be necessary—the British were handling the situation—
but a conference next year
could readdress the issue.
At times one has to deal with hidden enemies, intangible influences that
slink into dark corners and from this hiding affect
people by suggestion. In
instances like this, it is necessary to trace these things back to the most
secret recesses, in order to determine the
nature of the influences to be dealt
with. . . . The very anonymity of such plotting requires an especially
vigorous and indefatigable effort, but this is well worth while.
For when
such elusive influences are brought into the light and branded, they lose
their power over people.
THE I CHING, CHINA, CIRCA EIGHTH CENTURY B.C.
In early 1821 another revolution broke out, this time in Piedmont, the one
Italian state outside Austrian control. The king
was forced to abdicate. In
this instance Metternich welcomed Russian intervention, and 90,000
Russian troops became reserves
in an Austrian army heading for Piedmont.
A Russian military presence so close to their borders greatly dampened the
spirits
of the rebels and of their sympathizers throughout Italy—all those
leftists who had seen the czar as their friend and protector.
They thought
that no more.
The Austrian army crushed the revolution within a few weeks. At
Metternich’s request, the Russians politely withdrew their
forces. The czar
was proud of his growing influence in Europe, but somehow he had
embarked on the very opposite of his original
plans for a crusade: instead of
being in the forefront of the fight for progress and reform, he had become a
guardian of the
status quo, a conservative in the mold of Metternich
himself. Those around him could not understand how this had happened.
Interpretation
Prince Metternich may have been history’s most effective public
practitioner of passive aggression. Other diplomats sometimes
thought him
cautious, even weak, but in the end, as if by magic, he always got what he
wanted. The key to his success was
his ability to hide his aggression to the
point where it was invisible.
Metternich was always careful to take the measure of his opponent. In the
case of Czar Alexander, he was dealing with a man
governed by emotion
and subject to wild mood swings. Yet the czar, behind his moralistic
Christian fa¸cade, was also aggressive
in his own way, and ambitious; he
itched to lead a crusade. In Metternich’s eyes he was as dangerous as
Napoleon had been:
in the name of doing good for Europe, such a man
might march his troops from one end of the continent to the other, creating
untold chaos.
To stand in the way of Alexander’s powerful army would be destructive
in itself. But the canny Metternich knew that to try
to persuade the czar that
he was wrong would have the unintended effect of feeding his insecurities
and pushing him to the
left, making him more prone to take dangerous
action on his own. Instead the prince would have to handle him like a child,
diverting his energies to the right through a passive-aggressive campaign.
The passive part was simple: Metternich presented himself as compliant,
going along with ideas that he actually disagreed
with to the extreme. He
accepted Alexander’s request for a congress, for example, although he
personally opposed it. Then,
in his private discussions with the czar at
Troppau, he at first just listened, then enthusiastically agreed. The czar
believed
in demonstrating moral unity? Then so did Metternich—although
his own policies had always been more practical than moral;
he was the
master of realpolitik. He flattered personal qualities in the czar—moral
fervor, for example—that he actually thought
dangerous. He also
encouraged the czar to go further with his ideas.
In those days force and arms did prevail; but now the wit of the fox is
everywhere on foot, so hardly a faithful or virtuous
man may be found.
QUEEN ELIZABETH I, 1533–1603
Having disarmed Alexander’s suspicions and resistance this way,
Metternich at the same time operated aggressively. At Troppau
he worked
behind the scenes to isolate the czar from the other powers, so that the
Russian leader became dependent on him.
Next he cleverly arranged those
long hours of private meetings, in which he subtly infected the czar with the
idea that revolution
was far more dangerous than the status quo and
diverted the Russian’s radical Christian crusade into an attack on liberalism
itself. Finally, having mirrored Alexander’s energy, his moods, his fervor,
and his language, Metternich managed to lure him
into sending troops
against the rebellion in Piedmont. That action both committed Alexander in
deed to the conservative cause
and alienated him from the liberals of
Europe. No longer could he spout vague, ambiguous pronouncements on
the left; he had
finally taken action, and it was in the opposite direction.
Metternich’s triumph was complete.
Although the phrase “passive aggression” has negative connotations for
most of us, as conscious strategy passive-aggressive
behavior offers an
insidiously powerful way of manipulating people and waging personal war.
Like Metternich, you must operate
on two fronts. You are outwardly
agreeable, apparently bending to people’s ideas, energy, and will, changing
shape like Proteus
himself. Remember: people are willful and perverse.
Opposing them directly or trying to change their ideas will often have
the
contrary effect. A passive, compliant front, on the other hand, gives them
nothing to fight against or resist. Going along
with their energy gives you
the power to divert it in the direction you want, as if you were channeling a
river rather than
trying to dam it. Meanwhile the aggressive part of your
strategy takes the form of infecting people with subtle changes in
their ideas
and with an energy that will make them act on your behalf. Their inability
to get what you are doing in focus
gives you room to work behind the
scenes, checking their progress, isolating them from other people, luring
them into dangerous
moves that make them dependent on your support.
They think you are their ally. Behind a pleasant, compliant, even weak
front,
you are pulling the strings.
This was the real achievement of Metternich’s policy, that it had killed
Russian liberalism and achieved a measure of domination
over Austria’s
most dangerous rival in the guise of submitting to him.
—Henry Kissinger, A World Restored (1957)
In this postscript on the solution of Caesar’s problem, it is not our intention
to trace Octa-vian’s rise to power from the
time he arrived in Rome to claim
his inheritance until, in 31 B.C., with the aid of Vipsanius Agrippa, he
defeated Antony
and Cleopatra at Actium and became master of the Roman
world. Instead, it is to describe in brief how as such he solved Caesar’s
problem and established a peace which was to last for over 200 years.
When he contemplated the empire he had won and its heterogeneous local
governments and peoples, he realized that it was far
too large and complex
to be ruled by the council of a city state; that instead it demanded some
form of one-man rule, and
that his problem was how to disguise it. From
the outset he decided not to tamper with the constitution of the Republic, or
contemplate monarchy. . . . . . . Firstly, in 28 B.C. he declined all honours
calculated to remind the Romans of the kingly power; adopted the title
of
princeps (“first citizen”), and called his system the Principate. Secondly, he
accepted all the old conventions—consuls,
tribunes, magistrates, elections,
etc. Thirdly, instead of ignoring the Senate and insulting its members as
Caesar had done,
he went out of his way to consult it and placate them.
Lastly, on January 13, 27 B.C., at a session of the Senate, he renounced all
his extraordinary powers and placed them at the disposal of the Senate and
the
people. And when the senators begged him to resume them and not to
abandon the Commonwealth he had saved, he yielded to their
request and
consented to assume proconsular authority over an enlarged province,
which included Spain, Gaul, Syria, Cilicia,
and Cyprus, while the Senate
was left with the remaining provinces. Thus in semblance the sovereignty of
the Senate and the people was restored; but in fact, because his enlarged
province comprised
the majority of the legions, and Egypt, over which he
ruled as king . . . the basis of political power passed into his hands. Three
days later the Senate decreed that the title “Augustus” (the Revered) should
be conferred upon him.
JULIUS CAESAR, J.F.C. FULLER, 1965
KEYS TO WARFARE
We humans have a particular limitation to our reasoning powers that causes
us endless problems: when we are thinking about
someone or about
something that has happened to us, we generally opt for the simplest, most
easily digestible interpretation.
An acquaintance is good or bad, nice or
mean, his or her intentions noble or nefarious; an event is positive or
negative,
beneficial or harmful; we are happy or sad. The truth is that
nothing in life is ever so simple. People are invariably a mix
of good and
bad qualities, strengths and weaknesses. Their intentions in doing
something can be helpful and harmful to us
at the same time, a result of
their ambivalent feelings toward us. Even the most positive event has a
downside. And we often
feel happy and sad at the same time. Reducing
things to simpler terms makes them easier for us to handle, but because it is
not related to reality, it also means we are constantly misunderstanding and
misreading. It would be of infinite benefit for
us to allow more nuances and
ambiguity into our judgments of people and events.
This tendency of ours to judge things in simple terms explains why
passive aggression is so devilishly effective as a strategy
and why so many
people use it—consciously and unconsciously. By definition, people who
are acting passive-aggressively are
being passive and aggressive
simultaneously. They are outwardly compliant, friendly, obedient, even
loving. At the same time,
they inwardly plot and take hostile action. Their
aggression is often quite subtle—little acts of sabotage, remarks designed
to
get under your skin. It can also be blatantly harmful.
When we are the victims of this behavior, we find it hard to imagine that
both things are happening at the same time. We can
manage the idea that
someone can be nice one day and nasty the next; that is just called being
moody. But to be nasty and
nice simultaneously—that confuses us. We tend
to take these people’s passive exterior for reality, becoming emotionally
engaged
with their pleasant, nonthreatening appearance. If we notice that
something is not quite right, that while seeming friendly
they might be
doing something hostile, we are genuinely bewildered. Our confusion gives
the passive-aggressive warrior great
manipulative power over us.
There are two kinds of passive aggression. The first is conscious strategy
as practiced by Metternich. The second is a semiconscious
or even
unconscious behavior that people use all the time in the petty and not-so-
petty matters of daily life. You may be
tempted to forgive this second
passive-aggressive type, who seems unaware of the effects of his or her
actions or helpless
to stop, but people often understand what they are doing
far better than you imagine, and you are more than likely being taken
in by
their friendly and helpless exterior. We are generally too lenient with this
second variety.
The key to using passive aggression as a conscious, positive strategy is
the front you present to your enemies. They must
never be able to detect the
sullen, defiant thoughts that are going on inside of you.
In 1802 what today is Haiti was a French possession riven by a revolt of
the country’s black slaves under the leadership of
Toussaint-L’ouverture.
That year an army sent by Napoleon to crush the rebellion managed to seize
Toussaint through treachery
and ship him off to France, where he would
eventually die in prison. Among Toussaint’s most-decorated generals was a
man named
Jean-Jacques Dessalines, who now surrendered to the French
and even served in their army, helping them to put down isolated
pockets of
revolt and winning from them much appreciation. But it was all a ploy: as
Dessalines squashed these remnants of
the rebellion, he would hand over
the weapons he captured to the French, but secretly he always kept some of
them back, stashing
them away until he had quite a large armory.
Meanwhile he built up and trained a new rebel army in the remote areas
where
his assignment led him. Then, choosing a moment when an outbreak
of yellow fever had decimated the French army, he resumed
hostilities.
Within a few years, he had defeated the French and liberated Haiti for good
from colonial control.
Dessalines’s use of passive aggression has deep roots in military strategy,
in what can be called the “false surrender.” In
war your enemies can never
read your thoughts. They must make your appearance their guide, reading
the signs you give off
to decipher what you are thinking and planning.
Meanwhile the surrender of an army tends to be followed by a great flood
of
emotion and a lowering of everyone’s guard. The victor will keep an eye
on the beaten troops but, exhausted by the effort
it took to win, will be
hugely tempted to be less wary than before. A clever strategist, then, may
falsely surrender—announce
that he is defeated in body and spirit. Seeing
no indication otherwise, and unable to read his mind, the enemy is likely to
take his submission at face value. Now the false surrenderer has time and
space to plot new hostilities.
In war as in life, the false surrender depends on the seamless appearance
of submission. Dessalines did not just give in,
he actively served his former
enemies. To make this work, you must do likewise: play up your weakness,
your crushed spirit,
your desire to be friends—an emotional ploy with great
power to distract. You must also be something of an actor. Any sign
of
ambivalence will ruin the effect.
In 1940, President Franklin D. Roosevelt faced a dilemma. He was
nearing the end of his second term in office, and it was
an unwritten
tradition in American politics that no president would run for a third term.
But Roosevelt had much unfinished
business. Abroad, Europe was deep in a
war that would almost certainly end up involving the United States; at
home, the country
had been going through difficult times, and Roosevelt
wanted to bring his programs to remedy them to completion. If he revealed
his desire for a third term, though, he would stir up opposition even within
his own party. Many had already accused him of
dictatorial tendencies. So
Roosevelt decided to get what he wanted through a form of passive
aggression.
It is not an enemy who taunts me— then I could bear it; it is not an
adversary who deals insolently with me— then I could
hide from him. But it
is you, my equal, my companion, my familiar friend. . . . . . . My companion
stretched out his hand against his friends, he violated his covenant. His
speech was smoother than butter, yet war was in his heart; his words were
softer than oil, yet they were drawn swords.
PSALMS, 55:12–15, 20–21
In the months leading up to the Democratic Convention, which was to
choose which candidate the party would run in the race,
Roosevelt
repeatedly stated his lack of interest in a third term. He also actively
encouraged others in the party to seek
the nomination to replace him. At the
same time, he carefully crafted his language so that he never completely
closed the
door on running himself, and he pushed enough candidates into
the nomination race that no single one of them could come to
the
convention as the favorite. Then, as the convention opened, Roosevelt
withdrew from the scene, making his large presence
known by his absence:
without him the proceedings were incomparably dull. Reports came back to
him that people on the floor
were beginning to clamor for him to appear.
Letting that desire reach its peak, the president then had his friend Senator
Alben Barkley insert into his own convention speech a message from
Roosevelt: “The president has never had, and has not today,
any desire or
purpose to continue in the office of president, to be a candidate for that
office, or to be nominated by the
convention for that office.” After a
moment of silence, the convention floor began to ring with the delegates’
cry: “WE WANT
ROOSEVELT!” The appeal went on for an hour. The next
day the delegates were to vote, and chants of “ROOSEVELT!” again filled
the hall. The president’s name was entered for the nomination, and he won
by a landslide on the first ballot.
Remember: it is never wise to seem too eager for power, wealth, or fame.
Your ambition may carry you to the top, but you will
not be liked and will
find your unpopularity a problem. Better to disguise your maneuvers for
power: you do not want it but
have found it forced upon you. Being passive
and making others come to you is a brilliant form of aggression.
Subtle acts of sabotage can work wonders in the passive-aggressive
strategy because you can camouflage them under your friendly,
compliant
front. That was how the film director Alfred Hitchcock would outmaneuver
the meddlesome producer David O. Selznick,
who used to alter the script to
his liking, then show up on set to make sure it was shot the way he wanted
it. On these occasions
Hitchcock might arrange for the camera to
malfunction or let it run without any film in it—by the time Selznick saw
the edit,
reshooting would be expensive and impossible. Meanwhile the
director would make a show of being happy to see Selznick on set
and
bewildered if the camera didn’t roll or rolled but recorded no film.
Passive aggression is so common in daily life that you have to know how
to play defense as well as offense. By all means use
the strategy yourself; it
is too effective to drop from your armory. But you must also know how to
deal with those semiconscious
passive-aggressive types so prevalent in the
modern world, recognizing what they are up to before they get under your
skin
and being able to defend yourself against this strange form of attack.
First, you must understand why passive aggression has become so
omnipresent. In the world today, the expression of overt criticism
or
negative feelings toward others has become increasingly discouraged.
People tend to take criticism far too personally.
Furthermore, conflict is
something to be avoided at all costs. There is great societal pressure to
please and be liked by
as many people as possible. Yet it is human nature to
have aggressive impulses, negative feelings, and critical thoughts about
people. Unable to express these feelings openly, without fear of being
disliked, more and more people resort to a kind of
constant, just-below-the-
surface passive aggression.
The idiom represents an archetype in world literature: a person with a
smiling face and a cruel heart, dubbed a “smiling tiger”
in Chinese
folklore.
THE WILES OF WAR, TRANSLATED BY SUN HAICHEN, 1991
Most often their behavior is relatively harmless: perhaps they are
chronically late, or make flattering comments that hide
a sarcastic sting, or
offer help but never follow through. These common tactics are best ignored;
just let them wash over
you as part of the current of modern life, and never
take them personally. You have more important battles to fight.
There are, however, stronger, more harmful versions of passive
aggression, acts of sabotage that do real damage. A colleague
is warm to
your face but says things behind your back that cause you problems. You let
someone into your life who proceeds
to steal something valuable of yours.
An employee takes on an important job for you but does it slowly and
badly. These types
do harm but are excellent at avoiding any kind of blame.
Their modus operandi is to create enough doubt that they were the
ones
who did the aggressive act; it is never their fault. Somehow they are
innocent bystanders, helpless, the real victims
in the whole dynamic. Their
denials of responsibility are confusing: you suspect they have done
something, but you cannot
prove it, or, worse, if they are really skillful, you
feel guilty for even thinking them at fault. And if in your frustration you
lash out at them, you pay a high
price: they will focus attention on your
angry, aggressive response, your overreaction, distracting your thoughts
from the
passive-aggressive maneuvers that got you so irritated in the first
place. The guilt you feel is a sign of the power they
have over you. Indeed,
you can virtually recognize the harmful variety of passive aggression by the
strength of emotions it
churns up in you: not superficial annoyance but
confusion, paranoia, insecurity, and anger.
To defeat the passive-aggressive warrior, you must first work on yourself.
This means being acutely aware of the blame-shifting
tactic as it happens.
Squash any feelings of guilt it might begin to make you feel. These types
can be very ingratiating,
using flattery to draw you into their web, preying
on your insecurities. It is often your own weakness that sucks you into
the
passive-aggressive dynamic. Be alert to this.
Second, once you realize you are dealing with the dangerous variety, the
smartest move is to disengage, at best to get the
person out of your life, or
at the least to not flare up and cause a scene, all of which plays into his
hands. You need to
stay calm. If it happens to be a partner in a relationship
in which you cannot disengage, the only solution is to find a way
to make
the person feel comfortable in expressing any negative feelings toward you
and encouraging it. This may be hard to
take initially, but it may defuse his
or her need to be underhanded; and open criticisms are easier to deal with
than covert
sabotage.
It is not pathological to attempt to gain control of a relationship, we all do
this, but when one attempts to gain that control
while denying it, then such
a person is exhibiting symptomatic behavior. In any relationship that
stabilizes, such as that
between a husband and wife, the two people work
out agreements about who is to control what area of the relationship. . .
. A
relationship becomes psychopathological when one of the two people will
maneuver to circumscribe the other’s behavior while
indicating he is not.
The wife in such a relationship will force her husband to take care of the
house in such a way that she denies she is doing
so. She may, for example,
have obscure dizzy spells, an allergy to soap, or various types of attacks
which require her to
lie down regularly. Such a wife is circumscribing her
husband’s behavior while denying that she is doing this; after all, she
cannot help her dizzy spells. When one person circumscribes the behavior
of another while denying that he is doing so, the relationship begins to be
rather
peculiar. For example, when a wife requires her husband to be home
every night because she has anxiety attacks when she is
left alone, he
cannot acknowledge that she is controlling his behavior because she is not
requiring him to be home—the anxiety is and her behavior is involuntary.
Neither can he refuse to let her control his behavior
for the same reason.
STRATEGIES OF PSYCHOTHERAPY, JAY HALEY, 1963
The Spaniard Hernán Cortés had many passive-aggressive soldiers in the
army with which he conquered Mexico, men who outwardly
accepted his
leadership but were inwardly treacherous. Cortés never confronted or
accused these people, never lashed out at
them at all; instead he quietly
figured out who they were and what they were up to, then fought fire with
fire, maintaining
a friendly front but working behind the scenes to isolate
them and bait them into attacks in which they revealed themselves.
The
most effective counterstrategy with the passive-aggressive is often to be
subtle and underhanded right back at them, neutralizing
their powers. You
can also try this with the less harmful types—the ones who are chronically
late, for instance: giving them
a taste of their own medicine may open their
eyes to the irritating effects of their behavior.
In any event, you must never leave the passive-aggressive time and space
in which to operate. Let them take root and they
will find all kinds of sly
ways to pull you here and there. Your best defense is to be sensitive to any
passive-aggressive
manifestations in those around you and to keep your
mind as free as possible from their insidious influence.
Image: The River. It flows with great force, sometimes flooding its banks
and creating untold damage. Try to dam it and you
only add to its pent-up
energy and increase your risk. Instead divert its course, channel it, make its
power serve your purposes.
Authority: As dripping water wears through rock, so the weak
and yielding can subdue the firm and strong. —Sun Haichen,
Wiles of War (1991)
REVERSAL
The reversal of passive aggression is aggressive passivity, presenting an
apparently hostile face while inwardly staying calm
and taking no
unfriendly action. The purpose here is intimidation: perhaps you know you
are the weaker of the two sides and
hope to discourage your enemies from
attacking you by presenting a blustery front. Taken in by your appearance,
they will
find it hard to believe that you do not intend to do anything. In
general, presenting yourself as the opposite of what you
really are and
intend can be a useful way of disguising your strategies.
33
SOW UNCERTAINTY AND PANIC
THROUGH ACTS OF TERROR
THE CHAIN-REACTION STRATEGY
Terror is the ultimate way to paralyze a people’s will to resist
and destroy their ability to plan a strategic response. Such
power is gained through sporadic acts of violence that create a
constant feeling of threat, incubating a fear that spreads
throughout the public sphere. The goal in a terror campaign is
not battlefield victory but causing maximum chaos and
provoking
the other side into desperate overreaction. Melting
invisibly into the population, tailoring their actions for the mass
media,
the strategists of terror create the illusion that they are
everywhere and therefore that they are far more powerful than
they really are. It is a war of nerves. The victims of terror must
not succumb to fear or even anger; to plot the most effective
counterstrategy, they must stay balanced. In the face of a terror
campaign, one’s rationality is the last line of defense.
“Brothers,” says an Ismaili poet, “when the time of triumph comes, with
good fortune from both worlds as our companion, then
by one single
warrior on foot a king may be stricken with terror, though he own more
than a hundred thousand horsemen.”
QUOTED IN THEASSASSINS, BERNARD LEWIS, 1967
THE ANATOMY OF PANIC
In Isfahan (in present-day Iran) toward the end of the eleventh century,
Nizam al-Mulk, the powerful vizier to Sultan Malik
Shah, ruler of the great
Islamic empire of the period, became aware of a small yet irritating threat.
In northern Persia lived
a sect called the Nizari Ismailis, followers of a
religion combining mysticism with the Koran. Their leader, the charismatic
Hasan-i-Sabah, had recruited thousands of converts alienated by the tight
control the empire exercised over religious and
political practices. The
influence of the Ismailis was growing, and what was most disturbing to
Nizam al-Mulk was the utter
secrecy in which they operated: it was
impossible to know who had converted to the sect, for its members did so in
private
and kept their allegiance hidden.
The vizier monitored their activities as best he could, until finally he
heard some news that roused him to action. Over the
years, it seemed,
thousands of these secret Ismaili converts had managed to infiltrate key
castles, and now they had taken
them over in the name of Hasan-i-Sabah.
This gave them control over part of northern Persia, a kind of independent
state within
the empire. Nizam al-Mulk was a benevolent administrator, but
he knew the danger of allowing sects like the Ismailis to flourish.
Better to
snuff them out early on than face revolution. So, in 1092, the vizier
convinced the sultan to send two armies to
bring down the castles and
destroy the Nizari Ismailis.
The castles were strongly defended, and the countryside around them
teemed with sympathizers. The war turned into a stalemate,
and eventually
the sultan’s armies were forced to come home. Nizam al-Mulk would have
to find some other solution, perhaps
an occupying force for the region—but
a few months later, as he was traveling from Is-fahan to Baghdad, a Sufi
monk approached
the litter on which he was carried, pulled out a dagger
from under his clothes, and stabbed the vizier to death. The killer
was
revealed to be an Ismaili dressed as a peaceful Sufi, and he confessed to his
captors that Hasan himself had assigned
him to do the job.
The death of Nizam al-Mulk was followed within weeks by the death,
from natural causes, of Malik Shah. His loss would have
been a blow at any
time, but without his crafty vizier to oversee the succession, the empire fell
into a period of chaos that
lasted several years. By 1105, however, a degree
of stability had been reestablished and attention again focused on the
Ismailis.
With one murder they had managed to make the entire empire
tremble. They had to be destroyed. A new and vigorous campaign
was
launched against the sect. And soon it was revealed that the assassination of
Nizam al-Mulk was not a single act of revenge,
as it had seemed at the time,
but an Ismaili policy, a strange and frightening new way of waging war.
Over the next few years,
key members of the administration of the new
sultan, Muhammad Tapar, were assassinated in the same ritualistic fashion:
a
killer would emerge from a crowd to deliver a deadly blow with a dagger.
The deed was most often done in public and in broad
daylight; sometimes,
though, it took place while the victim was in bed, a secret Ismaili having
infiltrated his household
staff.
Losses to which we are accustomed affect us less deeply.
JUVENAL, FIRST TO SECOND CENTURY A.D.
A wave of fear fanned out among the empire’s hierarchy. It was
impossible to tell who was an Ismaili: the sect’s adherents
were patient,
disciplined, and had mastered the art of keeping their beliefs to themselves
and fitting in anywhere. It did
not help that when the assassins were
captured and tortured, they would accuse various people within the sultan’s
inner circle
of being either paid spies for the Ismailis or secret converts. No
one could know for certain if they were telling the truth,
but suspicion was
cast on everyone.
Now viziers, judges, and local officials had to travel surrounded by
bodyguards. Many of them began to wear thick, uncomfortable
shirts of
mail. In certain cities no one could move from house to house without a
permit, which spread disaffection among
the citizenry and made it easier for
the Ismailis to recruit converts. Many found it hard to sleep at night or to
trust their
closest friends. All kinds of wild rumors were spread by those
who had grown delirious with paranoia. Bitter divisions sprang
up within
the hierarchy, as some argued for a hard-line approach to Hasan, while
others preached accommodation as the only
answer.
Meanwhile, as the empire struggled to somehow repress the Is-mailis, the
killings went on—but they were highly sporadic. Months
would pass
without one, and then suddenly there would be two within a week. There
was no real rhyme or reason to when it happened
or which high
administrator was singled out. Officials would talk endlessly about a
pattern, analyzing every Ismaili move.
Without their realizing it, this little
sect had come to dominate their thoughts.
In 1120, Sanjar, the new sultan, decided to take action, planning a
military campaign to capture the Ismaili castles with
overwhelming force
and turn the region around them into an armed camp. He took extra
precautions to prevent any attempt on
his life, changing his sleeping
arrangements and allowing only those he knew well to approach him. By
making himself personally
secure, he believed he could stay free of the
panic around him.
As preparations for the war got under way, Hasan-i-Sabah sent
ambassador after ambassador to Sanjar offering to negotiate
an end to the
killings. They were all turned away. The tables seemed to have turned: now
it was the Ismailis who were frightened.
Shortly before the campaign was to be launched, the sultan awoke one
morning to find a dagger thrust neatly in the ground
a few feet away from
the position where his breast lay on the bed. How did it get there? What did
it mean? The more he thought
about it, the more he began to literally
tremble with fear—it was clearly a message. He told no one about this, for
whom could
he trust? Even his wives were suspect. By the end of the day,
he was an emotional wreck. That evening he received a message
from
Hasan himself: “Did I not wish the sultan well, that dagger which was
struck into the hard ground would have been planted
in his soft breast.”
Sanjar had had enough. He could not spend another day like this. He was
not willing to live in constant fear, his mind deranged
by uncertainty and
suspicion. It was better, he thought, to negotiate with this demon. He called
off his campaign and made
peace with Hasan.
Over the years, as the Ismailis’ political power grew and the sect
expanded into Syria, its killers became almost mythic.
The assassins had
never tried to escape; their killing done, they were caught, tortured, and
executed to a man, but new ones
kept on coming, and nothing seemed to
deter them from completing their task. They seemed possessed, utterly
devoted to their
cause. Some called them hashshashin, from the Arabic
word hashish, because they acted as if they were drugged. European
crusaders to the Holy Land heard stories about these devilish hashshashin
and passed them on, the word slowly transforming into “assassins,” passing
forever into the language.
On their voyage Pisander and the others abolished the democracies in the
[Greek] cities, as had been decided. From some places they also took
hoplites to add to their forces, and so came to Athens. Here
they found that
most of the work had already been done by members of their
[antidemocratic] party. Some of the younger men had formed a group
among themselves and had murdered without being detected a certain
Androcles,
who was one of the chief leaders of the [democratic] party. . . .
There were also some other people whom they regarded as undesirable and
did away with secretly. . . . . . . [Athenians] were afraid when they saw their
numbers, and no one now dared to speak in opposition to them. If anyone
did venture to do
so, some appropriate method was soon found for having
him killed, and no one tried to investigate such crimes or take action
against those suspected of them. Instead the people kept quiet, and were in
such a state of terror that they thought themselves
lucky enough to be left
unmolested even if they had said nothing at all. They imagined that the
revolutionary party was much bigger than it really was, and they lost all
confidence in themselves,
being unable to find out the facts because of the
size of the city and because they had insufficient knowledge of each other. . .
. Throughout the democratic
party people approached each other
suspiciously, everyone thinking that the next man had something to do with
what was going
on.
HISTORY OF THE PELOPONNESIAN WAR, THUCYDIDES, CIRCA
460–CIRCA 399 B.C.
Interpretation
Hasan-i-Sabah had one goal: to carve out a state for his sect in northern
Persia, allowing it to survive and thrive within
the Islamic empire. Given
his relatively small numbers and the powers arrayed against him, he could
not hope for more, so
he devised a strategy that was surely history’s first
organized terrorist campaign for political power. Hasan’s plan was
deceptively
simple. In the Islamic world, a leader who had won respect was
invested with considerable authority, and to the extent that
he had authority,
his death could sow chaos. Accordingly Hasan chose to strike these leaders,
but in a somewhat random way:
it was impossible to see any pattern in his
choices, and the possibility of being the next victim was more disturbing
than
many could bear. In truth, except for the castles they held, the Ismailis
were quite weak and vulnerable, but by patiently
infiltrating his men deep
into the heart of the sultan’s administration, Hasan was able to create the
illusion they were everywhere.
Only fifty or so assassinations are recorded
in his entire lifetime, and yet he won as much political power through them
as
if he had an enormous army.
This power could not come by merely making individuals feel afraid. It
depended on the effect the killings would have on the
entire social group.
The weakest officials in the hierarchy were the ones who would succumb to
paranoia and voice doubts and
rumors that would spread and infect those
who were less weak. The result was a ripple effect—wild swings of
emotion, from
anger to surrender, up and down the line. A group caught by
this kind of panic cannot find its balance and can fall with the
slightest
push. Even the strongest and most determined will be infected in the end, as
Sultan Sanjar was: his attempts at
security, and the harsh life to which he
subjected himself as protection, revealed that he was under the influence of
this
panic. One simple dagger in the ground was enough to push him over
the edge.
Understand: we are all are extremely susceptible to the emotions of those
around us. It is often hard for us to perceive how
deeply we are affected by
the moods that can pass through a group. This is what makes the use of
terror so effective and so
dangerous: with a few well-timed acts of violence,
a handful of assassins can spark all kinds of corrosive thoughts and
uncertainties.
The weakest members of the target group will succumb to the
greatest fear, spreading rumors and anxieties that slowly overcome
the rest.
The strong may respond angrily and violently to the terror campaign, but
that only shows how influenced they are
by the panic; they are reacting
rather than strategizing—a sign of weakness, not strength. In normal
circumstances individuals
who become frightened in some way can often
regain their mental balance over time, especially when they are around
others
who are calm. But this is almost impossible within a panicked group.
As the public’s imagination runs wild, the assassins become something
much larger, seeming omnipotent and omnipresent. As
Hasan proved, a
handful of terrorists can hold an entire empire hostage with a few well-
calibrated blows against the group
psyche. And once the group’s leaders
succumb to the emotional pull—whether by surrendering or launching an
unstrategic counterattack—the
success of the terror campaign is complete.
Victory is gained not by the number killed but by the number frightened.
—Arab proverb
KEYS TO WARFARE
In the course of our daily lives, we are subject to fears of many kinds. These
fears are generally related to something specific:
someone might harm us, a
particular problem is brewing, we are threatened by disease or even death
itself. In the throes of
any deep fear, our willpower is momentarily
paralyzed as we contemplate the bad that could happen to us. If this
condition
lasted too long or were too intense, it would make life unbearable,
so we find ways to avoid these thoughts and ease our fears.
Maybe we turn
to the distractions of daily life: work, social routines, activities with friends.
Religion or some other belief
system, such as faith in technology or science,
might also offer hope. These distractions and beliefs become the ground
beneath
us, keeping us upright and able to walk on without the paralysis
that fear can bring.
Under certain circumstances, however, this ground can fall away from
under us, and then there is nothing we can do to steady
ourselves. In the
course of history, we can track a kind of madness that overcomes humans
during certain disasters—a great
earthquake, a ferocious plague, a violent
civil war. What troubles us most in these situations is not any specific
dreadful
event that happened in the recent past; we have a tremendous
capacity to overcome and adapt to anything horrible. It is the
uncertain
future, the fear that more terrible things are coming and that we might soon
suffer some unpredictable tragedy—that
is what unnerves us. We cannot
crowd out these thoughts with routines or religion. Fear becomes chronic
and intense, our minds
besieged by all kinds of irrational thoughts. The
specific fears become more general. Among a group, panic will set in.
Six at the top means: Shock brings ruin and terrified gazing around. Going
ahead brings misfortune. If it has not yet touched one’s own body But has
reached one’s neighbor first, There is no blame. One’s comrades have
something to talk about. When inner shock is at its height, it robs a man of
reflection and clarity of vision. In such a state of shock it is of course
impossible to act with presence of mind. Then the right thing is to keep still
until composure and clarity are restored. But
this a man can do only when
he himself is not yet infected by the agitation, although its disastrous effects
are already visible
in those around him. If he withdraws from the affair in
time, he remains free of mistakes and injury. But his comrades, who no
longer heed any warning, will in their excitement certainly be displeased
with him. However, he must not take this into account.
THE I CHING, CHINA, CIRCA EIGHTH CENTURY B.C.
In essence, this is terror: an intense, overpowering fear that we cannot
manage or get rid of in the normal way. There is
too much uncertainty, too
many bad things that can happen to us.
During World War II, when the Germans bombed London, psychologists
noted that when the bombing was frequent and somewhat regular,
the
people of the city became numb to it; they grew accustomed to the noise,
discomfort, and carnage. But when the bombing
was irregular and sporadic,
fear became terror. It was much harder to deal with the uncertainty of when
the next one would
land.
It is a law of war and strategy that in the search for an advantage,
anything will be tried and tested. And so it is that
groups and individuals,
seeing the immense power that terror can have over humans, have found a
way to use terror as a strategy.
People are crafty, resourceful, and adaptable
creatures. The way to paralyze their will and destroy their capacity to think
straight is to consciously create uncertainty, confusion, and an
unmanageable fear.
Such strategic terror can take the form of exemplary acts of destruction.
The masters of this art were the Mongols. They would
level a few cities
here and there, in as horrible a manner as possible. The terrifying legend of
the Mongol Horde spread quickly.
At its very approach to a city, panic
would ensue as the inhabitants could only imagine the worst. More often
than not, the
city would surrender without a fight—the Mongols’ goal all
along. A relatively small army far from home, they could not afford
long
sieges or protracted wars.
This strategic terror can also be used for political purposes, to hold a
group or nation together. In 1792 the French Revolution
was spinning out of
control. Foreign armies were on the verge of invading France; the country
was hopelessly factionalized.
The radicals, led by Robespierre, confronted
this threat by initiating a war against the moderates, the Reign of Terror.
Accused
of counterrevolution, thousands were sent to the guillotine. No one
knew who would be next. Although the radicals were relatively
small in
number, by creating such uncertainty and fear they were able to paralyze
their opponents’ will. Paradoxically, the
Reign of Terror—which gives us
the first recorded instance of the use of the words “terrorism” and
“terrorist”—produced a
degree of stability.
Although terror as a strategy can be employed by large armies and indeed
whole states, it is most effectively practiced by
those small in number. The
reason is simple: the use of terror usually requires a willingness to kill
innocent civilians in
the name of a greater good and for a strategic purpose.
For centuries, with a few notable exceptions such as the Mongols,
military
leaders were unwilling to go so far. Meanwhile a state that inflicted mass
terror on its own populace would unleash
demons and create a chaos it
might find hard to control. But small groups have no such problems. Being
so few in number, they
cannot hope to wage a conventional war or even a
guerrilla campaign. Terror is their strategy of last resort. Taking on a
much
larger enemy, they are often desperate, and they have a cause to which they
are utterly committed. Ethical considerations
pale in comparison. And
creating chaos is part of their strategy.
The basis of Mongol warfare was unadulterated terror. Massacre, rapine
and torture were the price of defeat, whether enforced
or negotiated. . . .
The whole apparatus of terror was remorselessly applied to sap the victim’s
will to resist, and in practical
terms this policy of “frightfulness” certainly
paid short-term dividends. Whole armies were known to dissolve into fear-
ridden fragments at the news of the approach of the toumans. . . . Many
enemies were paralysed . . . before a [Mongol] army crossed their frontiers.
THE ART OF WARFARE ON LAND, DAVID CHANDLER, 1974
Terrorism was limited for many centuries by its tools: the sword, the
knife, the gun, all agents of individual killing. Then,
in the nineteenth
century, a single campaign produced a radical innovation, giving birth to
terrorism as we know it today.
In the late 1870s, a group of Russian radicals, mostly from the
intelligentsia, had been agitating for a peasant-led revolution.
Eventually
they realized that their cause was hopeless: the peasants were unprepared to
take this kind of action, and, more
important, the czarist regime and its
repressive forces were far too powerful. Czar Alexander II had recently
initiated what
became known as the White Terror, a brutal crackdown on
any form of dissidence. It was almost impossible for the radicals
to operate
in the open, let alone spread their influence. Yet if they did nothing, the
czar’s strength would only grow.
And so from among these radicals, a group emerged bent on waging a
terrorist war. They called themselves Narodnaya Volia,
or “People’s Will.”
To keep their organization clandestine, they kept it small. They dressed
inconspicuously, melting into
the crowd. And they began to make bombs.
Once they had assassinated a number of government ministers, the czar
became a virtual
prisoner in his palace. Deranged with the desire to hunt the
terrorists down, he directed all of his energies toward this
goal, with the
result that much of his administration became dysfunctional.
In 1880 the radicals were able to explode a bomb in the Winter Palace,
the czar’s residence in St. Petersburg. Then, finally,
the following year
another bomb killed Alexander himself. The government naturally
responded with repression still harsher
than the policy already in place,
erecting a virtual police state. In spite of this, in 1888, Alexander Ulianov—
the brother
of Vladimir Lenin and a member of Narod-naya Volia—nearly
succeeded in killing Alexander’s successor, Czar Alexander III.
The capture and execution of Ulianov brought the activities of Narodnaya
Volia to a close, but the group had already begun
to inspire a wave of
terrorist strikes internationally, including the anarchist assassinations of the
American presidents
James A. Garfield in 1881 and William McKinley in
1901. And with Narodnaya all the elements of modern terrorism are in
place.
The group thought bombs better than guns, being more dramatic and
more frightening. They believed that if they killed enough
ministers of the
government, extending upward to the czar himself, the regime would either
collapse or go to extremes to try
to defend itself. That repressive reaction,
though, would in the long run play into the radicals’ hands, fomenting a
discontent
that would eventually spark a revolution. Meanwhile the
bombing campaign would win the group coverage in the press, indirectly
publicizing their cause to sympathizers around the world. They called this
“the propaganda of the deed.”
“This is what you should try for. An attempt upon a crowned head or on a
president is sensational enough in a way, but not
so much as it used to be. It
has entered into a general conception of the existence of all chiefs of state.
It’s almost conventional—
especially since so many presidents have been
assassinated. Now let us take an outrage upon— say a church. Horrible
enough
at first sight, no doubt, and yet not so effective as a person of an
ordinary mind might think. No matter how revolutionary
and anarchist in
inception, there would be fools enough to give such an outrage the
character of a religious manifestation. And that would detract from the
especial alarming significance we wish to give to the act. A murderous
attempt on a restaurant
or a theatre would suffer in the same way from the
suggestion of non-political passion; the exasperation of a hungry man,
an
act of social revenge. All this is used up; it is no longer instructive as an
object lesson in revolutionary anarchism. Every newspaper has ready-made
phrases to explain such manifestations away. I am about to give you the
philosophy of bomb
throwing from my point of view; from the point of view
you pretend to have been serving for the last eleven years. I will
try not to
talk above your head. The sensibilities of the class you are attacking are
soon blunted. Property seems to them an indestructible thing. You can’t
count upon their emotions either
of pity or fear for very long. A bomb
outrage to have any influence on public opinion now must go beyond the
intention of
vengeance or terrorism. It must be purely destructive. It must be
that, and only that, beyond the faintest suspicion of any other object. You
anarchists
should make it clear that you are perfectly determined to make a
clean sweep of the whole social creation . . . . . . What is one to say to an act
of destructive ferocity so absurd as to be incomprehensible, inexplicable,
almost unthinkable,
in fact, mad? Madness alone is truly terrifying,
inasmuch as you cannot placate it either by threats, persuasion, or bribes.
Moreover, I am a civilized man. I would never dream of directing you to
organize a mere butchery even if I expected the best
results from it. But I
wouldn’t expect from a butchery the results I want. Murder is always with
us. It is almost an institution.
The demonstration must be against learning—
science. But not every science will do. The attack must have all the shocking
senselessness of gratuitous blasphemy. . . .”
THE SECRET AGENT, JOSEPH CONRAD, 1857–1924
Narodnaya Volia aimed principally at the government but was willing to
kill civilians in the process. The fall of the czarist
government was worth a
few lives lost, and in the end the bombs were less deadly than their
alternative, which was civil war.
At the very least, Narodnaya Volia would
show the Russian people that the government was not the untouchable
monolithic power
that it made itself seem; it was vulnerable. The group’s
members understood that the regime was quite likely to be able to
liquidate
them in time, but they were willing to die for their cause.
Narodnaya Volia saw that it could use one relatively small event—a
bomb blast—to set off a chain reaction: fear in the administration
would
produce harsh repression, which would win the group publicity and
sympathy and heighten the government’s unpopularity,
which would lead to
more radicalism, which would lead to more repression, and so on until the
whole cycle collapsed in turmoil.
Narodnaya Volia was weak and small, yet
simple but dramatic acts of violence could give it a disproportionate power
to sow
chaos and uncertainty, creating the appearance of strength among
police and public. In fact, its smallness and inconspicuousness
gave it a
tremendous edge: at enormous expense, a cumbersome force of thousands
of police would have to search out a tiny,
clandestine band that had the
advantages of mobility, surprise, and relative invisibility. Besides giving the
terrorists the
chance to present themselves as heroic underdogs, the
asymmetry of forces made them almost impossible to fight.
This asymmetry brings war to its ultimate extreme: the smallest number
of people waging war against an enormous power, leveraging
their
smallness and desperation into a potent weapon. The dilemma that all
terrorism presents, and the reason it attracts
so many and is so potent, is that
terrorists have a great deal less to lose than the armies arrayed against them,
and a great
deal to gain through terror.
It is often argued that terrorist groups like Narodnaya Volia are doomed
to failure: inviting severe repression, they play
into the hands of the
authorities, who can effectively claim carte blanche to fight this threat—and
in the end they bring
about no real change. But this argument misses the
point and misreads terrorism. Narodnaya Volia awakened millions of
Russians
to its cause, and its techniques were copied around the world. It
also profoundly unbalanced the czarist regime, which responded
irrationally
and heavy-handedly, devoting resources to repression that could have been
better applied to reforms that might
have prolonged its stay in power. The
repression also incubated a much more potent revolutionary group, the
burgeoning communist
movement.
In essence, terrorists kick a rock in order to start an avalanche. If no
landslide follows, little is lost, except perhaps
their own lives, which they
are willing to sacrifice in their devotion to their cause. If mayhem and chaos
ensue, though,
they have great power to influence events. Terrorists are
often reacting against an extremely static situation in which change
by any
route is blocked. In their desperation they can often break up the status quo.
It is a mistake to judge war by the rubric of victory or defeat: both states
have shades and gradations. Few victories in
history are total or bring about
lasting peace; few defeats lead to permanent destruction. The ability to
effect some kind
of change, to attain a limited goal, is what makes terrorism
so alluring, particularly to those who are otherwise powerless.
For instance, terrorism can be used quite effectively for the limited goal
of gaining publicity for a cause. Once this is
achieved, a public presence is
established that can be translated into political power. When Palestinian
terrorists hijacked
an El Al plane in 1968, they captured the attention of the
mass media all over the world. In the years to come, they would
stage-
manage other terrorist acts that played well on television, including the
infamous attack on the 1972 Munich Olympics.
Although such acts made
them hated by most in non-Arab countries, they were willing to live with
that—the publicity for their
cause, and the power that came from it, was all
they were after. As the writer Brian Jenkins notes, “Insurgents fought in
Angola, Mozambique, and Portuguese Guinea for fourteen years using the
standard tactics of rural guerrilla warfare. The world
hardly noticed their
struggle, while an approximately equal number of Palestinian commandos
employing terrorist tactics have
in a few years become a primary concern to
the world.”
In a world dominated by appearances, in which value is determined by
public presence, terrorism can offer a spectacular shortcut
to publicity—and
terrorists accordingly tailor their violence to the media, particularly
television. They make it too gruesome,
too compelling, to ignore. Reporters
and pundits can profess to be shocked and disgusted, but they are helpless:
it is their
job to spread the news, yet in essence they are spreading the virus
that can only aid the terrorists by giving them such presence.
The effect
does not go unnoticed among the small and powerless, making the use of
terrorism perversely appealing to a new
generation.
Yet for all its strengths, terrorism also has limitations that have proved the
death of many a violent campaign, and those
opposing it must know and
exploit this. The strategy’s main weakness is the terrorists’ lack of ties to
the public or to a
real political base. Often isolated, living in hiding, they
are prone to lose contact with reality, overestimating their own
power and
overplaying their hand. Although their use of violence must be strategic to
succeed, their alienation from the public
makes it hard for them to maintain
a sense of balance. The members of Narodnaya Volia had a somewhat
developed understanding
of the Russian serfs, but more recent terrorist
groups, such as the Weathermen in the United States and the Red Brigades
in
Italy, have been so divorced from the public as to verge on the delusional.
Accentuating the terrorists’ isolation and denying
them a political base
should be part of any effective counterstrategy against them.
When Odawara Castle fell to the attackers in the Mei¯o period (the end of
the fifteenth century), Akiko, who had been a maid
in the service of Mori
Fujiyori, the lord of the castle, escaped with a cat which had been her pet
for years, and then the
cat became a wild supernatural monster which
terrorized the people, finally even preying on infants in the village. The
local officials joined with the people in attempts to catch it, but with its
strange powers of appearing and disappearing,
the swordsmen and archers
could find nothing to attack, and men and women went in dread day and
night. Then in December of the second year of Eish o (1505), priest
Yakkoku went up on to the dais at Hokokuji and drew the picture
of a cat,
which he displayed to the congregation with the words: “As I have drawn it,
so I kill it with Katzu!, that the fears may be removed from the hearts of the
people.” He gave the shout, and tore to pieces the picture of the cat. On that
day a woodcutter in the valley near the Takuma villa heard a terrible
screech; he guided a company of archers to
the upper part of the valley,
where they found the body of the cat-monster, as big as a bear-cub, dead on
a rock. The people
agreed that this had been the result of the master’s
Katzu!

Tests (1) How can tearing up a picture with a Katzu! destroy a living
monster? (2) That devil-cat is right now rampaging among the people,
bewitching and killing them. Kill it quickly with a Katzu! Show
the proof!
SAMURAI ZEN: THE WARRIOR KOANS, TREVOR LEGGETT, 1985
Terrorism is usually born out of feelings of weakness and despair,
combined with a conviction that the cause one stands for,
whether public or
personal, is worth both the inflicting and the suffering of any kind of
damage. A world in which the faces
of power are often large and apparently
invulnerable only makes the strategy more appealing. In this sense terrorism
can become
a kind of style, a mode of behavior that filters down into
society itself.
In the 1920s and ’30s, the French psychoanalyst Jacques Lacan butted
heads with the extremely conservative medical societies
that dominated
almost all aspects of psychoanalytic practice. Realizing the futility of taking
on these authorities in a conventional
way, Lacan developed a style that can
fairly be described as terroristic. His sessions with his patients, for example,
were
often cut short before the usual fifty minutes were up; they could last
any period of time that he saw fit and were sometimes
as brief as ten
minutes. This deliberate provocation to the medical establishment caused a
great deal of scandal, setting
off a chain reaction that shook the
psychoanalytic community for years. (These sessions were also quite
terrorizing for the
patients, who could never be sure when Lacan would end
them and so were forced to concentrate and make every moment count—all
of which had great therapeutic value, according to Lacan.) Having gained
much publicity this way, Lacan kept stirring the
pot with new provocative
acts, culminating in the creation of his own rival school and professional
society. His books are
written in a style to match this strategy: violent and
arcane. It was as if he occasionally liked to throw little bombs into
the
world, thriving on the terror and attention they got him.
People who feel weak and powerless are often tempted into outbursts of
anger or irrational behavior, which keeps those around
them in suspense as
to when the next attack will come. These fits of temper, like other, more
serious kinds of terror, can
have a chilling effect on their targets, sapping
the will to resist; when the simplest dealings with these people are
potentially
so unpleasant, why fight? Why not just give in? A violent
temper or outlandish act, volcanic and startling, can also create
the illusion
of power, disguising actual weaknesses and insecurities. And an emotional
or out-of-control response to it just
plays into the other person’s hands,
creating the kind of chaos and attention he or she thrives on. If you have to
deal with
a terroristic spouse or boss, it is best to fight back in a determined
but dispassionate manner—the response such types least
expect.
Although organized terrorism has evolved and technology has increased
its capacity for violence, its essential makeup does
not seem to have
changed—the elements developed by Narodnaya Volia are still in effect.
Yet the question many ask today is
whether a new, more virulent kind of
terrorism may be developing, one far surpassing the classical version. If
terrorists
could get hold of more potent armaments, for example— nuclear
or biological weapons, say—and had the stomach to use them,
their kind of
war and the power it may bring them would make a qualitative leap into a
new, apocalyptic form. But perhaps
a new form of terrorism has already
emerged that does not need the threat of dirty weapons to create a more
devastating result.
On September 11, 2001, a handful of terrorists linked to the Islamic Al
Qaeda movement produced the single deadliest terrorist
action to date, in
their attacks on the World Trade Center in New York City and the Pentagon
outside Washington, D.C. The
attack had many of the earmarks of classical
terrorism: a small group, with extremely limited means, using the
technology
of the United States at their disposal, was able to strike with
maximum effect. Here was the familiar asymmetry of forces
in which
smallness becomes an asset, being inconspicuous within the larger
population and accordingly quite difficult to detect.
The terror of the event
itself set in motion a paniclike reaction from which the United States has
still not fully recovered.
The drama and symbolism of the Twin Towers
themselves, not to mention the Pentagon, created a grotesquely compelling
spectacle
that gave the terrorists maximum exposure while incisively
demonstrating the vulnerability of the United States, often described
in
recent years as the world’s only remaining superpower. There were those
around the world who had never imagined that America
could be so quickly
and seriously harmed but were delighted to find they were wrong.
Many deny that 9/11 was a new form of terrorism. It simply distinguished
itself, they say, by the number of its victims; the
change was quantitative,
not qualitative. And, as in classical terrorism, these analysts continue, Al
Qaeda is ultimately
doomed to failure: the U.S. counterattack on
Afghanistan destroyed their operational base, and they are now the targets
of
the unbending will of the American government, whose invasion of Iraq
was a stage in a grand strategy to rid the region of
terrorism in general. But
there is another way to look at the attack, keeping in mind the chain
reaction that is always the
terrorist’s goal.
When a man has learned within his heart what fear and trembling mean, he
is safeguarded against any terror produced by outside
influences. Let the
thunder roll and spread terror a hundred miles around: he remains so
composed and reverent in spirit that the sacrificial rite is not interrupted.
This is the spirit that must animate
leaders and rulers of men— a profound
inner seriousness from which all outer terrors glance off harmlessly.
THE I CHING, CHINA, CIRCA EIGHTH CENTURY B.C.
The full economic impact of 9/11 is hard to measure, but the ripple effect
of the attack is by any standard immense and undeniable:
substantial
increases in security costs, including the funding of new government
programs for that purpose; enormous military
expenditures on the invasions
of two separate nations; a depressive effect on the stock market (always
particularly susceptible
to the psychology of panic) and a consequent injury
to consumer confidence; hits on specific industries, such as travel and
tourism; and the reverberating effect of all these on the global economy.
The attack also had tremendous political effects—
in fact, the American
elections of 2002 and 2004 were arguably determined by it. And as the
chain reaction has continued to
play out, a growing rift has emerged
between the United States and its European allies. (Terrorism often
implicitly aims to
create such splits in alliances and in public opinion as
well, where hawks and doves line up.) September 11 has also had a
definite
and obvious impact on the American way of life, leading directly to a
curtailment of the civil liberties that are
the distinguishing mark of our
country. Finally—though this is impossible to measure— it has had a
depressive and chilling
effect on the culture at large.
“It appears to me that this mystery is considered insoluble, for the very
reason which should cause it to be regarded as easy
of solution—I mean for
the outré character of its features. The police are confounded by the
seeming absence of motive—not for the murder itself—but for the
atrocity of
the murder. . . . They have fallen into the gross but common error of
confounding the unusual with the abstruse.
But it is by these deviations
from the plane of the ordinary, that reason feels its way, if at all, in its
search for the
true. In investigations such as we are now pursuing, it should
not be so much asked ‘what has occurred,’ as ‘what has occurred
that has
never occurred before.’ In fact, the facility with which I shall arrive, or
have arrived, at the solution of this
mystery, is in the direct ratio of its
apparent insolubility in the eyes of the police.”
AUGUSTE DUPIN IN “THE MURDERS IN THE RUE MORGUE,”
EDGAR ALLAN POE, 1809–1849
Perhaps the strategists of Al Qaeda neither intended all this nor even
imagined it; we will never know. But terrorism is by
its nature a throw of
the dice, and the terrorist always hopes for the maximum effect. Creating as
much chaos, uncertainty,
and panic as possible is the whole idea. In this
sense the 9/11 attack must be considered a success to such an extent that
it
does indeed represent a qualitative leap in terrorism’s virulence. It may not
have been as physically destructive as the
explosion of a nuclear or
biological weapon could be, but over time its reverberating power has far
surpassed that of any
terror attack before it. And this power comes from the
altered nature of the world. Given the deep interconnections of the
new
global scene, whether commercial, political, or cultural, a powerful attack at
a single point can have a chain-reactive
effect that terrorists of earlier years
could never have imagined. A system of interconnected markets that thrives
on open
borders and networks is intensely vulnerable to this intense ripple
effect. The kind of panic that once might stir in a crowd
or through a city
can now spread over the world, fed spectacularly by the media.
To consider the 9/11 attack a failure because it did not achieve Al
Qaeda’s ultimate goal of pushing the United States out
of the Middle East
or spurring a pan-Islamic revolution is to misread their strategy and to judge
them by the standards of
conventional warfare. Terrorists quite often have a
large goal, but they know that the chances of reaching it in one blow
are
fairly negligible. They just do what they can to start off their chain reaction.
Their enemy is the status quo, and their
success can be measured by the
impact of their actions as it plays out over the years.
To combat terrorism—classical or the new version on the horizon— it is
always tempting to resort to a military solution, fighting
violence with
violence, showing the enemy that your will is not broken and that any
future attacks on their part will come
with a heavy price. The problem here
is that terrorists by nature have much less to lose than you do. A counter-
strike may
hurt them but will not deter them; in fact, it may even embolden
them and help them gain recruits. Terrorists are often willing
to spend years
bringing you down. To hit them with a dramatic counter-strike is only to
show your impatience, your need for
immediate results, your vulnerability
to emotional responses—all signs not of strength but of weakness.
We can no longer conceive of the idea of a symbolic calculation, as in poker
or the potlatch: minimum stake, maximum result.
This is exactly what the
terrorists have accomplished with their attack on Manhattan, which
illustrates rather well the theory
of chaos: an initial shock, provoking
incalculable consequences.
THE SPIRIT OF TERRORISM, JEAN BAUDRILLARD, 2002
Because of the extreme asymmetry of forces at play in the terrorist
strategy, the military solution is often the least effective.
Terrorists are
vaporous, spread out, linked not physically but by some radical and fanatic
idea. As a frustrated Napoleon
Bonaparte said when he was struggling to
deal with German nationalist groups resorting to acts of terror against the
French,
“A sect cannot be destroyed by cannonballs.”
The French writer Raymond Aron defines terrorism as an act of violence
whose psychological impact far exceeds its physical
one. This
psychological impact, however, then translates into something physical —
panic, chaos, political division—all of
which makes the terrorists seem
more powerful than they are in reality. Any effective counterstrategy must
take this into
consideration. In the aftermath of a terrorist blow, what is
most essential is stopping the psychological ripple effect. And
the effort
here must begin with the leaders of the country or group under attack.
In 1944, near the end of World War II, the city of London was subjected
to a fierce campaign of terror from Germany’s V-1
and V-2 rockets, an act
of desperation that Hitler hoped would spread internal division and paralyze
the will of the British
public to continue the war. Over six thousand people
were killed, many more were injured, and millions of homes were damaged
or destroyed. But instead of allowing despondency and worry to set in,
Prime Minister Winston Churchill turned the bombing
campaign to his
advantage as an opportunity to rally and unify the British people. He
designed his speeches and policies to
calm panic and allay anxiety. Instead
of drawing attention to the V-1 attacks, or to the more dreaded V-2s, he
emphasized
the need to stay resolved. The English would not give Germany
the satisfaction of seeing them bow to such terror.
In general, the most effective response to unconventional provocation is the
least response: do as little as possible and
that cunningly adjusted to the
arena. Do no harm. Deny one’s self, do less rather than more. These are
uncongenial to Americans who instead desire to deploy great force, quickly,
to achieve a swift and final result. What is needed is a shift in the perception
of those responsible in Washington: less
can be more, others are not like us,
and a neat and tidy world is not worth the cost.
DRAGONWARS, J. BOWYER BELL, 1999
In 1961, when President Charles de Gaulle of France faced a vicious
right-wing terror campaign by French forces in Algeria
opposed to his plan
to grant the colony its independence, he used a similar strategy: he appeared
on television to say that
the French could not surrender to this campaign,
that the costs in lives were relatively small compared to what they had
recently
suffered in World War II, that the terrorists were few in number,
and that to defeat them the French must not succumb to panic
but must
simply unite. In both these cases, a leader was able to provide a steadying
influence, a ballast against the latent
hysteria felt by the threatened citizenry
and stoked by the media. The threat was real, Churchill and de Gaulle
acknowledged;
security measures were being taken; but the important thing
was to channel public emotions away from fear and into something
positive. The leaders turned the attacks into rallying points, using them to
unite a fractured public—a crucial issue, for
polarization is always a goal of
terrorism. Instead of trying to mount a dramatic counterstrike, Churchill and
de Gaulle included
the public in their strategic thinking and made the
citizenry active participants in the battle against these destructive
forces.
And it is this uncontrollable chain reaction effect of reversals that is the true
power of terrorism. This power is visible
in the obvious and less obvious
aftereffects of the event— not only in the economic and political recession
throughout the
system, and the psychological recession that comes out of
that, but also in the recession in the value system, in the ideology
of liberty,
the freedom of movement, etc., which was the pride of the Western world
and the source of its power over the rest of the world. It has reached a point
where the idea of liberty, one that is relatively recent, is in the process of
disappearing from our
customs and consciences, and the globalization of
liberal values is about to realize itself in its exact opposite form: a
globalization of police forces, of total control, of a terror of security
measures. This reversal moves towards a maximum
of restrictions,
resembling those of a fundamentalist society.
THE SPIRIT OF TERRORISM, JEAN BAUDRILLARD, 2002
While working to halt the psychological damage from an attack, the
leader must do everything possible to thwart a further
strike. Terrorists often
work sporadically and with no pattern, partly because unpredictability is
frightening, partly because
they are often in fact too weak to mount a
sustained effort. Time must be taken to patiently uproot the terrorist threat.
More valuable than military force here is solid intelligence, infiltration of
the enemy ranks (working to find dissidents
from within), and slowly and
steadily drying up the money and resources on which the terrorist depends.
At the same time, it is important to occupy the moral high ground. As the
victim of the attack, you have the advantage here,
but you may lose it if you
counterattack aggressively. The high ground is not a minor luxury but a
critical strategic ploy:
world opinion and alliances with other nations will
prove crucial in isolating the terrorists and preventing them from sowing
division. All this requires the willingness to wage the war over the course of
many years, and mostly behind the scenes. Patient
resolve and the refusal to
overreact will serve as their own deterrents. Show you mean business and
make your enemies feel
it, not through the blustery front used for political
purposes—this is not a sign of strength—but through the cool and
calculating
strategies you employ to corner them.
In the end, in a world that is intimately interlinked and dependent on open
borders, there will never be perfect security.
The question is, how much
threat are we willing to live with? Those who are strong can deal with a
certain acceptable level
of insecurity. Feelings of panic and hysteria reveal
the degree to which the enemy has triumphed, as does an overly rigid
attempt at defense, in which a society and culture at large are made hostage
to a handful of men.
Image: The Tidal Wave. Something disturbs the water far out at sea—a
tremor, a volcano, a landslide. A wave a few inches high
begins to ripple,
cresting into a larger wave and then a larger one still, the depth of the
water giving it momentum, until
it breaks on shore with an unimaginable
destructive force.
Authority: There is no fate worse than being continuously under
guard, for it means you are always afraid.—Julius Caesar (100–
44 B.C.)
REVERSAL
The reverse of terrorism would be direct and symmetrical war, a return to
the very origins of warfare, to fighting that is
up-front and honest, a simple
test of strength against strength—essentially an archaic and useless strategy
for modern times.



The 50th Law
50 Cent and Robert Greene

Contents
Foreword
Introduction
Chapter 1
See Things for What They Are-Intense Realism
Chapter 2
Make Everything Your Own—Self-Reliance
Chapter 3
Turn Shit into Sugar—Opportunism
Chapter 4
Keep Moving—Calculated Momentum
Chapter 5
Know When to Be Bad—Aggression
Chapter 6
Lead from the Front—Authority
Chapter 7
Know Your Environment from the Inside Out—Connection
Chapter 8
Respect the Process—Mastery
Chapter 9
Push Beyond Your Limits—Self-Belief
Chapter 10
Confront Your Mortality—the Sublime
 
Acknowledgments
Other Books by 50 Cent and Robert Greene
Copyright
About the Publisher

Foreword
 
I first met 50 Cent in the winter of 2006. He had been a fan of my book The
48 Laws of Power, and he was interested in collaborating on a book project.
In the meeting, we talked about war, terrorism, the music business. What
struck me most was that we had a remarkably similar way of looking at the
world, one that transcended the great differences in our backgrounds. For
instance, in discussing the power games he was experiencing at that time in
the music business, we both looked past people’s benign explanations for
their behavior and tried to figure out what they were really up to. He
developed this way of thinking on the dangerous streets of Southside
Queens where it was a necessary life skill; I came to it by reading a lot of
history and observing the crafty maneuvers of various people in Hollywood,
where I worked for many years. The perspective, however, is the same.
We left the meeting that day with an open-ended idea about a future
project. As I pondered the possible theme of this book over the following
months, I became increasingly intrigued by the idea of bringing our two
worlds together. What excites me about America is its social mobility,
people continually rising from the bottom to the top and altering the culture
in the process. On another level, however, we remain a nation that lives in
social ghettos. Celebrities generally congregate around other celebrities;
academics and intellectuals are cloistered in their worlds; people like to
associate with those of their kind. If we leave these narrow worlds, it is
usually as an observer or tourist of another way of life. What seemed an
interesting possibility here was to ignore our surface differences as much as
possible and collaborate on the level of ideas—illuminating some truths
about human nature that go beyond class or ethnicity.
With an open mind and the idea of figuring out what this book could be,
I hung out with Fifty throughout much of 2007. I was given almost
complete access to his world. I followed him on numerous high-powered
business meetings, sitting quietly in a corner and observing him in action.
One day I witnessed a raucous fistfight in his office between two of his
employees, with Fifty having to personally break it up. I observed a fake
crisis that he manufactured for the press for publicity purposes. I followed
him as he mingled with other stars, friends from the hood, European
royalty, and political figures. I visited his childhood home in Southside
Queens, hung out with his friends from his hustling days, and got a sense of
what it could be like to grow up in that world. And the more I witnessed
him in action on all these fronts, the more it struck me that Fifty was a
walking, living example of the historical figures I had written about in my
three books. He is a master player at power, a kind of hip-hop Napoleon
Bonaparte.
While writing about the various power players in history, I developed
the theory that the source of their success could almost always be traced to
one single skill or unique quality that separated them from others. For
Napoleon, it was his remarkable ability to absorb a massive amount of
detail and organize it in his mind. This allowed him to almost always know
more than his rival generals about what was going on. After observing Fifty
and talking to him about his past, I decided that the source of his power is
his utter fearlessness.
This quality does not manifest itself in yelling or obvious intimidation
tactics. Any time Fifty acts that way in public it is pure theater. Behind the
scenes, he is cool and calculating. His lack of fear is displayed in his
attitude and his actions. He has seen and lived through too many dangerous
encounters on the streets to be remotely fazed by anything in the corporate
world. If a deal is not to his liking, he will walk away and not care. If he
needs to play a little rough and dirty with an adversary, he goes at it without
a second thought. He feels supreme confidence in himself. Living in a
world where most people are generally timid and conservative, he always
has the advantage of being willing to do more, to take risks, and to be
unconventional. Coming from an environment in which he never expected
to live past the age of twenty-five, he feels like he has nothing to lose, and
this brings him tremendous power.
The more I thought of this unique strength of his, the more it seemed
inspiring and instructive. I could see myself benefiting from his example
and overcoming my own fears. I decided that fearlessness in all its varieties
would be the subject of the book.
The process for writing The 50th Law was simple. In observing and
talking to Fifty, I noticed certain patterns of behavior and themes that would
eventually turn into the ten chapters of this book. Once I determined these
themes, I discussed them with him, and together we shaped them further.
We talked about overcoming the fear of death, the ability to embrace chaos
and change, the mental alchemy you can effect by thinking of any adversity
as an opportunity for power. We related these ideas to our own experiences
and to the world at large. I then expanded on these discussions with my own
research, combining the example of Fifty with stories of other people
throughout history who have displayed the same fearless quality.
In the end, this is a book about a particular philosophy of life that can be
summed up as follows—your fears are a kind of prison that confines you
within a limited range of action. The less you fear, the more power you will
have and the more fully you will live. It is our hope that The 50th Law will
inspire you to discover this power for yourself.

Introduction
SO OVER YOU IS THE GREATEST ENEMY A MAN CAN HAVE AND THAT IS
FEAR. I KNOW SOME OF YOU ARE AFRAID TO LISTEN TO THE TRUTH—
YOU HAVE BEEN RAISED ON FEAR AND LIES. BUT I AM GOING TO
PREACH TO YOU THE TRUTH UNTIL YOU ARE FREE OF THAT FEAR….
—Malcolm X
 
The Fearful Attitude
In the beginning, fear was a basic, simple emotion for the human animal.
We confronted something overwhelming—the imminent threat of death in
the form of wars, plagues, and natural disasters—and we felt fear. As for
any animal, this emotion had a protective function—it allowed us to take
notice of a danger and retreat in time. For us humans, it served an
additional, positive purpose—we could remember the source of the threat
and protect ourselves better the next time. Civilization depended on this
ability to foresee and forestall dangers from the environment. Out of fear,
we also developed religion and various belief systems to comfort us. Fear is
the oldest and strongest emotion known to man, something deeply inscribed
in our nervous system and subconscious.
Over time, however, something strange began to happen. The actual
terrors that we faced began to lessen in intensity as we gained increasing
control over our environment. But instead of our fears lessening as well,
they began to multiply in number. We started to worry about our status in
society—whether people liked us, or how we fit into the group. We became
anxious for our livelihoods, the future of our families and children, our
personal health, and the aging process. Instead of a simple, intense fear of
something powerful and real, we developed a kind of generalized anxiety. It
was as if the thousands of years of feeling fear in the face of nature could
not go away—we had to find something at which to direct our anxiety, no
matter how small or improbable.
In the evolution of fear, a decisive moment occurred in the nineteenth
century when people in advertising and journalism discovered that if they
framed their stories and appeals with fear, they could capture our attention.
It is an emotion we find hard to resist or control, and so they constantly
shifted our focus to new possible sources of anxiety: the latest health scare,
the new crime wave, a social faux pas we might be committing, and endless
hazards in the environment of which we were not aware. With the
increasing sophistication of the media and the visceral quality of the
imagery, they have been able to give us the feeling that we are fragile
creatures in an environment full of danger—even though we live in a world
infinitely safer and more predictable than anything our ancestors knew.
With their help, our anxieties have only increased.
Fear is not designed for such a purpose. Its function is to stimulate
powerful physical responses, allowing an animal to retreat in time. After the
event, it is supposed to go away. An animal that cannot not let go of its fears
once the threat is gone will find it hard to eat and sleep. We are the animal
that cannot get rid of its fears and when so many of them lay inside of us,
these fears tend to color how we view the world. We shift from feeling fear
because of some threat, to having a fearful attitude towards life itself. We
come to see almost every event in terms of risk. We exaggerate the dangers
and our vulnerability. We instantly focus on the adversity that is always
possible. We are generally unaware of this phenomenon because we accept
it as normal. In times of prosperity, we have the luxury of fretting over
things. But in times of trouble, this fearful attitude becomes particularly
pernicious. Such moments are when we need to solve problems, deal with
reality, and move forward, but fear is a call to retreat and retrench.
This is precisely what Franklin Delano Roosevelt confronted when he
took office in 1933. The Great Depression that had begun with the stock
market crash of 1929 was now at its worst. But what struck Roosevelt was
not the actual economic factors but the mood of the public. It seemed to him
that people were not only more fearful than necessary but that their fears
were making it harder to surmount adversity. In his inaugural address to the
country, he said that he would not ignore such obvious realities as the
collapse of the economy and that he would not preach a naive optimism.
But he implored his listeners to remember that the country had faced worse
things in its past, periods such as the Civil War. What had brought us out of
such moments was our pioneer spirit, our determination and resolve. This is
what it means to be an American.
Fear creates its own self-fulfilling dynamic—as people give in to it,
they lose energy and momentum. Their lack of confidence translates into
inaction that lowers confidence levels even further, on and on. “So, first of
all,” he told the audience, “let me assert my firm belief that the only thing
we have to fear is fear itself—nameless, unreasoning, unjustified terror,
which paralyzes needed efforts to convert retreat into advance.”
What Roosevelt sketched out in his speech is the knife’s edge that
separates failure from success in life. That edge is your attitude, which has
the power to help shape your reality. If you view everything through the
lens of fear, then you tend to stay in retreat mode. You can just as easily see
a crisis or problem as a challenge, an opportunity to prove your mettle, the
chance to strengthen and toughen yourself, or a call to collective action. By
seeing it as a challenge, you will have converted this negative into a
positive purely by a mental process that will result in positive action as
well. And in fact, through his inspiring leadership, FDR was able to help the
country shift its mind-set and confront the Depression with a more
enterprising spirit.
Today we seem to face new problems and crises that test our national
mettle. But just as FDR made the comparison to even worse times in the
past, we can say that what we are facing is not as bad as the perils of the
1930s and the subsequent war years. In fact, the reality of twenty-first-
century America is something more like the following: our physical
environment is safer and more secure than any other moment in our history.
We live in the most prosperous country in the world. In the past only white
males could play the power game. Now millions upon millions of
minorities and women have been given entrance to the arena, forever
altering the dynamic—making us the most socially advanced country in that
regard. Advances in technology have opened up all kinds of new
opportunities; old business models are dissolving, leaving the field wide
open for innovation. It is a time of sweeping change and revolution.
We face certain challenges as well. The world has become more
competitive; the economy has undeniable vulnerabilities and is in need of
reinvention. As in all situations, the determining factor will be our attitude,
how we choose to look at this reality. If we give in to the fear, we will give
disproportionate attention to the negative and manufacture the very adverse
circumstances that we dread. If we go the opposite direction, cultivating a
fearless approach to life, attacking everything with boldness and energy,
then we will create a much different dynamic.
Understand: we are all too afraid—of offending people, of stirring up
conflict, of standing out from the crowd, of taking bold action. For
thousands of years our relationship to this emotion has evolved—from a
primitive fear of nature, to generalized anxiety about the future, to the
fearful attitude that now dominates us. As rational, productive adults we are
called upon to finally overcome this downward trend and to evolve beyond
our fears.
The Fearless Type
THE VERY FIRST THING I REMEMBER IN MY EARLY CHILDHOOD IS A
FLAME, A BLUE FLAME JUMPING OFF A GAS STOVE SOMEBODY LIT…. I
WAS THREE YEARS OLD…. I FELT FEAR, REAL FEAR, FOR THE FIRST
TIME IN MY LIFE. BUT I REMEMBER IT ALSO LIKE SOME KIND OF
ADVENTURE, SOME KIND OF WEIRD JOY, TOO. I GUESS THAT
EXPERIENCE TOOK ME SOMEPLACE IN MY HEAD I HADN’T BEEN
BEFORE. TO SOME FRONTIER, THE EDGE, MAYBE, OF EVERYTHING
POSSIBLE…THE FEAR I HAD WAS ALMOST LIKE AN INVITATION, A
CHALLENGE TO GO FORWARD INTO SOMETHING I KNEW NOTHING
ABOUT. THAT’S WHERE I THINK MY PERSONAL PHILOSOPHY OF LIFE…
STARTED, WITH THAT MOMENT…. IN MY MIND I HAVE ALWAYS
BELIEVED AND THOUGHT SINCE THEN THAT MY MOTION HAD TO BE
FORWARD, AWAY FROM THE HEAT OF THAT FLAME.
—Miles Davis
There are two ways of dealing with fear—one passive, the other active. In
the passive mode, we seek to avoid the situation that causes us anxiety. This
could translate into postponing any decisions in which we might hurt
people’s feelings. It could mean opting for everything to be safe and
comfortable in our daily lives, so no amount of messiness can enter. When
we are in this mode it is because we feel that we are fragile and would be
damaged by an encounter with the thing we dread.
The active variety is something most of us have experienced at some
point in our lives: the risky or difficult situation that we fear is thrust upon
us. It could be a natural disaster, a death of someone close to us, or a
reversal in fortune in which we lose something. Often in these moments we
find an inner strength that surprises us. What we feared is not so bad. We
cannot avoid it and have to find a way to overcome our fear or suffer real
consequences. Such moments are oddly therapeutic because finally we are
confronting something real—not an imagined fear scenario fed to us by the
media. We can let go of this fear. The problem is that such moments tend to
not last very long or repeat themselves too often. They can quickly lose
their value and we return to the passive, avoidance mode.
When we live in relatively comfortable circumstances, the environment
does not press on us with obvious dangers, violence, or limitations to our
movement. Our main goal then is to maintain the comfort and security we
have, and so we become more sensitive to the slightest risk or threat to the
status quo. We find it harder to tolerate feelings of fear because they are
more vague and troubling—so we remain in the passive mode.
Throughout history, however, there are people who have lived in much
tighter circumstances, dangers pressing in on them on a daily basis. These
types must confront their fears in the active mode again and again and
again. This could be growing up in extreme poverty; facing death on the
battlefield or leading an army in war; living through tumultuous,
revolutionary periods; being a leader in a time of crisis; suffering personal
loss or tragedy; or having a brush with death. Countless people grow up in
or with such circumstances and their spirit is crushed by adversity. But a
few rise above. It is their only positive choice—they must confront these
daily fears and overcome them, or submit to the downward pull. They are
toughened and hardened to the point of steel.
Understand: no one is born this way. It is unnatural to not feel fear. It is
a process that requires challenges and tests. What separates those who go
under and those who rise above adversity is the strength of their will and
their hunger for power.
At some point, this defensive position of overcoming fears converts to
an offensive one—a fearless attitude. Such types learn the value not only of
being unafraid but also of attacking life with a sense of boldness and
urgency and an unconventional approach, creating new models instead of
following old ones. They see the great power this brings them and it soon
becomes their dominant mind-set.
We find these types in all cultures and all time periods—from Socrates
and the Stoics to Cornelius Vanderbilt and Abraham Lincoln.
Napoleon Bonaparte represents a classic fearless type. He began his
career in the military just as the French Revolution exploded. At this critical
moment in his life, he had to experience one of the most chaotic and
terrifying periods in history. He faced endless dangers on the battlefield as a
new kind of warfare was emerging, and he navigated through innumerable
political intrigues in which one wrong move could lead to the guillotine. He
emerged from all of this with a fearless spirit, embracing the chaos of the
times and the vast changes going on in the art of war. And in one of his
innumerable campaigns, he expressed the words that could serve as the
motto for all fearless types.
In the spring of 1800 he was preparing to lead an army into Italy. His
field marshals warned him that the Alps were not passable at that time of
year and told him to wait, even though waiting would spoil the chances for
success. The general replied to them, “For Napoleon’s army, there shall be
no Alps.” And mounted on a mule, Napoleon proceeded to personally lead
his troops through treacherous terrain and past innumerable obstacles. It
was the force of one man’s will that brought them through the Alps,
catching the enemy completely by surprise and defeating them. There are
no Alps and no obstacles that can stand in the way of a person without
fears.
Another example of the type would have to be the great abolitionist and
writer Frederick Douglass, who was born into slavery in Maryland in 1817.
As he later wrote, slavery was a system that depended on the creation of
deep levels of fear. Douglass continually forced himself in the opposite
direction. Despite the threat of severe punishment, he secretly taught
himself to read and write. When he was whipped for his rebellious attitude,
he fought back and saw that he was whipped less often. Without money or
connections, he escaped to the North at the age of twenty. He became a
leading abolitionist, touring the North and telling audiences about the evils
of slavery. The abolitionists wanted him to stay on his lecture circuit and
repeat the same stories over and over, but Douglass wanted to do much
more and he once again rebelled. He founded his own antislavery
newspaper, an unheard-of act for a former slave. The newspaper went on to
have tremendous success.
At each stage of his life Douglass was tested by the powerful odds
against him. Instead of giving in to the fear—of whippings, being alone on
the streets of unfamiliar cities, facing the wrath of the abolitionists—he
raised his level of boldness and pushed himself further onto the offensive.
This confidence gave him the power to rise above the fierce resistances and
animosities of those around him. That is the physics that all fearless types
discover at some point—an appropriate ratcheting up of self-belief and
energy when facing negative or even impossible circumstances.
Fearless people do not emerge exclusively from poverty or a harsh
physical environment. Franklin Delano Roosevelt grew up in a wealthy,
privileged family. At the age of thirty-nine he contracted polio, which
paralyzed him from the waist down. This was a turning point in his life, as
he faced a severe limitation to his movement and possibly an end to his
political career. He refused, however, to give in to the fear and the
downward pull on his spirit. He went the opposite direction, struggling to
make the most of his physical condition and developing an indomitable
spirit that would transform him into our most fearless president. For this
type of person, any kind of encounter with adversity or limitation, at any
age, can serve as the crucible for forging the attitude.
The New Fearless Type
THIS PAST, THE NEGRO’S PAST, OF ROPE, FIRE, TORTURE…DEATH AND
HUMILIATION; FEAR BY DAY AND NIGHT, FEAR AS DEEP AS THE
MARROW OF THE BONE…THIS PAST, THIS ENDLESS STRUGGLE TO
ACHIEVE AND CONFIRM A HUMAN IDENTITY…YET CONTAINS, FOR ALL
ITS HORROR, SOMETHING VERY BEAUTIFUL…. PEOPLE WHO CANNOT
SUFFER CAN NEVER GROW UP, CAN NEVER DISCOVER WHO THEY
ARE….
—James Baldwin
Through much of the nineteenth century, Americans faced all kinds of
dangers and adversity—the hostile physical environment of the frontier,
sharp political divisions, a lawlessness and chaos that came out of great
changes in technology and social mobility. We responded to this
constrictive environment by overcoming our fears and developing what
came to be known as a pioneer spirit—our sense of adventure and our
renowned ability to solve problems.
With our growing prosperity this began to change. In the twentieth
century, however, one environment remained as harsh as ever—the black
ghettos of inner-city America. And out of such a crucible a new fearless
type came forward, exemplified by such figures as James Baldwin,
Malcolm X, and Muhammad Ali. But the racism of the times constricted
their ability to give full rein to this spirit.
In recent times, newer types have emerged from inner-city America
with more freedom to advance to the highest points of power in America—
in entertainment, politics, and business. They come from a Wild West–like
environment in which they have learned to fend for themselves and give
full rein to their ambition. Their education comes from the streets and their
own rough experiences. In a way, they are throwbacks to the freewheeling
types of the nineteenth century, who had little formal schooling but created
a new way of doing business. Their spirit fits the disorder of the twenty-first
century. They are fascinating to watch and in some ways have much to
teach us.
The rapper known as 50 Cent (aka Curtis Jackson) would have to be
considered one of the more dramatic contemporary examples of this
phenomenon and this type. He grew up in a particularly violent and tense
neighborhood—Southside Queens in the midst of the crack epidemic of the
1980s. And in each phase of his life he has had to face a series of dangers
that both tested and toughened him, rituals of initiation into the fearless
attitude he has slowly developed.
One of the greatest fears that any child has is that of being abandoned,
left alone in a terrifying world. It is the source of our most primal
nightmares. This was Fifty’s reality. He never knew his father, and his
mother was murdered when he was eight years old. He quickly developed
the habit of not depending on other people to protect or shelter him. This
meant that in every subsequent encounter in life in which he felt fear, he
could turn only to himself. If he did not want to feel the emotion, he had to
learn to overcome it—on his own.
He began hustling on the streets at any early age, and there was no way
he could avoid feeling fear. On a daily basis he had to confront violence and
aggression. And seeing fear in action so routinely, he understood what a
destructive and debilitating emotion it could be. On the streets, showing
fear would make people lose respect for you. You would end up being
pushed around and more likely to suffer violence because of your desire to
avoid it. You had no choice—if you were to have any kind of power as a
hustler, you had to overcome this emotion. No one could read it in your
eyes. This meant that he would have to place himself again and again in the
situations that stimulated anxiety. The first time he faced someone with a
gun, he was frightened. The second time, less so. The third time, it meant
nothing.
Testing and proving his courage in this way gave him a feeling of
tremendous power. He quickly learned the value of boldness, how he could
push others on their heels by feeling supreme confidence in himself. But no
matter how tough and hardened they become, hustlers usually face one
daunting obstacle—the fear of leaving the streets that are so familiar and
that have taught them all of their skills. They become addicted to the
lifestyle, and even though they are likely to end up in prison or die an early
death, they cannot leave the hustling racket.
Fifty, however, had greater ambitions than to become merely a
successful hustler, and so he forced himself to face and overcome this one
powerful fear. At the age of twenty and at the peak of his hustling success,
he decided to cut his ties to the game and dive into the music racket without
any connections or a safety net. Because he had no plan B, because it was
either succeed at music or go under, he operated with a frantic, bold energy
that got him noticed in the rap world.
He was still a very young man when he had faced down some of the
worst fears that can afflict a human—abandonment, violence, radical
change—and he had emerged stronger and more resilient. But at the age of
twenty-four, on the eve of the release of his first record, he came face-to-
face with what many of us would consider the ultimate fear—that of death
itself. In May of 2000 an assassin poured nine bullets into him in broad
daylight as he sat in a car outside his house, one bullet going through his
jaw and coming within a millimeter of killing him.
In the aftermath of the shooting, Columbia Records dropped him from
the label, canceling the release of his first album. He was quickly
blackballed from the industry, as record executives were afraid to have any
kind of involvement with him and the violence he was associated with.
Many of his friends turned against him, perhaps sensing his weakness. He
now had no money; he couldn’t really return to hustling after turning his
back on it, and his music career seemed to be over. This was one of those
turning points that reveals the power of one’s attitude in the face of
adversity. It was as if he were confronting the impassable Alps.
At this moment, he did as Frederick Douglass did—he decided to
ratchet up his anger, energy, and fearlessness. Coming so close to death, he
understood how short life could be. He would not waste a second. He would
spurn the usual path to success—working within the record industry,
nabbing that golden deal, and putting out the music they thought would sell.
He would go his own way—launching a mix-tape campaign in which he
would sell his music or give it away for free on the streets. In this way he
could hone the hard and raw sounds that he felt were more natural to him.
He could speak the language of the hood without having to soften it at all.
Suddenly he felt a great sense of freedom—he could create his own
business model, be as unconventional as he desired. He felt like he had
nothing to lose, as if the last bits of fear that still remained within him had
bled out in the car that day in 2000. The mix-tape campaign made him
famous on the streets and caught the attention of Eminem, who quickly
signed Fifty to his and Dr. Dre’s label, setting the stage for Fifty’s meteoric
rise to the top of the music world in 2003, and the subsequent creation of
the business empire he has forged since.
We are living through strange, revolutionary times. The old order is
crumbling before our eyes on so many levels. And yet in such an unruly
moment, our leaders in business and politics cling to the past and the old
ways of doing things. They are afraid of change and any kind of disorder.
The new fearless types, as represented by Fifty, move in the opposite
direction. They find that the chaos of the times suits their temperament.
They have grown up being unafraid of experimentation, hustling, and trying
new ways of operating. They embrace the advances in technology that make
others secretly fearful. They let go of the past and create their own business
model. They do not give in to the conservative spirit that haunts corporate
America in this radical period. And at the core of their success is a premise,
a Law of Power that has been known and used by all the fearless spirits in
the past and is the foundation of any kind of success in the world.
The 50th Law
THE GREATEST FEAR PEOPLE HAVE IS THAT OF BEING THEMSELVES.
THEY WANT TO BE 50 CENT OR SOMEONE ELSE. THEY DO WHAT
EVERYONE ELSE DOES EVEN IF IT DOESN’T FIT WHERE AND WHO THEY
ARE. BUT YOU GET NOWHERE THAT WAY; YOUR ENERGY IS WEAK AND
NO ONE PAYS ATTENTION TO YOU. YOU’RE RUNNING AWAY FROM THE
ONE THING THAT YOU OWN—WHAT MAKES YOU DIFFERENT. I LOST
THAT FEAR. AND ONCE I FELT THE POWER THAT I HAD BY SHOWING THE
WORLD I DIDN’T CARE ABOUT BEING LIKE OTHER PEOPLE, I COULD
NEVER GO BACK.
—50 Cent
The 50th Law is based on the following premise: We humans have
generally little control over circumstances. People intersect our lives, doing
things directly and indirectly to us, and we spend our days reacting to what
they bring. Good things come our way, followed by bad things. We struggle
as best we can to gain some control, because being helpless in the face of
events makes us unhappy. Sometimes we succeed, but the margin of control
that we have over people and circumstance is depressingly narrow.
The 50th Law, however, states that there is one thing we can actually
control—the mind-set with which we respond to these events around us.
And if we are able to overcome our anxieties and forge a fearless attitude
towards life, something strange and remarkable can occur—that margin of
control over circumstance increases. At its utmost point, we can even create
the circumstances themselves, which is the source of the tremendous power
that fearless types have had throughout history. And the people who
practice the 50th Law in their lives all share certain qualities—supreme
boldness, unconventionality, fluidity, and a sense of urgency—that give
them this unique ability to shape circumstance.
A bold act requires a high degree of confidence. People who are the
targets of an audacious act, or who witness it, cannot help but believe that
such confidence is real and justified. They respond instinctively by backing
up, by getting out of the way, or by following the confident person. A bold
act can put people on their heels and eliminate obstacles. In this way, it
creates its own favorable circumstances.
We are social creatures, and so it is natural for us to want to conform to
the people around us and the norms of the group. But underneath this is a
deep fear—that of sticking out, of following our own path no matter what
people think of us. The fearless types are able to conquer this fear. They
fascinate us by how far they go with their unconventionality. We secretly
admire and respect them for this; we wish we could act more like they do.
Normally it is hard to hold our attention; we shift our interest from one
spectacle to the next. But those who fearlessly express their difference
compel our attention on a deeper level for a longer duration, which
translates into power and control.
Many of us respond to the shifting circumstances of life by trying to
micromanage everything in our immediate environment. When something
unexpected happens, we become rigid and we respond by employing some
tactic that worked in the past. If events change quickly, we are easily
overwhelmed and lose control. Those who follow the 50th Law are not
afraid of change or chaos; they embrace it by being as fluid as possible.
They move with the flow of events and then gently channel them in the
direction of their choice, exploiting the moment. Through their mind-set,
they convert a negative (unexpected events) into a positive (an opportunity).
Having a brush with death, or being reminded in a dramatic way of the
shortness of our lives, can have a positive, therapeutic effect. Our days are
numbered and so it is best to make every moment count, to have a sense of
urgency about life. It could end at any moment. The fearless types usually
gain such awareness through some traumatic experience. They are
energized to make the most of every action, and the momentum this gives
them in life helps them determine what happens next.
It is all rather simple: when you transgress this fundamental law by
bringing your usual fears into any encounter, you narrow your options and
your capacity to shape events. Your fear can even bring you into a negative
field where your powers are reversed. Being conservative, for instance, can
force you into a corner in which you are more likely to lose what you have
in the long run because you also lose the capacity to adapt to change. Trying
so hard to please people can actually end up pushing them away—it is hard
to respect someone who has such an ingratiating attitude. If you are afraid
to learn from your mistakes, you will more than likely keep repeating them.
When you transgress this law, no amount of education, connections, or
technical knowledge can save you. Your fearful attitude encloses you in an
invisible prison, and there you will remain.
Observing the 50th Law creates the opposite dynamic—it opens
possibilities, brings freedom of action, and helps create a forward
momentum in life.
The key to possessing this supreme power is to assume the active mode
in dealing with your fears. This means entering the very arenas you
normally shy away from: making the very hard decisions you have been
avoiding, confronting the people who are playing power games with you,
thinking of yourself and what you need instead of pleasing others, making
yourself change the direction of your life even though such change is the
very thing you dread.
You deliberately put yourself in difficult situations and you examine
your reactions. In each case, you will notice that your fears were
exaggerated and that confronting them has the bracing effect of bringing
you closer to reality.
At some point you will discover the power of reversal—overcoming the
negative of a particular fear leads to a positive quality—self-reliance,
patience, supreme self-confidence, and on and on. (Each of the following
chapters will highlight this reversal of perspective.) And once you start on
this path, it is hard to turn back. You will continue all the way to a bold and
fearless approach to everything.
Understand: you do not have to grow up in Southside Queens or be the
target of an assassin to develop the attitude. All of us face challenges, rivals,
and setbacks. We choose to ignore or avoid them out of fear. It is not the
physical reality of your environment that matters but your mental state, how
you come to deal with the adversity that is part of life on every level. Fifty
had to confront his fears; you must choose to.
Finally, your attitude has the power of shaping reality in two opposite
directions—one that constricts and corners you in with fear, the other that
opens up possibilities and freedom of action. It is the same for the mind-set
and spirit that you bring to reading the chapters that follow. If you read
them with your ego out in front, feeling that you are being judged here, or
are under attack—in other words, if you read them in a defensive mode—
then you will needlessly close yourself off from the power this could bring
you. We are all human; we are all implicated by our fears; no one is being
judged. Similarly, if you read these words as narrow prescriptions for your
life, trying to follow them to the letter, then you are constricting their value
—their application to your reality.
Instead you must absorb these words with an open and fearless spirit,
letting the ideas get under your skin and affect how you see the world. Do
not be afraid to experiment with them. In this way, you will shape this book
to your circumstances and gain a similar power over the world.
IN MY VIEW…IT IS BETTER TO BE IMPETUOUS THAN CAUTIOUS,
BECAUSE FORTUNE IS A WOMAN, AND IF YOU WISH TO DOMINATE HER
YOU MUST BEAT HER AND BATTER HER. IT IS CLEAR THAT SHE WILL LET
HERSELF BE WON BY MEN WHO ARE IMPETUOUS RATHER THAN BY
THOSE WHO STEP CAUTIOUSLY.
—Niccolò Machiabelli

CHAPTER 1
See Things for What They Are-Intense Realism
REALITY CAN BE RATHER HARSH. YOUR DAYS ARE NUMBERED. IT TAKES
CONSTANT EFFORT TO CARVE A PLACE FOR YOURSELF IN THIS
RUTHLESSLY COMPETITIVE WORLD AND HOLD ON TO IT. PEOPLE CAN
BE TREACHEROUS. THEY BRING ENDLESS BATTLES INTO YOUR LIFE.
YOUR TASK IS TO RESIST THE TEMPTATION TO WISH IT WERE ALL
DIFFERENT; INSTEAD YOU MUST FEARLESSLY ACCEPT THESE
CIRCUMSTANCES, EVEN EMBRACE THEM. BY FOCUSING YOUR
ATTENTION ON WHAT IS GOING ON AROUND YOU, YOU WILL GAIN A
SHARP APPRECIATION FOR WHAT MAKES SOME PEOPLE ADVANCE AND
OTHER FALL BEHIND. BY SEEING THROUGH PEOPLE’S MANIPULATIONS,
YOU CAN TURN THEM AROUND. THE FIRMER YOUR GRASP ON REALITY,
THE MORE POWER YOU WILL HAVE TO ALTER IT FOR YOUR PURPOSES.
 
The Hustler’s Eye
THIS IS LIFE, NEW AND STRANGE; STRANGE, BECAUSE WE FEAR IT; NEW,
BECAUSE WE HAVE KEPT OUR EYES TURNED FROM IT…. MEN ARE MEN
AND LIFE IS LIFE, AND WE MUST DEAL WITH THEM AS THEY ARE; AND IF
WE WANT TO CHANGE THEM, WE MUST DEAL WITH THEM IN THE FORM
IN WHICH THEY EXIST.
–Richard Wright
As a boy, Curtis Jackson (aka 50 Cent) had one dominant drive—ambition.
He wanted more than anything the very things that it seemed he could never
have—money, freedom, and power.
Looking out on the streets of Southside Queens where he grew up,
Curtis saw a grim, depressing reality staring him in the face. He could go to
school and take it seriously, but the kids who did that didn’t seem to get
very far—a life of low-paying jobs. He could turn to crime and make his
money fast, but the ones who went for that either died young or spent much
of their youth in prison. He could escape it all by taking drugs—once you
start down that path there is no turning back. The only people he could see
who led the life that he dreamed of were the hustlers, the drug dealers. They
had the cars, the clothes, the lifestyle, the degree of power that matched his
ambitions. And so by the age of eleven he had made the choice to follow
that path and become the greatest hustler of them all.
The further he got into it, however, the more he realized that the reality
was much grimier and harsher than he had imagined. The drug fiends, the
customers, were erratic and hard to figure out. The fellow hustlers were all
fighting over the same limited number of corners and they’d stab you in the
back in an instant. The big-time dealers who ran the neighborhood could be
violent and heavy-handed. If you did too well, someone would try to take
what you had. The police were everywhere. One wrong move could land
you in prison. How could he possibly succeed amid this chaos and avoid all
of the inevitable dangers? It seemed impossible.
One day he was discussing the troublesome aspects of the game with an
older hustler named Truth, who told him something he would never forget.
Don’t complain about the difficult circumstances, he said. In fact, the hard
life of these streets is a blessing if you know what you’re doing. Because it
is such a dangerous world, a hustler has to focus intensely on what’s going
on around him. He has to get a feel for the streets—who’s trouble, where
there might be some new opportunity. He has to see through all the bullshit
people throw at him—their games, their lousy ideas. He has to look at
himself, see his own limitations and stupidity. All of this sharpens the eye to
a razor’s edge, making him a keen observer of everything. That’s his power.
The greatest danger we face, he told Curtis, is not the police or some
nasty rival. It’s the mind going soft. I’ve seen it happen to many a hustler,
he said. If things go well, he starts thinking it will go on forever and he
takes his eyes off the streets. If things go bad, he starts wishing it were all
different and he comes up with some foolish scheme to get quick, easy
money. Either way, he falls fast. Lose your grip on reality on these streets
and you might as well kill yourself.
In the months to come, Curtis thought more and more about what Truth
had told him, and it began to sink in. He decided to transform the hustler’s
words into a kind of code that he would live by: he would trust no one; he
would conceal his intentions, even from friends and partners; and no matter
how high or low life brought him, he would remain the supreme realist,
keeping his hustler’s eye sharp and focused.
Over the next few years he became one of the savviest hustlers in his
neighborhood, operating a small crew that brought him good money. The
future looked promising, but a moment’s inattention got him trapped in a
police sting, and at the age of sixteen he was sentenced to nine months in a
shock rehabilitation center in upstate New York. In this unfamiliar space
and with time to reflect, suddenly the words of Truth came back to him.
This was not the time to get depressed or to dream, but to fix that hustler’s
eye on himself and the world he lived in. See it as it is, no matter how ugly.
He had unbridled ambition; he wanted real power, something he could
build on. But no street hustler lasts that long. It’s a young man’s game. By
the time hustlers reach their twenties, they slow down and something bad
happens or they go scurrying into a low-paying job. And what blinds them
to this reality is the money and lifestyle in the moment; they think it will go
on forever. They’re too afraid to try something else. It doesn’t matter how
clever you are—there’s a ceiling to how high you can rise.
He had to wake up and get out while he was still young and his
ambitions could be realized. He would not be afraid. And so based on these
reflections, he decided he would make a break into music. He would find a
mentor, someone who could teach him the ropes. He would learn everything
he could about music and the business. He would have no plan B—it was
either make it there or die.
Operating with a kind of desperate energy, he made the transition into
music, carving a place for himself by creating a sound that was hard driving
and reflected the realities of the streets. After a relentless mix-tape
campaign in New York he got the attention of Eminem, and a record deal
followed. Now he seemed to have realized his childhood ambitions. He had
money and power. People were nice to him. Everywhere he went they
flattered him, wanting to be a part of his success. He could feel it happening
—the good press, the sycophantic followers—it was all starting to go to his
head and dull his vision. On the surface everything looked great, but what
was the reality here? Now more than ever he needed that clear, penetrating
eye to see past all the hype and glamour.
The more he looked at it, the more he realized that the reality of the
music business was as harsh as the streets. The executives who ran the
labels were ruthless. They distracted you with their charming words, but in
fact they could care less about your future as an artist; they wanted to suck
you dry of every dollar they could get out of you. Once you were no longer
so hot, you would find yourself slowly pushed to the side; your decline
would be all the more painful for having once tasted success. In truth, you
were a pawn in their game. A corner hustler had more power and control
over his future than a rapper did.
And what about the business itself? Record sales were falling because
people were pirating music or buying it in different forms. Anyone with two
eyes could see that. The old business model had to go. But these very same
executives who seemed so sharp were afraid to confront this reality. They
held on tightly to the past and would bring everyone down with them.
Not Fifty. He would avoid this fate by moving in a different direction.
He would forge a diversified business empire, music merely being a tool to
get there. His decisions would be based on his intense reading of the
changing environment that he had detected in music but was infecting all
levels of business. Let others depend on their MBAs, their money, and their
connections. He instead would rely upon that hustler’s eye that had brought
him from the bottom of America to the top in just a few short years.
The Fearless Approach
REALITY IS MY DRUG. THE MORE I HAVE OF IT, THE MORE POWER I GET
AND THE HIGHER I FEEL.
–50 Cent
You might imagine that the streets that molded Fifty and the code he created
for himself have little to do with your circumstances, but that is merely a
symptom of your dreaming, of how deeply you are infected with fantasies
and how afraid you are to face reality. The world has become as grimy and
dangerous as the streets of Southside Queens—a global, competitive
environment in which everyone is a ruthless hustler, out for him- or herself.
Truth’s words apply to you as much as to Fifty: the greatest danger you
face is your mind growing soft and your eye getting dull. When things get
tough and you grow tired of the grind, your mind tends to drift into
fantasies; you wish things were a certain way, and slowly, subtly, you turn
inward to your thoughts and desires. If things are going well, you become
complacent, imagining that what you have now will continue forever. You
stop paying attention. Before you know it, you end up overwhelmed by the
changes going on and the younger people rising up around you, challenging
your position.
Understand: you need this code even more than Fifty. His world was so
harsh and dangerous it forced him to open his eyes to reality and never lose
that connection. Your world seems cozier and less violent, less immediately
dangerous. It makes you wander and your eyes mist over with dreams. The
competitive dynamic (the streets, the business world) is in fact the same,
but your apparently comfortable environment makes it harder for you to see
it. Reality has its own power—you can turn your back on it, but it will find
you in the end, and your inability to cope with it will be your ruin. Now is
the time to stop drifting and wake up—to assess yourself, the people around
you, and the direction in which you are headed in as cold and brutal a light
as possible. Without fear.
Think of reality in the following terms: the people around you are
generally mysterious. You are never quite sure about their intentions. They
present an appearance that is often deceptive—their manipulative actions
don’t match their lofty words or promises. All of this can prove confusing.
Seeing people as they are, instead of what you think they should be, would
mean having a greater sense of their motives. It would mean being able to
pierce the facade they present to the world and see their true character. Your
actions in life would be so much more effective with this knowledge.
Your line of work is another layer of reality. Right now, things might
seem calm on the surface, but there are changes rippling through that world;
dangers are looming on the horizon. Soon your assumptions about how
things are done will be outdated. These changes and problems are not
immediately apparent. Being able to see through to them before they
become too large would bring you great power.
The capacity to see the reality behind the appearance is not a function of
education or cleverness. People can be full of book knowledge and
crammed with information but have no real sense of what’s going on
around them. It is in fact a function of character and fearlessness. Simply
put, realists are not afraid to look at the harsh circumstances of life. They
sharpen their eye by paying keen attention to details, to people’s intentions,
to the dark realities hiding behind any glamorous surface. Like any muscle
that is trained, they develop the capacity to see with more intensity.
It is simply a choice you have to make. At any moment in life you can
convert to realism, which is not a belief system at all, but a way of looking
at the world. It means every circumstance, every individual is different, and
your task is to measure that difference, then take appropriate action. Your
eyes are fixed on the world, not on yourself or your ego. What you see
determines what you think and how you act. The moment you believe in
some cherished idea that you will hold on to no matter what your eyes and
ears reveal to you, you are no longer a realist.
To see this power in action, look at a man like Abraham Lincoln,
perhaps our greatest president. He had little formal education and grew up
in a harsh frontier environment. As a young man, he liked to take apart
machines and put them back together. He was practical to the core. As
president, he found himself having to confront the gravest crisis in our
history. He was surrounded by cabinet members and advisers who were out
to promote themselves or some rigid ideology they believed in. They were
emotional and heated; they saw Lincoln as weak. He seemed to take a long
time to make a decision, and it would often be the opposite of what they
had counseled. He trusted generals like Ulysses S. Grant, who was an
alcoholic and a social misfit. He worked with those whom his advisers
considered political enemies on the other side of the aisle.
What they didn’t realize at the time was that Lincoln came to each
circumstance without preconceptions. He was determined to measure
everything exactly as it was. His choices were made out of pure
pragmatism. He was a keen observer of human nature and stuck with Grant
because he saw him as the only general capable of effective action. He
judged people by results, not friendliness or political values. His careful
weighing of people and events was not a weakness but the height of
strength, a fearless quality. And working this way, he carefully guided the
country past countless dangers. It is not a history we are accustomed to
reading about, since we prefer to be swept up in great ideas and dramatic
gestures. But the genius of Lincoln was his ability to focus intensely on
reality and see things for what they were. He was a living testament to the
power of realism.
It might seem that seeing so much of reality could make one depressed,
but the opposite is the case. Having clarity about where you are headed,
what people are up to, and what is happening in the world around you will
translate into confidence and power, a sensation of lightness. You will feel
more connected to your environment, like a spider on its web. Whenever
things go wrong in life you will be able to right yourself faster than others,
because you will quickly see what is really going on and how you can
exploit even the worst moment. And once you taste this power, you will
find more satisfaction from an intense absorption in reality than from
indulging in any kind of fantasy.
Keys to Fearlessness
KNOW THE OTHER, KNOW YOURSELF, AND THE VICTORY WILL NOT BE
AT RISK; KNOW THE GROUND, KNOW THE NATURAL CONDITIONS, AND
THE VICTORY WILL BE TOTAL.
–Sun Tzu
America was once a country of great realists and pragmatists. This came
from the harshness of the environment, the many dangers of frontier life.
We had to become keen observers of everything going on around us to
survive. In the nineteenth century, such a way of looking at the world led to
innumerable inventions, the accumulation of wealth, and the emergence of
our country as a great power. But with this growing power, the environment
no longer pressed upon us so violently, and our character began to change.
Reality came to be seen as something to avoid. Secretly and slowly we
developed a taste for escape—from our problems, from work, from the
harshness of life. Our culture began to manufacture endless fantasies for us
to consume. And fed on such illusions, we became easier to deceive, since
we no longer had a mental barometer for distinguishing fact from fiction.
This is a dynamic that has repeated itself throughout history. Ancient
Rome began as a small city-state. Its citizens were tough and stoic. They
were famous for their pragmatism. But as they moved from being a republic
to an empire and their power expanded, everything reversed itself. Their
citizens’ minds hungered for newer and newer forms of escape. They lost
all sense of proportion—petty political battles consumed their attention
more than much larger dangers on the outskirts of the empire. The empire
fell well before the invasion of the barbarians. It collapsed from the
collective softness of its citizens’ minds and the turning of their back on
reality.
Understand: as an individual you cannot stop the tide of fantasy and
escapism sweeping a culture. But you can stand as an individual bulwark to
this trend and create power for yourself. You were born with the greatest
weapon in all of nature—the rational, conscious mind. It has the power to
expand your vision far and wide, giving you the unique capacity to
distinguish patterns in events, learn from the past, glimpse into the future,
see through appearances. Circumstances are conspiring to dull that weapon
and render it useless by turning you inward and making you afraid of
reality.
Consider it war. You must fight this tendency as best you can and move
in the opposite direction. You must turn outward and become a keen
observer of all that is around you. You are doing battle against all the
fantasies that are thrown at you. You are tightening your connection to the
environment. You want clarity, not escape and confusion. Moving in this
direction will instantly bring you power among so many dreamers.
Regard the following as exercises for your mind—to make it less rigid,
more penetrating and expansive, a sharper gauge of reality. Practice all of
them as often as you can.
REDISCOVER CURIOSITY—OPENNESS
One day it came to the attention of the ancient Greek philosopher Socrates
that the oracle at Delphi had pronounced him the wisest man in the world.
This baffled the philosopher—he did not think himself worthy of such a
decree. It made him uncomfortable. He decided to simply go around Athens
and find a person who was wiser than he—that should be easy and it would
disprove the oracle.
He engaged in many discussions with politicians, poets, craftsmen, and
fellow philosophers. He began to realize that the oracle was right. All the
people he talked to had such a certainty about things, venturing solid
opinions about matters of which they had no experience; they were full of
so much air. If you questioned them at all, they could not really defend their
opinions, which seemed based on something they had decided years earlier.
His superiority, he realized, was that he knew that he knew nothing. This
left his mind open to experiencing things as they are, the source of all
knowledge.
This position of basic ignorance was what you had as a child. You had a
need and hunger for knowledge, to overcome this ignorance, so you
observed the world as closely as possible, absorbing large amounts of
information. Everything was a source of wonder. With time our minds tend
to close off. At some point, we feel like we know what we need to know;
our opinions are certain and firm. We do this out of fear. We don’t want our
assumptions about life challenged. If we go too far in this direction, we can
become extremely defensive and cover up our fears by acting with supreme
confidence and certainty.
What you need to do in life is return to that mind you possessed as a
child, opening up to experience instead of closing it off. Just imagine for a
day that you do not know anything, that what you believe could be
completely false. Let go of your preconceptions and even your most
cherished beliefs. Experiment. Force yourself to hold the opposite opinion
or see the world through your enemy’s eyes. Listen to the people around
you with more attentiveness. See everything as a source for education—
even the most banal encounters. Imagine that the world is still full of
mystery.
When you operate this way, you will notice that something strange often
happens. Opportunities will begin to fall into your lap because you are
suddenly more receptive to them. Sometimes luck or serendipity is more a
function of the openness of your mind.
KNOW THE COMPLETE TERRAIN—EXPANSION
War is fought over specific terrain. But there is more involved than just that.
There is also the morale of the enemy soldiers, the political leaders who set
them in motion, the minds of the opposing generals who make the key
decisions, and the money and resources that stand behind it all. A mediocre
general will confine his knowledge to the physical terrain. A better general
will try to expand his knowledge by reading reports about the other factors
that influence an army. And the superior general will try to intensify this
knowledge by observing as much as he can with his own eyes or consulting
firsthand sources. Napoleon Bonaparte is the greatest general who ever
lived, and what elevated him above all others was the mass of information
he absorbed about all of the details of battle, with as few filters as possible.
This gave him a superior grasp on reality.
Your goal is to follow the path of Napoleon. You want to take in as
much as possible with your own eyes. You communicate with people up
and down the chain of command within your organization. You do not draw
any barriers to your social interactions. You want to expand your access to
different ideas. Force yourself to go to events and places that are beyond
your usual circle. If you cannot observe something firsthand, try to get
reports that are more direct and less filtered, or vary the sources so that you
can see things from several sides. Get a fingertip feel for everything going
on in your environment—the complete terrain.
DIG TO THE ROOTS—DEPTH
Malcolm X was a realist—he had a way of looking at the world that was
honed by years on the streets and in prison. After prison, his mission in life
was to figure out the source of the problem for blacks in America. As he
explained in his autobiography, “This country goes in for the surface
glossing over, the escape ruse, surfaces, instead of truly dealing with its
deep-rooted problems.” He decided to dig as far below the surface as
possible. Finally he arrived at what he believed to be the root cause—
dependency. As it stood, African Americans couldn’t do things completely
on their own—they depended on the government, on liberals, on their
leaders, on everybody but themselves. If they could end this dependency,
they would have the power to reverse everything.
Malcolm X died before he could go further with his life’s mission, but
his method remains valid for all time. When you do not get to the root of a
problem, you cannot solve it in any meaningful manner. People like to look
at the surfaces, get all emotional and react, doing things that make them feel
better in the short term but do nothing for them in the long term.
This must be the power and the direction of your mind whenever you
encounter some problem—to bore deeper and deeper until you get at
something basic and at the root. Never be satisfied with what presents itself
to your eyes. See what underlies it all, absorb it, and then dig deeper.
Always question why this particular event has happened, what the motives
of the various actors are, who really is in control, who benefits by this
action. Often, it will revolve around money and power—that is what people
are usually fighting over, despite the surface gloss they give to it. You may
never get to the actual root, but the process of digging will bring you closer.
And operating in this way will help develop your mind into a powerful
analytical instrument.
SEE FURTHER AHEAD—PROPORTION
By our nature as rational, conscious creatures, we cannot help but think of
the future. But most people, out of fear, limit their view of the future to a
narrow range—thoughts of tomorrow, a few weeks ahead, perhaps a vague
plan for the months to come. We are generally dealing with so many
immediate battles, it is hard for us to lift our gaze above the moment. It is a
law of power, however, that the further and deeper we contemplate the
future, the greater our capacity to shape it according to our desires.
If you have a long-term goal for yourself, one that you have imagined in
detail, then you are better able to make the proper decisions in the present.
You know which battles or positions to avoid because they don’t advance
you towards your goal. With your gaze lifted to the future, you can focus on
the dangers looming on the horizon and take proactive measures to avert
them. You have a sense of proportion—sometimes the things we fuss over
in the present don’t matter in the long run. All of this gives you an increased
power to reach your objectives.
As part of this process, look at the smaller problems that are plaguing
you or your enterprise in the present, and draw arrows to the future,
imagining what they could possibly lead to if they grow larger. Think of
your own biggest mistakes or those of others. How could they have been
foreseen? Generally there are signs that seem so obvious afterwards. Now
imagine those very same signs that you are probably ignoring in the present.
LOOK AT PEOPLE’S DEEDS, NOT WORDS—SHARPNESS
In war or any competitive game, you don’t pay attention to people’s good or
bad intentions. They don’t matter. It should be the same in the game of life.
Everyone is playing to win, and some people will use moral justifications to
advance their side. All you look at are people’s maneuvers—their actions in
the past and what you might expect in the future. In this area, you are
fiercely realistic. You understand that everyone is after power, and that to
get it we all occasionally manipulate and even deceive. That is human
nature and there is no shame in it. You don’t take people’s maneuvers
personally; you merely try to defend or advance yourself.
As part of this approach, you must become a better observer of people.
This cannot be done on the Internet. It must be honed in personal
interactions. You are trying to read people, see through them as best you
can. You come to understand, for instance, that a person who is too
obviously friendly after too short a time is often up to no good. If they
flatter you, it is generally out of envy. Behavior that stands out and seems
excessive is a sign. Don’t get caught up in people’s grand gestures, in the
public face they put on. Pay more attention to the details, to the little things
they reveal in their day-to-day lives. Their decisions reveal a lot, and you
can often discern a pattern if you look at them closely.
In general, looking at people through the lens of your emotions will
cloud what you see and make you misunderstand everything. What you
want is a sharp eye towards your fellow humans—one that is piercing,
objective, and nonjudgmental.
REASSESS YOURSELF—DETACHMENT
Your increasing powers of observation must occasionally be aimed at
yourself. Think of this as a ritual you will engage in every few weeks—a
rigorous reassessment of who you are and where you are headed. Look at
your most recent actions as if they were the maneuvers of another person.
Imagine how you could have done it all better—avoided unnecessary
battles or confronted people who stood in your way, instead of running
away from them. The goal here is not to beat up on yourself but to have the
capacity to adapt and change your behavior by moving closer to the reality.
The endgame of such an exercise is to cultivate the proper sense of
detachment from yourself and from life. It is not that you want to feel this
detachment at every moment. There are times that require you to act with
heart and boldness, without doubts or self-distance. On many occasions,
however, you need to be able to assess what is happening, without your ego
or emotions coloring your perceptions. Moving to a calm, detached inner
position to observe events will become a habit and something you can rely
on amid any crisis. At those moments in life when others lose their balance,
you will find yours with relative ease. As a person who cannot be easily
ruffled by events, you will attract attention and power.
Reversal of Perspective
The word “realist” often comes with some negative connotations. Realists,
according to conventional wisdom, can be practical to a fault; they often
lack a feel for the finer, higher things in life. Taken too far, such types can
be cynical, manipulative, Machiavellian. They stand in contrast to
dreamers, people of high imagination who inspire us with their ideals or
divert us with their fantastical creations.
This is a concept that comes from looking at the world through the lens
of fear. It is time we reverse this perspective and see dreamers and realists
in their true light. The dreamers, those who misread the actual state of
affairs and act upon their emotions, are often the source of the greatest
mistakes in history—the wars that are not thought out, the disasters that are
not foreseen. Realists, on the other hand, are the real inventors and
innovators. They are men and women of imagination, but their imagination
is in close contact with the environment, with reality—they are empirical
scientists, writers with a sharp understanding of human nature, or leaders
who guide us thoughtfully through crises. They are strong enough to see the
world as it is, including their own personal inadequacies.
Let us take this further. The real poetry and beauty in life comes from an
intense relationship with reality in all its aspects. Realism is in fact the ideal
we must aspire to, the highest point of human rationality.
PEOPLE WHO CLING TO THEIR DELUSIONS FIND IT DIFFICULT, IF NOT
IMPOSSIBLE, TO LEARN ANYTHING WORTH LEARNING: A PEOPLE UNDER
THE NECESSITY OF CREATING THEMSELVES MUST EXAMINE
EVERYTHING, AND SOAK UP LEARNING THE WAY THE ROOTS OF A TREE
SOAK UP WATER.
—James Baldmin

CHAPTER 2
Make Everything Your Own—Self-Reliance
WHEN YOU WORK FOR OTHERS, YOU ARE AT THEIR MERCY. THEY OWN
YOUR WORK; THEY OWN YOU. YOUR CREATIVE SPIRIT IS SQUASHED.
WHAT KEEPS YOU IN SUCH POSITIONS IS A FEAR OF HAVING TO SINK OR
SWIM ON YOUR OWN. INSTEAD YOU SHOULD HAVE A GREATER FEAR OF
WHAT WILL HAPPEN TO YOU IF YOU REMAIN DEPENDENT ON OTHERS
FOR POWER. YOUR GOAL IN EVERY MANEUVER IN LIFE MUST BE
OWNERSHIP, WORKING THE CORNER FOR YOURSELF. WHEN IT IS YOURS
TO LOSE-YOU ARE MORE MOTIVATED, MORE CREATIVE, MORE ALIVE.
THE ULTIMATE POWER IN LIFE IS TO BE COMPLETELY SELF-RELIANT,
COMPLETELY YOURSELF.
 
The Hustler’s Empire
HUMAN NATURE IS SO CONSTITUTED, THAT IT CANNOT HONOR A
HELPLESS MAN, ALTHOUGH IT CAN PITY HIM; AND EVEN THIS IT
CANNOT DO LONG, IF THE SIGNS SIGNS OF POWER DO NOT ARISE.
—Frederick Douglass
After serving a short sentence in a Brooklyn rehabilitation program for his
first offense as a drug dealer, Curtis Jackson returned to the streets virtually
back at square one. The money he had earned the previous few years as a
corner hustler was all gone, and his once loyal customers had all found
other dealers to buy from.
A friend, now running a fairly large crack-cocaine operation, offered
Curtis a job bagging up drugs. He would be paid a daily wage, and not a
bad one. Curtis desperately needed the money, so he accepted the offer.
Perhaps further down the road his friend would cut him in on some of the
action and he could reestablish his own business. But from the first day on
the job, he realized that this was all a mistake. He was working with a group
of other baggers, all former dealers. They were now hired help; they had to
show up at a certain time and bow down to the authority of their employers.
Curtis had lost not only his money but also his freedom. This new position
went against all of the survival lessons he had learned up till then in his
short life.
Curtis had never known his father, and his mother had been murdered
when he was eight years old. His grandparents had essentially raised him;
they were loving and kind, but they had a lot of children to look after and
not much time to give individual attention. If he wanted any kind of
guidance or advice, there was nobody in his life to turn to. At the same
time, if he wanted anything new, such as clothes, he did not feel
comfortable asking his grandparents—they did not have much money. What
all of this meant was that he was essentially alone in this world. He could
not rely on anyone to give him anything. He would have to fend for
himself.
Then crack cocaine exploded on the streets in the mid-1980s and
everything changed in neighborhoods like his. In the past, large gangs
controlled the drug business, and to be involved you had to fit into their
structure and spend years moving up the ladder. But crack was so easy to
manufacture and the demand was so high, that anyone—no matter how
young—could get in on the game without any startup capital. You could
work on your own and make good money. For those like Curtis who grew
up with little parental supervision and a disdain for authority, being a corner
dealer was the perfect fit—no political games, no bosses above you. And so
he quickly joined the growing pool of hustlers dealing crack on the streets
of Southside Queens.
As he got further into the game, he learned a fundamental lesson. There
were endless problems and dangers confronting the street hustler—
undercover cops, fiends, and rival dealers scheming to rob you. If you were
weak, you looked for others to help you or for some crutch to lean on, such
as drugs or alcohol. This was the path of doom. Eventually your friend
would not show up as promised or your mind would be too clouded by
drugs to see someone’s treachery. The only way to survive was to admit you
were on your own, learn to make your own decisions, and trust your
judgment. Do not ask for what you need but take it. Depend only on your
wits.
It was as if a hustler, born amid squalor and cramped quarters,
possessed an empire. This was not something physical—the corner that he
worked or the neighborhood he wanted to take over. It was his time, his
energy, his creative schemes, his freedom to move where he wanted to. If he
kept command of that empire, he would make money and thrive. If he
looked for help, if he got caught up in other people’s political games, he
gave all of that away. In such a case, the negative conditions of the hood
would be magnified and he would end up a beggar, a pawn in someone
else’s game.
As he sat there bagging drugs that first day, Curtis realized that this
went far beyond a momentary lull in his life in which he needed some quick
money. This was a turning point. He looked at the other baggers. They all
had suffered downturns in fortune—violence, prison time, etc. They had
become scared and tired of the grind. They wanted the comfort and security
of a paycheck. And this would become the pattern for the rest of their lives
—afraid of life’s challenges, they would come to depend on other people to
help them. Perhaps they could go on like this for several years, but the day
of reckoning would come when there were no more jobs and they had
forgotten how to fend for themselves.
It was ludicrous for Curtis to imagine that the man now employing him
to bag would some day help him set up shop. Bosses don’t do things like
that, even if they’re your friends. They think of themselves and they use
you. He had to get out now, before that empire slipped from his hands and
he became yet another former hustler dependent on favors.
He quickly went into full hustling mode and figured his way out of the
trap. At the end of the first day, he made a deal with the baggers. He would
dole out the daily cash he had been paid for the job to all of them. In return,
he would teach them how to put less crack in each capsule but make it look
full (he had been doing this on the street for years). They were then to give
Curtis the extra crack that was left over from each capsule. Within a week,
he had accumulated enough drugs to return to hustling on the streets, on his
terms. After that, he swore to himself he’d never work for another person
ever again. He would rather die.
 
Years later, Curtis (now known as 50 Cent) had managed to segue into a
music career, and after a fierce mix-tape campaign on the streets of New
York in which he became a local celebrity, he gained the attention of
Eminem, who helped sign him to a lucrative deal on his own label within
Interscope Records.
For the launch of his debut album, Get Rich or Die Tryin’, there was a
lot of work to do—a marketing campaign, videos, artwork—and so he went
to Los Angeles to work with Interscope on these projects. But the more time
he spent in their cushy offices, the more he had the feeling that he was at
yet another turning point in his life.
The game these music executives were playing was simple: They
owned your music and a lot more. They wanted to package the artist in their
way, and this dictated all of the key decisions on the music videos and
publicity. In return, they lavished you with money and perks. They created a
feeling of dependence—without their massive machine behind you, you
were helpless in the face of a viciously competitive business. In essence,
you were exchanging money for freedom. And once you internally
succumbed to their logic and their money, you were finished. You were a
high-paid bagger doing a job.
And so, as before, Fifty went into full hustling mode to reclaim his
empire. In the short term, he schemed to shoot his own videos, with his own
money, and come up with his own marketing schemes. To Interscope it
seemed like he was saving them time and resources, but to Fifty it was a
subtle way to regain control over his image. He set up a record label for his
own stable of artists from within Interscope and he used this label to teach
himself all aspects of production. He created his own website where he
could experiment with new ways to market his music. He turned the
dependence dynamic around, using Interscope as a school for teaching him
how to run things on his own.
All of this was part of the endgame he had in mind—he would run out
his contract with Interscope, and instead of renegotiating a new one, he
would proclaim his independence and be the first artist to set up his own
freestanding record label. From such a position of power, he would have no
more executives to please and he could expand his empire on his own
terms. It would be just like the freedom he had experienced on the streets,
but on a global scale.
The Fearless Approach
I WAS BORN ALONE AND I WILL DIE ALONE. I’VE GOT TO DO WHAT’S
RIGHT FOR ME AND NOT LIVE MY LIFE THE WAY ANYBODY ELSE WANTS
IT.
—50 Cent
You came into this life with the only real possessions that ever matter—
your body, the time that you have to live, your energy, the thoughts and
ideas unique to you, and your autonomy. But over the years you tend to
give all of this away. You spend years working for others—they own you
during that period. You get needlessly caught up in people’s games and
battles, wasting energy and time that you will never get back. You come to
respect your own ideas less and less, listening to experts, conforming to
conventional opinions. Without realizing it you squander your
independence, everything that makes you a creative individual.
Before it is too late, you must reassess your entire concept of
ownership. It is not about possessing things or money or titles. You can
have all of that in abundance but if you are someone who still looks to
others for help and guidance, if you depend on your money or resources,
then you will eventually lose what you have when people let you down,
adversity strikes, or you reach for some foolish scheme out of impatience.
True ownership can come only from within. It comes from a disdain for
anything or anybody that impinges upon your mobility, from a confidence
in your own decisions, and from the use of your time in constant pursuit of
education and improvement.
Only from this inner position of strength and self-reliance will you be
able to truly work for yourself and never turn back. If situations arise in
which you must take in partners or fit within another organization, you are
mentally preparing yourself for the moment when you will move beyond
these momentary entanglements. If you do not own yourself first, you will
continually be at the mercy of people and circumstance, looking outward
instead of relying on yourself and your wits.
Understand: we are living through an entrepreneurial revolution,
comparable to the one that swept through Fifty’s neighborhood in the
1980s, but on a global scale. The old power centers are breaking up.
Individuals everywhere want more control over their destiny and have
much less respect for an authority that is not based on merit but on mere
power. We have all naturally come to question why someone should rule
over us, why our source of information should depend on the mainstream
media, and on and on. We do not accept what we accepted in the past.
Where we are naturally headed with all of this is the right and capacity
to run our own enterprise, in whatever shape or form, to experience that
freedom. We are all corner hustlers in a new economic environment and to
thrive in it we must cultivate the kind of self-reliance that helped push Fifty
past all of the dangerous dependencies that threatened him along the way.
For Fifty it was very clear—he was alone in the house he grew up in
and on the streets. He lacked the usual supports and so he was forced to
become self-sufficient. The consequences of being dependent on people
were so much more severe in his case—it would mean constant
disappointment and urgent needs that went unmet. It is harder for us to
realize that we are essentially alone in this world and in need of the skills
that Fifty had to develop for himself on the streets. We have layers of
support that seem to prop us up. But these supports are illusions in the end.
Everyone in the world is governed by self-interest. People naturally
think first of themselves and their agendas. An occasional affectionate or
helpful gesture from people you know tends to cloud this reality and make
you expect more of this support—until you are disappointed, again and
again. You are more alone than you imagine. This should not be a source of
fear but of freedom. When you prove to yourself that you can get things on
your own, then you experience a sense of liberation. You are no longer
waiting for people to do this or that for you (a frustrating and infuriating
experience). You have confidence that you can manage any adverse
situation on your own.
Look at a man like Rubin “Hurricane” Carter—a successful
middleweight boxer who found himself arrested in 1966 at the height of his
career and charged with a triple murder. The following year he was
convicted and sentenced to three consecutive life terms. Through it all
Carter vehemently maintained his innocence, and in 1986 he was finally
exonerated of the crimes and set free. But for those nineteen years, he had
to endure one of the most brutal environments known to man, one designed
to break down every last vestige of autonomy.
Carter knew he would be freed at some point. But on the day of his
release, would he walk the streets with a spirit crushed by years in prison?
Would he be the kind of former prisoner who keeps coming back into the
system because he can no longer do anything for himself?
He decided that he would defeat the system—he would use the years in
prison to develop his self-reliance so that when he was freed it would mean
something. For this purpose he devised the following strategy: He would
act like a free man while surrounded by walls. He would not wear their
uniform or carry an ID badge. He was an individual, not a number. He
would not eat with the other prisoners, do the assigned tasks, or go to his
parole hearings. He was placed in solitary confinement for these
transgressions but he was not afraid of the punishments, nor of being alone.
He was afraid only of losing his dignity and sense of ownership.
As part of this strategy, he refused to have the usual entertainments in
his cell—television, radio, pornographic magazines. He knew he would
grow dependent on these weak pleasures and this would give the wardens
something to take away from him. Also, such diversions were merely
attempts to kill time. Instead he became a voracious reader of books that
would help toughen his mind. He wrote an autobiography that gained
sympathy for his cause. He taught himself law, determined to get his
conviction overturned by himself. He tutored other prisoners in the ideas
that he had learned through his reading. In this way, he reclaimed the dead
time of prison for his own purposes.
When he was eventually freed, he refused to take civil action against the
state—that would acknowledge he had been in prison and needed
compensation. He needed nothing. He was now a free man with the
essential skills to get power in the world. After prison he became a
successful advocate for prisoners’ rights and was awarded several honorary
law degrees.
Think of it this way: dependency is a habit that is so easy to acquire. We
live in a culture that offers you all kinds of crutches—experts to turn to,
drugs to cure any psychological unease, mild pleasures to help pass or kill
time, jobs to keep you just above water. It is hard to resist. But once you
give in, it is like a prison you enter that you cannot ever leave. You
continually look outward for help and this severely limits your options and
maneuverability. When the time comes, as it inevitably does, when you
must make an important decision, you have nothing inside of yourself to
depend on.
Before it is too late, you must move in the opposite direction. You
cannot get this requisite inner strength from books or a guru or pills of any
kind. It can come only from you. It is a kind of exercise you must practice
on a daily basis—weaning yourself from dependencies, listening less to
others’ voices and more to your own, cultivating new skills. As happened
with Carter and with Fifty, you will find that self-reliance becomes the habit
and that anything that smacks of depending on others will horrify you.
Keys to Fearlessness
I AM OWNER OF MY MIGHT, AND I AM SO WHEN I KNOW MYSELF AS
UNIQUE.
—Max Stirner
As children we all faced a similar dilemma. We began life as willful
creatures who had yet to be tamed. We wanted and demanded things for
ourselves, and we knew how to get them from the adults around us. And yet
at the same time, we were completely dependent on our parents for so many
important things—comfort, protection, love, guidance. And so from deep
inside, we developed an ambivalence. We wanted the freedom and power to
move on our own, but we also craved the comfort and security only others
could give us.
In adolescence we rebelled against the dependent part of our character.
We wanted to differentiate ourselves from our parents and show that we
could fend for ourselves. We struggled to form our own identity and not
simply conform to our parents’ values. But as we get older, that childhood
ambivalence tends to return to the surface. In the face of so many
difficulties and competition in the adult world, a part of us yearns to return
to that childish position of dependence. We maintain an adult face and work
to gain power for ourselves, but deep inside we secretly wish that our
spouses, partners, friends, or bosses could take care of us and solve our
problems.
We must wage a ferocious war against this deeply embedded
ambivalence, with a clear understanding of what is at stake. Our task as an
adult is to take full possession of that autonomy and individuality we were
born with. It is to finally overcome the dependent phase in childhood and
stand on our own. We must see the desire for a return to that phase as
regressive and dangerous. It comes from fear—of being responsible for our
success and failure, of having to act on our own and make the hard
decisions. We will often package this as the opposite—that by working for
others, being dutiful, fitting in, or subsuming our personality to the group,
we are being a good person. But that is our fear speaking and deluding us. If
we give in to this fear, then we will spend our lives looking outward for
salvation and never find it. We will merely move from one dependency to
another.
For most of us, the critical terrain in this war is the work world. Most of
us enter adult life with great ambitions for how we will start our own
ventures, but the harshness of life wears us down. We settle into some job
and slowly give in to the illusion that our bosses care about us and our
future, that they spend time thinking of our welfare. We forget the essential
truth that all humans are governed by self-interest. Our bosses keep us
around out of need, not affection. They will get rid of us the moment that
need is less acute or they find someone younger and less expensive to
replace us. If we succumb to the illusion and the comfort of a paycheck, we
then neglect to build up self-reliant skills and merely postpone the day of
reckoning when we are forced to fend for ourselves.
Your life must be a progression towards ownership—first mentally of
your independence, and then physically of your work, owning what you
produce. Think of the following steps as a kind of blueprint for how to
move in this direction.
STEP ONE: RECLAIM DEAD TIME
When Cornelius Vanderbilt (1794–1877) was twelve years old he was
forced to work for his father in his small shipping business. It was drudge
work and he hated it. Cornelius was a willful, ambitious child, and so in his
mind he made the following determination: within a couple of years he was
going to start his own shipping enterprise. This simple decision altered
everything. Now this job was an urgent apprenticeship. He had to keep his
eyes open, learn everything he could about his father’s business, including
how he could do things better. Instead of dull labor, it was now an exciting
challenge.
At the age of sixteen he borrowed $100 from his mother. He used the
money to buy a boat and began ferrying passengers between Manhattan and
Staten Island. Within a year he paid back the loan. By the time he was
twenty-one he had made a small fortune and was on his way to becoming
the wealthiest man of his time. From this experience he established his
lifelong motto: “Never be a minion, always be an owner.”
Time is the critical factor in our lives, our most precious resource. The
problem when we work for others is that so much of this becomes dead
time that we want to pass as quickly as possible, time that is not our own.
Almost all of us must begin our careers working for others, but it is always
within our power to transform this time from something dead to something
alive. If we make the same determination as Vanderbilt—to be an owner
and not a minion—then that time is used to learn as much as we can about
what is going on around us—the political games, the nuts and bolts of this
particular venture, the larger game going on in the business world, how we
could do things better. We have to pay attention and absorb as much
information as possible. This helps us endure work that does not seem so
rewarding. In this way, we own our time and our ideas before owning a
business.
Remember: your bosses prefer to keep you in dependent positions. It is
in their interest that you do not become self-reliant, and so they will tend to
hoard information. You must secretly work against this and seize this
information for yourself.
STEP TWO: CREATE LITTLE EMPIRES
While still working for others, your goal at some point must be to carve out
little areas that you can operate on your own, cultivating entrepreneurial
skills. This could mean offering to take over projects that others have left
undone or proposing to put into action some new idea of your own, but
nothing too grandiose to raise suspicion. What you are doing is cultivating a
taste for doing things yourself—making your own decisions, learning from
your own mistakes. If your bosses do not allow you to make such a move
on any scale, then you are not in the right place. If you fail in this venture,
then you have gained a valuable education. But generally taking on such
things on your own initiative forces you to work harder and better. You are
more creative and motivated because there is more at stake; you rise to the
challenge.
Keep in mind the following: what you really value in life is ownership,
not money. If ever there is a choice—more money or more responsibility—
you must always opt for the latter. A lower-paying position that offers more
room to make decisions and carve out little empires is infinitely preferable
to something that pays well but constricts your movements.
STEP THREE: MOVE HIGHER UP THE FOOD CHAIN
In 1499, Pope Alexander VI managed to carve out a principality for his son,
Cesare Borgia, in the Romagna district of Italy. This was not easy. All kinds
of rival powers were competing for control of the country—families that
dominated the political scene, foreign kings scheming to take over certain
regions, city-states with spheres of influence, and finally the church itself.
To secure Romagna for his son, the pope had to win over one of the two
most powerful families in Italy, make an alliance with King Louis XII of
France, and hire a mercenary army.
Cesare Borgia was a shrewd young man. His goal was to expand
beyond Romagna and eventually unify all of Italy, making it a great power.
But his position now depended on various outside forces that controlled his
destiny, each one above the other—the army beholden to the powerful
families and king of France, then the pope himself who could die any day
and be replaced by someone antagonistic to Borgia. These alliances could
shift and turn against him. He had to eliminate these dependencies, one by
one, until he could stand on his own, with nobody above him.
Using bribery, he put himself at the head of the family faction his father
had allied him with, then moved to eliminate its main rival. He worked to
get rid of the mercenary army and establish his own. He schemed to make
alliances that would secure him against the French king who now saw him
as a threat. He gobbled up more and more regions. He was on the verge of
expanding his base to a point of no return when he suddenly fell gravely ill
in 1504. Shortly thereafter, his father died and was soon replaced by a pope
determined to stop Cesare Borgia. Who knows how far he could have
gotten if his plans had not become unraveled by such unforeseen
circumstances.
Borgia was a kind of self-reliant entrepreneur before his time. He
understood that people are political creatures, continually scheming to
secure their own interests. If you form partnerships with them or depend
upon them for your advancement and protection, you are asking for trouble.
They will either turn against you at some point or use you as a cat’s-paw to
get what they want. Your goal in life must be to always move higher and
higher up the food chain, where you alone control the direction of your
enterprise and depend on no one. Since this goal is a future ideal, in the
present you must strive to keep yourself free of unnecessary entanglements
and alliances. And if you cannot avoid having partners, make sure that you
are clear as to what function they serve for you and how you will free
yourself of them at the right moment
You must remember that when people give you things or do you favors
it is always with strings attached. They want something from you in return
—assistance, unquestioned loyalty, and so forth. You want to keep yourself
free of as many of these obligations as possible, so get in the habit of taking
what you need for yourself instead of expecting others to give it to you.
STEP FOUR: MAKE YOUR ENTERPRISE
A REFLECTION OF YOUR INDIVIDUALITY
Your whole life has been an education in developing the skills and self-
reliance necessary for creating your own venture, being your own boss. But
there is one last impediment to making this work. Your tendency will be to
look at what other people have done in your field, how you could possibly
repeat or emulate their success. You can gain some power with such a
strategy, but it won’t go far and it won’t last.
Understand: you are one of a kind. Your character traits are a kind of
chemical mix that will never be repeated in history. There are ideas unique
to you, a specific rhythm and perspective that are your strengths, not your
weaknesses. You must not be afraid of your uniqueness and you must care
less and less what people think of you.
This has been the path of the most powerful people in history.
Throughout his life the great jazz musician Miles Davis was always being
pushed into making his sound fit the particular rage of the time. Instead he
kept insisting on putting his own stamp on anything he played. As he got
older this became more and more extreme until he revolutionized the jazz
world with his constant innovations in sound. At a certain point he simply
stopped listening to others. John F. Kennedy refused to run a campaign like
Franklin Delano Roosevelt or any other American politician in the past. He
created his own inimitable style, based on the times he lived in and his own
personality. By going his own way, he forever altered the course of political
campaigning.
This uniqueness that you express is not anything wild or too strange.
That is an affectation in itself. People are rarely that different. Rather you
are being yourself, as far as you can take that. The world cannot help but
respond to such authenticity.
Reversal of Perspective
We might think of people who are independent and used to being alone as
reclusive, prickly, and hard to be around. In our culture we tend to elevate
those who are smooth talkers, seem more gregarious, and fit in better,
conforming to certain norms. They smile and seem happier. This is a
superficial appraisal of character; if we reverse our perspective and look at
this from the fearless point of view we come to the opposite conclusion.
People who are self-sufficient are generally types who are more
comfortable with themselves. They do not look for things that they need
from other people. Paradoxically this makes them more attractive and
seductive. We wish we could be more like that and want to be around them,
hoping that some of their independence might rub off on us. The needy,
clingy types—often the most sociable—unconsciously push us away. We
feel their need for comfort and validation and secretly we want to say to
them: “Get it for yourself—stop being so weak and dependent.”
Those who are self-reliant turn to people out of strength—a desire for
pleasant company or an exchange of ideas. If people do not do what they
want or expect, they are not hurt or let down. Their happiness comes from
within and is all the more profound for that reason.
Finally, do not be taken in by the culture of ease. Self-help books and
experts will try to convince you that you can have what you want by
following a few simple steps. Things that come easy and fast will leave you
just as fast. The only way to gain self-reliance or any power is through great
effort and practice. And this effort should not be seen as something ugly or
dull; it is the process of gaining power over yourself that is the most
satisfying of all, knowing that step-by-step you are elevating yourself above
the dependent masses.
THERE IS A TIME IN EVERY MAN’S EDUCATION WHEN HE ARRIVES AT
THE CONVICTION THAT…IMITATION IS SUICIDE…THAT THOUGH THE
WIDE UNIVERSE IS FULL OF GOOD, NO KERNEL OF NOURISHING CORN
CAN COME TO HIM BUT THROUGH HIS TOIL BESTOWED ON THAT PLOT
OF GROUND WHICH IS GIVEN TO HIM TO TILL. THE POWER WHICH
RESIDES IN HIM IS NEW IN NATURE, AND NONE BUT HE KNOWS WHAT
THAT IS WHICH HE CAN DO, NOR DO KNOW UNTIL HE HAS TRIED.
—Ralph Waldo Emerson

CHAPTER 3
Turn Shit into Sugar—Opportunism
EVERY NEGATIVE SITUATION CONTAINS THE POSSIBILITY FOR
SOMETHING POSITIVE, AN OPPORTUNITY. IT IS HOW YOU LOOK AT IT
THAT MATTERS. YOUR LACK OF RESOURCES CAN BE AN ADVANTAGE,
FORCING YOU TO BE MORE INVENTIVE WITH THE LITTLE THAT YOU
HAVE. LOSING A BATTLE CAN ALLOW YOU TO FRAME YOURSELF AS THE
SYMPATHETIC UNDERDOG. DO NOT LET FEARS MAKE YOU WAIT FOR A
BETTER MOMENT OR BECOME CONSERVATIVE. IF THERE ARE
CIRCUMSTANCES YOU CANNOT CONTROL, MAKE THE BEST OF THEM. IT
IS THE ULTIMATE ALCHEMY TO TRANSFORM ALL SUCH NEGATIVES INTO
ADVANTAGES AND POWER.
 
Hood Alchemy
IF ONE IS CONTINUALLY SURVIVING THE WORST THAT LIFE CAN BRING,
ONE EVENTUALLY CEASES TO BE CONTROLLED BY A FEAR OF WHAT
LIFE CAN BRING.
—James Baldwin
For well over a year 50 Cent had been working on what was meant to be his
debut album, Power of the Dollar, and finally in the spring of 2000 it was
ready to be released by Columbia Records. It represented to him all the
struggles he had been through on the streets, and he had hopes that it would
turn his life around for good. In May of that year, however, a few weeks
before the launch date, a hired assassin shot nine bullets into him while he
sat in the back of a car, one bullet going through his jaw and nearly killing
him.
In a flash, all of the momentum he had built up reversed itself.
Columbia canceled the release of the record and dropped Fifty from his
contract. There was too much violence associated with him; it was bad for
business. A few inquiries made it clear that other labels felt the same—he
was being blackballed from the industry. One executive told him flatly he
would have to wait at least two years before he could think of resurrecting
his career.
The assassination attempt was the result of an old drug beef from his
days as a dealer; the killers could not afford to let him survive and would
try to finish the job. Fifty had to keep a low profile. At the same time, he
had no money and could not return to street hustling. Even many of his
friends, who had hoped to be part of his success as a rapper, started to avoid
him.
In just a few short weeks he had gone from being poised for fame and
fortune to hitting the bottom. And there seemed no way to move out of the
corner he found himself in. Could this be the end of all his efforts? It would
have been better to die that day than to feel this powerlessness. But as he
lay in bed at his grandparents’ house, recovering from the wounds, he
listened a lot to the radio, and what he heard gave him an incredible rush of
optimism: an idea started taking shape in his mind that the shooting was in
fact a great blessing in disguise, that he had narrowly survived for a reason.
The music on the radio was all so packaged and produced. Even the
tough stuff, the gangsta rap, was fake. The lyrics did not reflect anything
from the streets that he knew. The attempt to pass it off as real and urban
angered him to a point he could not endure. This was not the time for him to
be afraid and depressed, or to sit around and wait a few years while all of
the violence around him died down. He had never been a fake studio
gangsta and now he had the nine bullet wounds to prove it. This was the
moment to convert all of his anger and dark emotions into a powerful
campaign that would shake the very foundations of hip-hop.
As a hustler on the streets Fifty had learned a fundamental lesson:
Access to money and resources is severely limited in the hood. A hustler
must transform every little event and every trifling object into some
gimmick for making money. Even the worst shit that happens to you can be
converted into gold if you are clever enough. All of the negative factors
now facing him—little money, no connections, the price on his head—
could be turned into their opposites, advantages and opportunities. That is
how he would confront the seemingly insurmountable obstacles now in his
path.
He decided to disappear for a few months and, holed up in various
friends’ houses, he began to re-create himself and his music career. With no
executives to have to please or worry about, he could push his lyrics and the
hard sounds as far as he wanted. His voice had changed as a result of the
pieces of bullet still lodged in his tongue—it now had a hiss. It was still
painful for him to move his mouth, so he had to rap more slowly. Instead of
trying to normalize and retrain his voice, he determined to turn it into a
virtue. His new style of rapping would be more deliberate and menacing;
that hiss would remind listeners of the bullet that had gone through his jaw.
He would play all of that up.
In the summer of 2001, just as people had begun to forget about him,
Fifty suddenly released his first song to the streets. It was called “Fuck
You,” the title and the lyrics summarizing how he felt about his killers—and
everyone who wanted him to go away. Just putting out the song was
message enough—he was defying his assassins openly and publicly. Fifty
was back, and to shut him up they would have to finish the job. The
palpable anger in his voice and the hard-driving sound of the song made it a
sensation on the streets. It also came with an added punch—because he
seemed to be inviting more violence, the public had to grab up everything
he produced before he was killed. The life-and-death angle made for a
compelling spectacle.
Now the songs started to pour out of him. He fed off all the anger he felt
and the doubts people had had about him. He was also consumed with a
sense of urgency—this was his last chance to make it and so he worked
night and day. Fifty’s mix-tapes began to hit the street at a furious pace.
Soon he realized the greatest advantage he possessed in this campaign
—the feeling that he had already hit bottom and had nothing to lose. He
could attack the record industry and poke fun at its timidity. He could pirate
the most popular songs on the radio and put his own lyrics over them to
create wicked parodies. He didn’t care about the consequences. And the
further he took this the more his audiences responded. They loved the
transgressive edge to it. It was like a crusade against all the fake crap on the
radio, and to listen to Fifty was to participate in the cause.
On and on he went, transforming every conceivable negative into a
positive. To compensate for the lack of money to distribute his mix-tapes
far and wide, he decided to encourage bootleggers to pirate his tracks and
spread his music around like a virus. With the price still on his head, he
could not give concerts or do any kind of public promotion; but somehow
he turned even this into a marketing device. Hearing his music everywhere
but not being able to see him only added to the mystique and the attention
people paid to him. Rumors and word of mouth helped form a kind of Fifty
mythology. He made himself even scarcer to feed this process.
The momentum now was devastating—you could not go far in New
York without hearing his music blasted from some corner. Soon one of his
mix-tapes reached the ears of Eminem, who decided this was the future of
hip-hop and quickly signed Fifty in early 2003 to his and Dr. Dre’s label,
Shady Aftermath, completing one of the most rapid and remarkable
turnarounds in fortune in modern times.
The Fearless Approach
EVERY NEGATIVE IS A POSITIVE. THE BAD THINGS THAT HAPPEN TO ME,
I SOMEHOW MAKE THEM GOOD. THAT MEANS YOU CAN’T DO ANYTHING
TO HURT ME.
—50 Cent
Events in life are not negative or positive. They are completely neutral. The
universe does not care about your fate; it is indifferent to the violence that
may hit you or to death itself. Things merely happen to you. It is your mind
that chooses to interpret them as negative or positive. And because you have
layers of fear that dwell deep within you, your natural tendency is to
interpret temporary obstacles in your path as something larger—setbacks
and crises.
In such a frame of mind, you exaggerate the dangers. If someone attacks
and harms you in some way, you focus on the money or position you have
lost in the battle, the negative publicity, or the harsh emotions that have
been churned up. This causes you to grow cautious, to retreat, hoping to
spare yourself more of these negative things. It is a time, you tell yourself,
to lay low and wait for things to get better; you need calmness and security.
What you do not realize is that you are inadvertently making the
situation worse. Your rival only gets stronger as you sit back; the negative
publicity becomes firmly associated with you. Being conservative turns into
a habit that carries over into less difficult moments. It becomes harder and
harder to move to the offensive. In essence you have chosen to cast life’s
inevitable twists of fortune as hardships, giving them a weight and
endurance they do not deserve.
What you need to do, as Fifty discovered, is take the opposite approach.
Instead of becoming discouraged and depressed by any kind of downturn,
you must see this as a wake-up call, a challenge that you will transform into
an opportunity for power. Your energy levels rise. You move to the attack,
surprising your enemies with boldness. You care less what people think
about you and this paradoxically causes them to admire you—the negative
publicity is turned around. You do not wait for things to get better—you
seize this chance to prove yourself. Mentally framing a negative event as a
blessing in disguise makes it easier for you to move forward. It is a kind of
mental alchemy, transforming shit into sugar.
Understand: we live in a society of relative prosperity, but in many
ways this turns out to be a detriment to our spirit. We come to feel that we
naturally deserve good things, that we have certain privileges due to us.
When setbacks occur, it is almost a personal affront or punishment. “How
could this have happened?” we ask. We either blame other people or we
blame ourselves. In both cases, we lose valuable time and become
unnecessarily emotional.
In places like the hood or in any kind of materially impoverished
environment, the response to hardship is much different. There, bad things
happening assume a kind of normality. They are part of daily life. The
hustler thinks: “I must make the most of what I have, even the bad stuff,
because things are not going to get better on their own. It is foolish to wait;
tomorrow may bring even worse shit.” If Fifty had waited, as he had been
counseled, he would be just another rapper who had had a moment of
success and then faded quickly away. The hood would have consumed him.
This hustler mind-set is more realistic and effective. The truth is that life
is by nature harsh and competitive. No matter how much money or
resources you have accumulated, someone will try to take them from you,
or unexpected changes in the world will push you backward. These are not
adverse circumstances but merely life as it is. You have no time to lose to
fear and depression, and you do not have the luxury of waiting.
All of the most powerful people in history demonstrate in one way or
another this fearless attitude towards adversity. Look at George Washington.
He was a wealthy landowner but his attitude towards life had been forged
by years fighting for the British in the French and Indian War, amid the
harsh environment of frontier America. In 1776, Washington was made
supreme commander of the American Revolutionary army. At first glance
this position seemed more like a curse. The army was a semi-organized
mob. It had no training, was poorly paid and outfitted, and its morale was
low—most of the soldiers did not really believe they could succeed in
defeating the all-powerful British.
Throughout 1777, British forces pushed this weak American army
around, from Boston to New York, until by the end of the year Washington
had been forced to retreat to New Jersey. This was the darkest moment in
his career and in the war for independence. Washington’s army had
dwindled to a few thousand men; they had little food and were poorly
clothed, during one of the bitterest winters in memory. The American
Continental Congress, fearing imminent disaster, fled from Philadelphia to
Baltimore.
Assessing this situation, a cautious leader would have chosen to wait
out the winter, muster more troops, and hope for some change in fortune.
But Washington had a different mind-set. As he perceived it, his army
would be considered by the British as too weak to pose any threat. Being
small, his army could move without the enemy’s knowledge, and launch an
attack that was all the more surprising for coming out of nowhere. Moving
to the attack would excite the troops and gain some much-needed positive
publicity. Thinking in this manner, he decided to lead a raid on an enemy
garrison in Trenton, which proved to be a great success. He followed this up
with an attack on British supplies at Princeton. These daring victories
captivated the American public. Confidence had been restored in
Washington as a leader and the American army as a legitimate force.
From then on, Washington waged a guerrilla-style war, wearing out the
British with the great distances they had to cover. Everything was turned
around—lack of funds and experience led to a more creative way of
fighting. The smallness of his forces allowed him to torment the enemy
with fluid maneuvering over rough terrain. At no point did he decide to wait
for more troops or more money or better circumstances—he went
continually on the attack with what he had. It was a campaign of supreme
fearlessness, in which all negatives were converted into advantages.
This is a common occurrence in history: almost all great military and
political triumphs are preceded by some kind of crisis. That is because a
substantial victory can only come out of a moment of danger and attack.
Without these moments, leaders are never challenged, never get to prove
themselves. If the path is too smooth, they grow arrogant and make a fatal
mistake. The fearless types require some kind of adversity against which
they can measure themselves. The tenseness of such dark moments brings
out their creativity and urgency, making them rise to the occasion and turn
the tide of fortune from defeat to a great victory.
You must adopt an attitude that is the opposite to how most people think
and operate. When things are going well, that is precisely when you must be
concerned and vigilant. You know it will not last and you will not be caught
unprepared. When things are going badly, that is when you are most
encouraged and fearless. Finally you have material for a powerful reversal,
a chance to prove yourself. It is only out of danger and difficulty that you
can rise at all. By simply embracing the moment as something positive and
necessary you have already converted it into gold.
Keys to Fearlessness
[I]N NOOKS ALL OVER THE EARTH SIT MEN WHO ARE WAITING,
SCARCELY KNOWING IN WHAT WAY THEY ARE WAITING, MUCH LESS
THAT THEY ARE WAITING IN VAIN. OCCASIONALLY THE CAL THAT
AWAKENS—THAT ACCIDENT WHICH GIVES THE “PERMISSION TO ACT—
COMES TOO LATE, WHEN THE BEST YOUTH AND STRENGTH FOR ACTION
HAS ALREADY BEEN USED UP BY SITTING STILL; AND MANY HAVE FOUND
TO THEIR HORROR WHEN THEY “LEAPED UP” THAT THEIR LIMBS HAD
GONE TO SLEEP AND THEIR SPIRIT HAD BECOME TOO HEAVY. “IT IS TOO
LATE,” THEY SAID TO THEMSELVES, HAVING LOST THEIR FAITH IN
THEMSELVES AND HENCEFORTH FOREVER USELESS.
—Friedrich Nietzsche
Our minds possess powers we have not even begun to tap into. These
powers come from a mix of heightened concentration, energy, and ingenuity
in the face of obstacles. Each of us has the capacity to develop these
powers, but first we have to be aware of their existence. This is difficult,
however, in a culture that emphasizes material means—technology, money,
connections—as the answer to everything. We place unnecessary limits on
what the mind can accomplish, and that becomes our reality. Look at our
concept of opportunity and you will see this in its clearest light.
According to conventional wisdom, an opportunity is something that
exists out there in the world; if it comes our way and we seize it, it brings us
money and power. This could be a particular job, the perfect fit for us; it
could be a chance to create or join a new venture. It could be meeting the
appropriate person. In any event, it depends on being at the right place at
the right time and having the proper skills to take advantage of this
propitious moment. We generally believe there are only a few such golden
chances in life, and most of us are waiting for them to cross our path.
This concept is extremely limited in scope. It makes us dependent on
outside forces. It stems from a fearful, passive attitude towards life that is
counterproductive. It constrains our minds to a small circle of possibility.
The truth is that for the human mind, everything that crosses its path can be
a potential tool for power and expansion.
Many of us have had the following experience: we find ourselves in an
urgent, difficult situation. Perhaps we have to get something done in an
impossibly short amount of time, or someone we had counted on for help
does not come through, or we are in a foreign land and must suddenly fend
for ourselves. In these situations, necessity crowds in on us. We have to get
work done and figure out problems quickly or we suffer immediate
consequences. What usually happens is that our minds snap to attention. We
find the necessary energy because we have to. We pay attention to details
that normally elude us, because they might spell the difference between
success and failure, life and death. We are surprised at how inventive we
become. It is at such moments that we get a glimpse of that potential mental
power within us that generally lies untapped. If only we could have such a
spirit and attitude in everyday life.
This attitude is what we shall call “opportunism.” True opportunists do
not require urgent, stressful circumstances to become alert and inventive.
They operate this way on a daily basis. They channel their aggressive
energy into hunting down possibilities for expansion in the most banal and
insignificant events. Everything is an instrument in their hands, and with
this enlarged notion of opportunity, they create more of it in their lives and
gain great power.
Perhaps the greatest opportunist in history is Napoleon Bonaparte.
Nothing escaped his attention. He focused with supreme intensity on all of
the details, finding ways to transform even the most trivial aspects of
warfare—how to march and carry supplies, how to organize troops into
divisions—into tools of power. He ruthlessly exploited the slightest mistake
of his opponents. He was the master at turning the worst moments in battle
into material for a devastating counterattack.
All of this came out of Napoleon’s determination to see everything
around him as an opportunity. By looking for these opportunities, he found
them. This became a mental skill that he refined to an art. This power is
open to each and every one of us if we put into practice the following four
principles of the art.
MAKE THE MOST OF WHAT YOU HAVE
In 1704, a Scottish sailor named Alexander Selkirk found himself marooned
on a deserted island some four hundred miles off the coast of Chile. All he
had with him was a rifle, some gunpowder, a knife, and some carpenter’s
tools. In exploring the interior, he saw nothing but a bunch of goats, cats,
rats, and some unfamiliar animals that made strange noises at night. It was a
shelterless environment. He decided to keep to the shoreline, slept in a cave,
found enough to eat by catching fish, and slowly gave way to a deep
depression. He knew he would run out of gunpowder, his knife would get
rusty, and his clothes would rot on his back. He could not survive on just
fish. He did not have enough supplies to get by and the loneliness was
crushing. If only he had brought over more materials from his ship.
Then suddenly the shoreline was invaded by sea lions; it was their
mating season. Now he was forced to move inland. There, he could not
simply harpoon fish and sit in a cave brooding. He quickly discovered that
this dark forest contained everything he needed. He built a series of huts out
of the native woods. He cultivated various fruit trees. He taught himself to
hunt the goats. He domesticated dozens of feral cats—they protected him
against the rats and provided him much needed companionship. He took
apart his useless rifle and fashioned tools out of it. Recalling what he
learned from his father, who had been a shoemaker, he made his own
clothes out of animal hides. It was as if he had suddenly come to life and his
depression disappeared. He was finally rescued from the island, but the
experience completely altered his way of thinking. Years later he would
recall his time there as the happiest in his life.
Most of us are like Selkirk when he first found himself stranded—we
look at our material resources and wish we had more. But a different
possibility exists for us as well—the realization that more resources are not
necessarily coming from the outside and that we must use what we already
have to better effect. What we have in hand could be research material for a
particular book, or people who work within our organization. If we look for
more—information, outside people to help us—it won’t necessarily lead to
anything better; in fact the waiting and the dependence makes us less
creative. When we go to work with what is there, we find new ways to
employ this material. We solve problems, develop skills we can use again
and again, and build up our confidence. If we become wealthy and
dependent on money and technology, our minds atrophy and that wealth
will not last.
TURN ALL OBSTACLES INTO OPENINGS
The great boxer Joe Louis encountered a tremendous obstacle in the racism
of the 1930s. Jack Johnson had preceded Louis as the most famous black
boxer of his time. Johnson was supremely skilled and he beat his white
opponents with ease, but he was an emotional fighter—encountering hostile
crowds that chanted “Kill the nigger” only made him more heated and
angry. He found himself in constant trouble and quickly burned out from all
the hatred.
Louis was equally talented, but as he perceived it, he could not gloat or
show emotion in the ring—that would incite the white audiences and feed
into the stereotype of the out-of-control black boxer. And yet a fighter
thrives off his emotions, his fighting spirit, and uses this to overwhelm his
opponent. Instead of rebelling against this state of affairs or giving up,
Louis decided to use it to his advantage. He would show no emotions in the
ring. After knocking someone out, he would calmly return to his corner.
Opponents and the audience would try to bait him into an emotional
response, but he resisted. All of his spirit and anger went into forging this
cold and intimidating mask. The racists could not rail against this. He
became known as the “Embalmer,” and it was enough to see his grim
expression when you entered the ring to feel your legs getting weak. In
essence, Louis turned this obstacle into his greatest strength.
An opportunist in life sees all hindrances as instruments for power. The
reason is simple: negative energy that comes at you in some form is energy
that can be turned around—to defeat an opponent and lift you up. When
there is no such energy, there is nothing to react or push against; it is harder
to motivate yourself. Enemies that hit you have opened themselves up to a
counterattack in which you control the timing and the dynamic. If bad
publicity comes your way, think of it as a form of negative attention that
you can easily reframe for your purposes. You can seem contrite or
rebellious, whatever will stir up your base. If you ignore it, you look guilty.
If you fight it, you seem defensive. If you go with it and channel it in your
direction, you have turned it into an opportunity for positive attention. In
general, obstacles force your mind to focus and find ways around them.
They heighten your mental powers and should be welcomed.
LOOK FOR TURNING POINTS
Opportunities exist in any field of tension—heated competition, anxiety,
chaotic situations. Something important is going on and if you are able to
determine the underlying cause, you can create for yourself a powerful
opportunity.
Look for any sudden successes or failures in the business world that
people find hard to explain. These are often indications of shifts going on
under the surface; perhaps someone has inadvertently hit upon a new model
for doing things and you must analyze this. Examine the greatest anxieties
of those on the inside of any business or industry. Deep changes going on
usually register as fear to those who do not know how to deal with them.
You can be the first to exploit such changes for positive purposes.
Keep your eye out for any kind of shifts in tastes or values. People in
the media or the establishment will often rail against these changes, seeing
them as signs of moral decline and chaos. People fear the new. You can turn
this into an opportunity by being the first to give some meaning to this
apparent disorder, establishing it as a positive value. You are not looking for
fads, but deep-rooted changes in people’s tastes. One opportunity you can
always bank on is that a younger generation will react against the sacred
cows of the older generation. If the older set valued spontaneity and
pleasure, you can be sure that the younger set will crave order and
orthodoxy. By attacking the values of the older generation before anyone
else, you can gain powerful attention.
MOVE BEFORE YOU ARE READY
Most people wait too long to go into action, generally out of fear. They
want more money or better circumstances. You must go the opposite
direction and move before you think you are ready. It is as if you are
making it a little more difficult for yourself, deliberately creating obstacles
in your path. But it is a law of power that your energy will always rise to the
appropriate level. When you feel that you must work harder to get to your
goal because you are not quite prepared, you are more alert and inventive.
This venture has to succeed and so it will.
This has been the way of powerful people from ancient to modern
times. When Julius Caesar was faced with the greatest decision of his life—
whether to move against Pompey and initiate a civil war or wait for a better
moment—he stood at the Rubicon River that separated Gaul from Italy,
with only the smallest of forces. Although it seemed insanity to his
lieutenants, he judged the moment right. He would compensate for the
smallness of his troops with their heightened morale and his own strategic
wits. He crossed the Rubicon, surprised the enemy, and never looked back.
When Barack Obama was contemplating a run for president in 2006,
almost everyone advised him to wait his turn. He was too young, too much
of an unknown. Hillary Clinton loomed over the scene. He threw away all
their conventional wisdom and entered the race. Because everything and
everyone was against him, he had to compensate with energy, superior
strategy, and organization. He rose to the occasion with a masterful
campaign that turned all of its negatives into virtues—his inexperience
represented change, etc.
Remember: as Napoleon said, the moral is to the physical as three to
one—meaning the motivation and energy levels you or your army bring to
the encounter have three times as much weight as your physical resources.
With energy and high morale, a human can overcome almost any obstacle
and create opportunity out of nothing.
Reversal of Perspective
In modern usage, “opportunist” is generally a derogatory term that refers to
people who will do anything for themselves. They have no core values
beyond promoting their own needs. They contribute nothing to society.
This, however, is a misreading of the phenomenon and stems from an age-
old elitism that wants to see opportunities kept as privileges for a powerful
few. Those from the bottom who dare to promote themselves in any way are
seen as Machiavellian, while those already on the top who practice the same
strategies are merely smart and resourceful. Such judgments are a reflection
of fear.
Opportunism is in fact a great art that was studied and practiced by
many ancient cultures. The greatest ancient Greek hero of them all,
Odysseus, was a supreme opportunist. In every dangerous moment in his
life, he exploited some weakness his enemies left open to trick them and
turn the tables. The Greeks venerated him as one who had mastered life’s
shifting circumstances. In their value system, rigid, ideological people who
cannot adapt, who miss all opportunities, are the ones who deserve our
scorn—they inhibit progress.
Opportunism comes with a belief system that is eminently positive and
powerful—one known to the Stoic philosophers of ancient Rome as amor
fati, or love of fate. In this philosophy every event is seen as fated to occur.
When you complain and rail against circumstances, you fall out of balance
with the natural state of things; you wish things were different. What you
must do instead is accept the fact that all events occur for a reason, and that
it is within your capacity to see this reason as positive. Marcus Aurelius
compared this to a fire that consumes everything in its path—all
circumstances become consumed in your mental heat and converted into
opportunities. A man or woman who believes this cannot be hurt by
anything or anyone.
WITHOUT DOUBT, PRINCES BECOME GREAT WHEN THEY OVERCOME
DIFFICULTIES AND HURDLES PUT IN THEIR PATH. WHEN FORTUNE
WANTS TO ADVANCE A NEW PRINCE…SHE CREATES ENEMIES FOR HIM,
MAKING THEM LAUNCH CAMPAIGNS AGAINST HIM SO THAT HE IS
COMPELLED TO OVERCOME THEM AND CLIMB HIGHER ON THE LADDER
THAT THEY HAVE BROUGHT HIM. THEREFORE, MANY JUDGE THAT A
WISE PRINCE MUST SKILLFULLY FAN SOME ENMITY WHENEVER THE
OPPORTUNITY ARISES, SO THAT IN CRUSHING IT HE WILL INCREASE HIS
STANDING.
—Niccolò Machiavelli

CHAPTER 4
Keep Moving—Calculated Momentum
IN THE PRESENT THERE IS CONSTANT CHANGE AND SO MUCH WE
CANNOT CONTROL. IF YOU TRY TO MICROMANAGE IT ALL, YOU LOSE
EVEN GREATER CONTROL IN THE LONG RUN. THE ANSWER IS TO LET GO
AND MOVE WITH THE CHAOS THAT PRESENTS ITSELF TO YOU—FROM
WITHIN IT, YOU WILL FIND ENDLESS OPPORTUNITIES THAT ELUDE MOST
PEOPLE. DON’T GIVE OTHERS THE CHANCE TO PIN YOU DOWN; KEEP
MOVING AND CHANGING YOUR APPEARANCES TO FIT THE
ENVIRONMENT. IF YOU ENCOUNTER WALLS OR BOUNDARIES, SLIP
AROUND THEM. DO NOT LET ANYTHING DISRUPT YOUR FLOW.
 
The Hustler’s Flow
THE OLD MUSICIANS STAY WHERE THEY ARE AND BECOME LIKE
MUSEUM PIECES UNDER GLASS, SAFE, EASY TO UNDERSTAND, PLAYING
THAT TIRED OLD SHIT OVER AND OVER AGAIN…. BEBOP WAS ABOUT
CHANGE, ABOUT EVOLUTION. IT WASN’T ABOUT STANDING STILL AND
BECOMING SAFE. IF ANYBODY WANTS TO KEEP CREATING THEY HAVE
TO BE ABOUT CHANGE.
—Miles Davis
When Curtis Jackson first started hustling in the late 1980s, it was a chaotic
world that he entered. Crack cocaine had hit the streets and turned
everything upside down. Now the corner hustler was unleashed. Moving to
wherever there was money to be made, this new breed of drug dealer had to
contend with hundreds of scheming rivals, the erratic drug addicts, the old-
style gang leaders who were trying to muscle their way back into the
business, and the police who swarmed over the area. It was like the Wild
West out there—every man for himself, making up his own rules as he went
along.
Some couldn’t stand this. They wanted structure, somebody to tell them
when to get up and get to work. They didn’t last too long in this new order.
Others thrived on all the anarchy and freedom. Curtis was of the latter
variety.
Then one day everything changed. An old-style gangster nicknamed
“the Godfather” made a play for control over the drug traffic of Southside
Queens and he succeeded. He installed his son Jermaine in Curtis’s
neighborhood and the son quickly laid down the law—the family was there
to bring order to the business. Jermaine would be selling these purple-top
capsules for a cheap price. It would be one size fits all—his capsules or
nothing. Nobody could compete with his prices, and any hustler that tried to
defy him would be intimidated into submission. They were now all working
for Jermaine.
Curtis found this hard to accept. He did not like any kind of authority.
He kept trying to get around Jermaine’s tight grip on the area by selling his
own stuff on the sly, but Jermaine and his team of enforcers kept catching
him. Finally they inflicted a good beating on him and he decided it would
be wise to surrender—for the time being.
Jermaine liked Curtis’s independent spirit and decided to take the youth
under his wing, schooling him on what he was up to. He had done some
time in prison and had studied business and economics there. He was going
to run the crack-cocaine business according to a model inspired by some of
the more successful corporations in America. He aimed for control of the
local drug business through cheap prices and a complete monopoly on
traffic—that was the evolution of all successful enterprises, even the new
ones such as Microsoft. He personally hated all the disorder on the streets—
it was bad for business and made him uneasy.
One day he drove by in his red Ferrari and invited Curtis to come along
for a ride. He drove to the nearby Baisley Projects, which were controlled
back then by the Pharaohs, a gang that was heavily invested in the crack
trade and notorious for its violent ways. Curtis watched, with growing
discomfort, as Jermaine explained to its leaders his plan for the
neighborhood. He couldn’t have freelancers and gangs operating on the
margins of his empire; the Pharaohs would have to fall in line as well, but
he’d find a way to make it profitable for them.
The man’s arrogance was increasing by the day. Perhaps he would
follow this visit up with some violent act to show the Pharaohs he meant
what he said, but Curtis had a real bad feeling from that afternoon. Over the
next few days, he did whatever he could to avoid running into Jermaine.
Sure enough, a week later Jermaine was shot in the head and killed in one
of the back alleyways of the hood. Everyone knew who did it and why.
In the months to come, Curtis thought long and hard about what had
happened. A part of him had identified with Jermaine. He too had great
ambitions and wanted to forge some kind of empire within the hood. With
all the competition on the streets, this could never be an easy task. It was
natural then for someone like Jermaine to decide that the only way to create
this empire was through force and the buildup of a monopoly. But such an
effort was futile. Even if he had lasted longer, there were too many people
operating on the fringes who resented his takeover and would have done
whatever they could to sabotage him. The fiends would have grown tired of
his one-size-fits-all approach; they liked variety, even if it was only in the
color of the capsules. The police would have taken notice of his large
operation and tried to break it up. Jermaine had been living in the past, in
ideas cooked up in prison in the 1970s, the grand era of the drug lord. Time
had passed him by, and in the ruthless dynamic of the hood, he paid for this
with his life.
What was needed was a new skill set, a different mentality for handling
the chaos. And Curtis would be the hustler to develop these skills to the
maximum. For this purpose, he let go of any desire to dominate an area
with one large operation. Instead he started experimenting with four or five
hustles at the same time; inevitably one of the angles would work and pay
for all the others. He made sure he always had options, room to move in
case the police pushed in and cut off one of his access routes. He interacted
with the fiends, looking for any changes in their tastes and ways he could
appeal to them with some new marketing scheme. He let those who worked
for him do things on their own time, as long as they produced results—he
wanted as little friction as possible. He never stayed tied to one venture, one
partner, or one way of doing things for very long. He kept moving.
The chaos of the streets was part of his flow, something he learned to
exploit by working from within it. Operating this way, he slowly
accumulated the kind of hustling empire that could surpass what even
Jermaine had attempted.
 
In 2003, Curtis (now known as 50 Cent) found himself thrust into corporate
America, working within Interscope Records and dealing with the growing
number of businesses that wanted to ally themselves with him. Coming
from the streets, with no formal business background, it was natural for him
to feel intimidated in this new environment. But within a few months he
saw things differently—the new skills he had developed in the hood were
more than adequate.
What he noticed about the business executives he dealt with was rather
shocking: they operated by these conventions that seemed to have little to
do with the incredible changes going on in the business environment. The
record industry, for instance, was being destroyed by digital piracy, but the
executives could only think of somehow maintaining their monopoly on
ownership and distribution; they were incapable of adapting to the changes.
They interacted only with themselves—not with their customer base—so
their ideas never evolved. They were living in the past, when all of the
business models were simple, and control was easy to come by. They had
the Jermaine mentality through and through, and in Fifty’s mind they would
some day suffer a similar fate.
Fifty would stay true to his street strategies—he would opt for fluid
positions and room to move. This meant branching out into ventures that
were not at all traditional for a rapper—Vitamin Water, a line of books, an
alliance with General Motors and Pontiac. These associations seemed
disorderly and random, but it was all tied to his compelling image that he
continued to shape. He worked five different angles at the same time; if one
venture failed, he learned and moved on. The business world was like a
laboratory that he would use for constant experimentation and discovery.
He would mix and mingle with his employees, up and down the line, and
with his audience, allowing them to alter his ideas. The centerpiece of this
flow strategy would be the Internet, a chaotic space with endless
opportunity for a hustler like himself.
Without knowing exactly where it would lead, he began putting together
his own website. At first it was a place to showcase new videos and get
feedback from the public. Soon it began to morph into a social network,
bringing together his fans from all over the world. This gave him endless
space to market his brand and track the changing moods of his audience.
His website would continue to evolve like a living organism—he placed no
limits on what it could become.
Years later, having moved beyond music into as many varied realms as
possible, Fifty could look back on all the people he had left far behind—the
record executives, fellow rappers, and business leaders who had gone astray
amid all the rapid fluctuations in the early part of the century, a whole
gallery of Jermaine types who had no flow. No matter the changes to come,
he would continue to thrive in this new Wild West environment, just as he
had on the streets.
The Fearless Approach
50 CENT IS A PERSON I CREATED. SOON IT WILL BE TIME TO DESTROY
HIM AND BECOME SOMEBODY ELSE.
—50 Cent
As infants we were surrounded by many things that were unfamiliar and
unpredictable—people acting in ways that did not make sense, events that
were hard to figure out. This was the source of great anxiety. We wanted the
world around us to be more familiar. What was not so predictable became
associated in our minds with darkness and chaos, something to dread. Out
of this fear, a desire was born deep inside of us to somehow gain greater
control over the people and events that eluded our grasp. The only way we
knew how to do this was to grab and hold, to push and pull, exerting our
will in as direct a manner as possible to get people to do what we wanted.
Over the years, this can become a lifelong pattern of behavior—more subtle
as an adult, but infantile at heart.
Every individual we come across in life is unique, with his or her own
energy, desires, and history. But wanting more control over people, our first
impulse is generally to try to push them into conforming to our moods and
ideas, into acting in ways that are familiar and comfortable to us. Every
circumstance in life is different, but this elicits that old fear of chaos and the
unknown. We cannot physically make events more predictable, but we can
internally create a feeling of greater control by holding on to certain ideas
and beliefs that give us a sense of consistency and order.
This hunger for control, common to all of us, is the root of so many
problems in life. Staying true to the same ideas and ways of doing things
makes it that much harder for us to adapt to the inevitable changes in life. If
we try to dominate a situation with some kind of aggressive action, this
becomes our only option. We cannot give in, or adapt, or bide our time—
that would mean letting go of our grip, and we fear that. Having such
narrow options makes it hard to solve problems. Forcing people to do what
we want makes them resentful—inevitably they sabotage us or assert
themselves against our will. What we find is that our desire to micromanage
the world around us comes with a paradoxical effect—the harder we try to
control things in our immediate environment, the more likely we are to lose
control in the long run.
Most people tend to think of these forms of direct control as power
itself—something that shows strength, consistency, or character. But in fact
the opposite is the case. They are forms of power that are infantile and
weak, stemming from that deep-rooted fear of change and chaos. Before it
is too late you need to convert to a more sophisticated, fearless concept of
power—one that emphasizes fluidity.
Life has a particular pace and rhythm, an endless stream of changes that
can move slowly or quickly. When you try to stop this flow mentally or
physically by holding on to things or people, you fall behind. Your actions
become awkward because they are not in relation to present circumstances.
It is like moving against a current as opposed to using it to propel you
forward.
The first and most important step is to let go of this need to control in
such a direct manner. This means that you no longer see change and chaotic
moments in life as something to fear, but rather as a source of excitement
and opportunity. In a social situation in which you want the ability to
influence people, your first move is to bend to their different energies. You
see what they bring and you adapt to this, then find a way to divert their
energy in your direction. You let go of the past way of doing things and
adapt your strategies to the ever-flowing present.
Often what seems like chaos to us is merely a series of events that are
new and hard to figure out. You cannot make sense of this apparent disorder
if you are reactive and fearful, trying to make everything conform to
patterns that exist only in your mind. By absorbing more of these chaotic
moments with an open spirit, you can glimpse a pattern, a reason why they
are occurring, and how you can exploit them.
As part of this new concept, you are replacing the old stalwart symbols
of power—the rock, the oak tree, etc.—with that of water, the element that
has the greatest potential force in all of nature. Water can adapt to whatever
comes its way, moving around or over any obstacle. It wears away rock
over time. This form of power does not mean you simply give in to what
life brings you and drift. It means that you channel the flow of events in
your direction, letting this add to the force of your actions and giving you
powerful momentum.
In places like the hood, the concept of flow is more developed than
elsewhere. In such an environment, obstacles are everywhere. Those who
live there cannot move and make a good living beyond the confines of the
hood. If they try to control too many things and become aggressive, they
tend to make their lives harder and shorter. The violence they initiate only
comes back at them with equal force.
With so many physical limitations, hustlers have learned to develop
mental freedom. They cannot let their minds be bothered by all these
hindrances. Their thoughts have to keep moving—creating new ventures,
new hustles, new directions in music and clothes. That is why trends change
so quickly in the hood, which often serves as the engine for new styles in
the culture at large. With people, hustlers have to adapt to all of their
differences, wearing the mask that is appropriate for each situation,
deflecting people’s suspicions. (Hustlers are consummate chameleons.) If
they can maintain this mental and social fluidity, they can feel a degree of
freedom beyond all the physical confinements of the hood.
You too face a world full of obstacles and limitations—a new
environment where the competition is more global, complicated, and
intense than ever before. Like the hustler, you must find your freedom
through the fluidity of your thoughts and your constant inventiveness. This
means having a greater willingness to experiment, trying several ventures
without fear of failing here or there. It also means constantly looking to
develop new styles, new directions you can take, freeing yourself up from
any inertia that comes with age. In a world full of people who are too
conventional in their thinking, who respect the past far too much, such flow
will inevitably translate into power and more room to move.
The fearless types in history all reveal a greater capacity to handle chaos
and to use it for their purposes. No greater example of this can be found
than Mao Zedong. China in the 1920s was a country on the verge of radical
change. The old imperial order that had suffocated China for centuries had
finally fallen apart. But fearing the disorder that could be unleashed in such
a vast country, the two parties vying for control—the Nationalists and the
Communists—opted to try to contain the situation as best they could.
The Nationalists offered the old-style imperial order with a new face.
The Communists decided to impose on China the Lenin model—waging a
proletariat revolution, centered in urban areas, controlling key cities in the
country and enforcing strict adherence to party dogma among its followers.
This had worked well in the Soviet Union, creating order in a short period
of time, but it had no relevance to China; by the end of the decade this
strategy was failing miserably. On the verge of annihilation, the
Communists turned to Mao, who had a totally different concept of what to
do.
Mao had been raised in a small village, among the country’s vast
peasant population. As part of his upbringing, he was immersed in the
ancient belief systems of Taoism, which saw change as the essence of
nature, and conforming to these changes as the source of all power. In the
end, according to Taoism, you are stronger by having a softness that allows
you to bend and adapt. Mao was not afraid of the vast size and population
of China. The chaos this could represent would simply become part of his
strategy. His idea was to enlist the help of the peasantry, so that Communist
soldiers could blend in to the countryside like fish in water.
He would not attack city centers or try to occupy any single position in
the country. Instead he would move the army around, like a vaporous force
that would attack and then disappear, the enemy never knowing where it
was coming from or what it was up to. This guerrilla force would stay in
constant motion, allowing the enemy no breathing space and giving them a
sense of chaos.
The Nationalists epitomized the opposite school of fighting,
conventional to the core. When Mao finally unleashed on them his new
brand of warfare, they could not adapt. They held on to key positions, while
the Communists encircled them in the vast spaces of China. The
Nationalists’ control narrowed to the point of a few cities, and soon they
crumbled completely in one of the most remarkably swift turnarounds in
military history.
Understand: it is not only what you do that must have flow, but also
how you do things. It is your strategies, your methods of attacking
problems, that must constantly be adapted to circumstances. Strategy is the
essence of human action—the bridge between an idea and its realization in
the world. Too often these strategies become frozen into conventions, as
people mindlessly imitate what worked before. By keeping your strategies
attuned to the moment, you can be an agent of change, the one who breaks
up these dead ways of acting, gaining tremendous power in the process.
Most people in life are rigid and predictable; that makes them easy targets.
Your fluid, unpredictable strategies will drive them insane. They cannot
foresee your next move or figure you out. That is often enough to make
them give way or fall apart.
Keys to Fearlessness
THUS ONE’S VICTORIES IN BATTLE CANNOT BE REPEATED—THEY TAKE
THEIR FORM IN RESPONSE TO INEXHAUSTIBLY CHANGING
CIRCUMSTANCES…. IT CAN BE LIKENED TO WATER, AS WATER VARIES
ITS FLOW ACCORDING TO THE FALL OF THE LAND.
—Sun Tzu
All of us have experienced at some point in our lives a feeling of
momentum. Perhaps we do something that strikes a chord and we get
recognized for it. This positive attention fills us with unusual confidence,
which in turn attracts people to us. Now brimming with self-belief, we are
able to pull off another good action. Even if it is not so perfect, people will
now tend to overlook the rough patches. We have the aura of success about
us. So many times in life, one good thing seems to follow another.
This will go on until inevitably we disrupt the flow. Perhaps we
overreach with an action that breaks the spell, or we keep repeating the
same things and people grow tired of us and move on to someone else. Just
as quickly the opposite momentum can afflict us. Our own insecurities start
to get in the way; the little imperfections that people overlooked before now
seem glaring. We enter a run of bad fortune and feelings of depression
render us more and more immobile.
On either end of the spectrum we recognize the phenomenon but we
treat it as if it were something mystical, beyond conscious control and
explanation. But it is not as mysterious as we might think. In the midst of
any run of momentum, we generally feel more open; we allow ourselves to
be carried along. The confidence we have when things are going well
makes people get out of our way or join our side, giving our actions added
force. Sometimes a feeling of urgency—we have to get something done—
pushes us to act in a particularly energetic manner, and this starts a good
run. This is often accompanied with a feeling that we have little to lose by
trying something bold. Perhaps feeling somewhat desperate, we loosen up
and experiment.
What ties this all together is that something inside of us opens up and
we allow a greater range of motion. Our style becomes freer and bolder, and
we move with the current. On the other hand, when a run of momentum
ends, it is usually from something we do, a kind of unconscious self-
sabotage. We react against this loosening up, out of some fear of where it
could lead us. We become conservative and the flow of energy stops, slowly
reversing itself into stasis and depression. In many ways, we are the ones in
control of this phenomenon, but it does not operate on a conscious enough
level.
Understand: momentum in life comes from increased fluidity, a
willingness to try more, to move in a less constricted fashion. On many
levels it remains something hard to put into words, but by understanding the
process, becoming more conscious of the elements involved, you can place
your mind in a readied position, better able to exploit any positive
movement in your life. Call this calculated momentum. For this purpose
you must practice and master the following four types of flow.
MENTAL FLOW
In the time of Leonardo da Vinci’s youth (mid-fifteenth century),
knowledge had hardened into rigid compartments. In one slot, there was
philosophy and scholasticism; in another, the arts, which were considered
more like simple crafts; in yet another, science, which was not yet very
empirical. On the margins stood all forms of dark knowledge—the arts of
the occult.
Da Vinci was the illegitimate son of a notary, and because of this murky
social position, he was denied the usual formal education, all of which
became a great blessing in disguise. His mind was freed from all the
prejudices and rigid categories of thinking that prevailed at the time. He
went to serve an apprenticeship in the studio of the great artist Verrocchio.
And once he began to learn there the craft of drawing and painting, a
process was set in motion that led to the forming of one of the most original
minds in the history of mankind.
Knowledge in one field simply opened up in da Vinci an insatiable
hunger to learn something else in a related field. The study of painting led
to that of design in general, which led to an interest in architecture—from
there he flowed to studying engineering; making war machines and
strategy; observing animals and the mechanics of motion that could be
applied to technology; studying birds and aerodynamics, the anatomy of
animals and humans, the relationship between emotions and physiology;
and on and on. This incredible stream of ideas even overflowed into areas
of the occult. His mind would recognize no boundaries; he sought the
connections between all natural phenomena. In this sense, he was ahead of
his time and the first real Renaissance man. His discoveries in various fields
had a momentum—the intensity of one leading to another. Many could not
understand him and thought he was eccentric, even erratic. But great
patrons such as King François I of France, and even Cesare Borgia,
recognized his genius and sought to exploit it.
Today we have regressed to a point that resembles the pre-Renaissance.
Knowledge has once again hardened into rigid categories, with intellectuals
shut off in various ghettos. Intelligent people are considered serious by
virtue of how deeply they immerse themselves in one field of study, their
viewpoint becoming more and more myopic. Someone who crosses these
rigid demarcations is inevitably considered a dilettante. After college we are
all encouraged to specialize, to learn one thing well and stick to it. We end
up strangling ourselves in the narrowness of our interests. With all of these
restrictions, knowledge has no flow to it. Life does not have these
categories; they are mere conventions that we mindlessly abide by.
Da Vinci remains the icon and the inspiration for a new form of
knowledge. In this form, what matters are the connections between things,
not what separates them. The mind has a particular momentum itself; when
it heats up and discovers something new, it tends to find other items to
study and illuminate. All of the greatest innovations in history come from
an openness to discovery, one idea leading to another, sometimes coming
from unrelated fields. You must develop this spirit and the same insatiable
hunger for knowledge. This comes from widening your fields of study and
observation, letting yourself be carried along by what you discover. You
will find that you will come up with unexpected ideas, the kind that will
lead to new practices or novel opportunities. If things run dry in your
particular line of work, you have developed your mind along other lines that
you can now exploit. Having such mental flow will allow you to constantly
think around any obstacle and maintain your career momentum.
EMOTIONAL FLOW
By nature we are emotional creatures. It is how we primarily react to
events; only afterwards are we able to see that such emotional responses
can be destructive and need to be reined in. You cannot repress this part of
human nature, nor should you ever try. It is like a flood that will overwhelm
you all the more for your attempts to dam it up. What you want is for these
endless emotions that assail you during the day to wash over you, to never
hold on to one single emotion for very long. You are able to let go of any
kind of obsessive feeling. If someone says something that bothers you, you
find a way to move quickly past the feeling—either to excuse what they
said, to make it less important, or to forget.
Forgetting is a skill that you must develop in order to have emotional
flow. If you cannot help but feel anger or disgust in the moment, make it a
point to not let it remain the following day. When you hold on to emotions
like that, it is as if you put blinders on your eyes. For that amount of time,
you see and feel only what this emotion dictates, falling behind events. Your
mind stops on feelings of failure, disappointment, and mistrust, giving you
that awkwardness of someone out of tune with the moment. Without
realizing it, all of your strategies become infected by these feelings, pushing
you off course.
To combat this, you must learn the art of counterbalance. When you are
fearful, force yourself to act in a bolder fashion than usual. When you feel
inordinate hate, find some object of love or admiration that you can focus
on with intensity. One strong emotion tends to cancel out the other and help
you move past it.
It might seem that intense feelings of love, hate, or anger can be used to
impel you forward on some project, but that is an illusion. Such emotions
give you a burst of energy that falls quickly and leaves you as low as you
were high. Rather, you want a more balanced emotional life, with fewer
highs and lows. This not only helps you keep moving and overcoming petty
obstacles, but it also affects people’s perceptions of you. They come to see
you as someone who has grace under pressure, a steady hand, and they will
turn to you as a leader. Maintaining such steadiness will keep that positive
flow in motion.
SOCIAL FLOW
Working with people on any level can be a disorderly affair. They bring
their differences and own energy to the project, as well as their own
agendas. The natural tendency for a leader is to try to tamp down these
differences and get everyone on the same page. This seems like the strong
thing to do, but in fact it stems from that infantile fear of the unpredictable.
And in the end it becomes counterproductive, as those who work for you
bring less and less energy to the task. After an initial burst of enthusiasm in
your venture, the discontent of those working for you can quickly stifle any
momentum you had developed.
Early in his career, the great Swedish director Ingmar Bergman used
this more tyrannical approach in dealing with his actors, but he began to be
dissatisfied with its results and so decided to experiment with something
different. He would sketch out the script for a film, leaving the dialog
mostly open. He would then invite his actors to bring their own energy and
experiences into the mix, shaping the dialog to fit their emotional responses.
This would make the screenplay come alive from within, and sometimes it
would require rewriting parts of the plot. In working with the actors on this
level, Bergman would enter their spirit, mirroring their energy as a way to
get them to relax and open up. He allowed for this more and more as his
career evolved, and the results were astonishing.
The actors came to love this, feeling more involved and engaged; they
wanted to work with him, and their enthusiasm carried over into their
performances, each one better than the last. His films had the feel of
something much more lifelike and engaging than those structured around
some rigid script. His work became increasingly popular as he went further
with this collaborative process.
This should be your model in any venture that involves groups of
people. You provide the framework, based on your knowledge and
expertise, but you allow room for this project to be shaped by those
involved in it. They are motivated and creative, helping to give the project
more flow and force. You are not going too far in this process; you set the
overall direction and tone. You are simply letting go of that fearful need to
make people do exactly as you desire. In the long run, you will find that
your ability to gently divert people’s energy in your direction gives you a
wider range of control over the shape and result of the project.
CULTURAL FLOW
In the 1940s, the great saxophone player Charlie Parker single-handedly
revolutionized the world of jazz with his invention of the style known as
bebop. But he watched it soon become the convention in jazz, and within a
few years he was no longer the revolutionary figure worshipped by hipsters.
Younger artists emerged who took his inventions to other levels. This was
immensely disturbing to him and he spiraled downward, dying at an early
age.
The trumpeter Miles Davis had been a part of Parker’s ensemble and he
personally witnessed this decline. Davis understood the situation at its core
—jazz was an incredibly fluid form of music that underwent tremendous
changes in style in short periods of time. Because America did not honor or
take care of its black musicians, the ones who found themselves surpassed
by a new trend had to suffer a terrible fate, like Parker. Davis vowed to
overcome this dynamic. His solution was to never settle on one style. Every
four years or so, he would radically reinvent his sound. His audiences
would have to catch up with the changes, and most often they did.
It soon became a self-fulfilling prophecy, as he was seen as someone
who had his finger on the latest trend, and his new sound would be studied
and emulated. As part of this strategy, he would always hire the youngest
generation of performers to work with him, harnessing the creativity that
comes with youth. In this way, he developed a kind of steady momentum
that carried him past the usual decline in a jazz musician’s career. He kept
this inventiveness up for over thirty years, something unheard of in the
genre.
Understand: you exist in a particular cultural moment, with its own flow
and style. When you are young you are more sensitive to these fluctuations
in taste and so you generally keep up with the present. But as you get older
the tendency is for you to become locked in a style that is dead, one that
you associate with your youth and its excitement. If enough time passes,
your style-lock can become quite ludicrous; you look like a museum piece.
Your momentum will grind to a halt as people come to categorize you in a
narrow period of time.
Instead you must find a way to periodically reinvent yourself. You are
not trying to mimic the latest trend—that will make you look equally
ludicrous. You are simply rediscovering that youthful attentiveness to what
is happening around you and incorporating what you like into a newer
spirit. You are taking pleasure in shaping your personality, wearing a new
mask. The only thing you really have to fear is becoming a social and
cultural relic.
Reversal of Perspective
In Western culture, we tend to associate strength of character with
consistency. People who shift around too much with their ideas and image
can be judged as untrustworthy and even demonic. We honor those who are
true to the past and certain timeless values. On the other hand, people who
challenge and change the prevailing conventions are often viewed as
destructive figures, at least while they are alive.
The great Florentine writer Niccolò Machiavelli saw these values of
consistency and order as products of a fearful culture and something that
should be reversed. In his view, it is precisely our fixed nature, our
tendency to hold to one line of action or thought, that is the source of
human misery and incompetence. A leader can come to power through acts
of boldness, but when the times shift and require something more cautious,
he generally will continue with his bold approach. He is not strong enough
to adapt; he is a prisoner of his fixed nature. What raised him above others
then becomes the source of his downfall.
True figures of power, as Machiavelli saw it, would be people who
could shape their own character, call up the qualities that were necessary for
the moment, and know how to bend to circumstance. Those who remain
true to some idea or value without self-examination often prove to be the
worst tyrants in life. They make others conform to dead concepts. They are
negative forces, holding back the change that is necessary for any culture to
evolve and prosper.
This is how you must operate: you actively work to overcome this fixed
nature, deliberately trying a different approach and style than your usual
one, to get a sense of a different possibility. You come to view periods of
stability and order with mistrust. Something isn’t moving in your life and in
your mind. On the other hand, moments of change and apparent chaos are
what you thrive on—they make your mind and spirit jump to life. If you
reach such a point, you have tremendous power. You have nothing to fear
from moments of transition. You welcome, even create them. Whenever you
feel rooted and established in place, that is when you should be truly afraid.
PEOPLE WISH TO BE SETTLED; ONLY AS FAR AS THEY ARE UNSETTLED IS
THERE ANY HOPE FOR THEM.
—Ralph Waldo Emerson

CHAPTER 5
Know When to Be Bad—Aggression
YOU WILL ALWAYS FIND YOURSELF AMONG THE AGGRESSIVE AND THE
PASSIVE AGGRESSIVE WHO SEEK TO HARM YOU IN SOME WAY. YOU
MUST GET OVER ANY GENERAL FEARS YOU HAVE OF CONFRONTING
PEOPLE OR YOU WILL FIND IT EXTREMELY DIFFICULT TO ASSERT
YOURSELF IN THE FACE OF THOSE WHO ARE MORE CUNNING AND
RUTHLESS. BEFORE IT IS TOO LATE YOU MUST MASTER THE ART OF
KNOWING WHEN AND HOW TO BE BAD—USING DECEPTION,
MANIPULATION, AND OUTRIGHT FORCE AT THE APPROPRIATE
MOMENTS. EVERYONE OPERATES WITH A FLEXIBLE MORALITY WHEN
IT COMES TO THEIR SELF-INTEREST—YOU ARE SIMPLY MAKING THIS
MORE CONSCIOUS AND EFFECTIVE.
 
The Hustler’s Setup
[T]HE HUSTLER’S EVERY WAKING HOUR IS LIVED WITH BOTH THE
PRACTICAL AND THE SUBCONSCIOUS KNOWLEDGE THAT IF HE EVER
RELAXES, IF HE EVER SLOWS DOWN, THE OTHER HUNGRY, RESTLESS
FOXES, FERRETS, WOLVES, AND VULTURES OUT THERE WITH HIM
WON’T HESITATE TO MAKE HIM THEIR PREY.
—Malcolm X
In the summer of 1994, Curtis Jackson returned to Southside Queens after
having served some time in a rehabilitation program for drug offenders.
And to his surprise, in the year he had been away the hustling game had
dramatically changed. The streets were now more crowded than ever with
dealers trying to make some money in the crack-cocaine trade. Having
grown weary over the heated rivalries and violence of the past eight years,
the hustlers had settled into a system where each would have his own corner
or two; the drug fiends would come to them for quick transactions. It was
easy and predictable for everyone. No need to fight or push people out of
the way or even move around.
When Curtis spread the word that he was looking to get his old crew
together and start back where he had left off before rehab, he was met with
suspicion and outright hostility. He could ruin the nice system they had in
place with his ambitious hustling schemes. He had the feeling they would
kill him before he could do anything, just to preserve this new order.
The future suddenly seemed depressing and grim. He had decided
months before to find a way out of the drug-dealing racket, but his plans
depended on his ability to make some good money and save it so he could
segue into a music career. Fitting into this one-corner system would mean
he could never earn enough. A few years would go by and he would find it
harder and harder to get out. But if he made a play to grab more turf and
make some quick money, he would find few allies and many enemies
among his fellow hustlers. It was not in their interest that he be allowed to
expand his business.
The more Curtis pondered the situation, the angrier he became. It
seemed to him that everywhere he turned, people were trying to get in his
way, restrain his ambitions, or tell him what to do. They pretended they
were trying to keep order, when in fact it was just about getting power for
themselves and holding on to it. In his experience, whenever he wanted
something in life, he couldn’t afford to be nice and submissive; he had to
get active and forceful. It would be natural for him to feel a little skittish,
coming fresh out of jail and trying to get his old life back together, but what
he really had to be afraid of was being stuck and settling for the corner
hustler’s life. Now was exactly the time to get aggressive, to be bad, and to
disrupt this system that was designed only to keep people like him down.
He thought back to the great hustlers he had known in the
neighborhood. One of their most successful strategies was the “setup,” a
variation on the old con game of bait and switch. You distract people with
something dramatic and emotional, and while they are not paying attention
to you, you grab what you want. He had seen it executed dozens of times,
and as he thought about it, he realized he had the material for the perfect
distraction.
While in rehab he had befriended the ringleader of a gang of Brooklyn
stickup artists. They were notorious for their efficiency and intimidating
presence. For the setup, Curtis would lay low for a few weeks, working a
corner like everyone else and appearing to go along with the new system.
He would then hire these stickup artists on the sly to rob all of the
neighborhood hustlers—including Curtis himself—of their jewelry, money,
and drugs. They would make several sweeps of the area over the course of a
few weeks. As part of the deal, they would keep the money and jewelry
from the robberies; Curtis would get the drugs. Nobody would suspect his
involvement.
In the weeks to come he watched with amusement as the sudden
appearance of the stickup artists in his neighborhood caused panic among
the hustlers, some of whom were his friends. He pretended to share their
distress. These Brooklyn gangstas were not to be messed with. Almost
overnight, the dealers’ whole way of life was disrupted: they were forced
now to carry guns for protection, but this created a new set of problems.
The police were everywhere, making random checks, and to be caught
loitering with a gun would mean solid prison time. The hustlers could no
longer simply stand on the street corner and wait for the drug fiends to
come to them. They had to keep in constant motion to avoid the police; for
some, getting called on their beepers was the only way to arrange a deal.
Everything became more complicated and business slowed down.
The old model, tight and static, had been exploded, and now Curtis
moved into the breach with some new-colored capsules he packaged and
sold to the fiends. Sometimes he included in the sales some free capsules,
which happened to be the drugs he had accumulated from the robberies.
The fiends began to flock to him, while the other hustlers were too upset to
notice the trick that had been played. By the time they had figured it out, it
was too late. Curtis had expanded his business and he was well on his way
to buying his freedom.
 
Several years later, Curtis (now known as 50 Cent) had carved out a path
towards a career as a rapper. He had a deal with Columbia Records and the
future looked reasonably bright. But Fifty was not one to be duped by the
usual dreams. He quickly saw that there was only so much room for the top
performers who could bank on a solid career in this business. He, along
with everyone else, was fighting for crumbs of attention; the artists might
get temporary success with a hit here or there, but it wouldn’t last, and they
had no power to alter the dynamic. What was worse, Fifty had made some
enemies in the business—he was an ambitious hustler with talent. There
were people who mistrusted and feared him. They worked behind the
scenes to make sure he would not get far in the industry.
As Fifty had learned, talent and good intentions are never enough in this
world; you need to be fearless and strategic. When you face people’s
indifference or outright hostility you have to get aggressive and push them
out of your way by any means necessary, and not worry about some people
disliking you. In this case he looked for any opportunity to make such a
bold move, and one evening a chance encounter provided this for him.
At a club in Manhattan, Fifty was talking with a friend from the
neighborhood when he saw the rapper Ja Rule staring in his direction.
Several weeks before, Fifty’s friend had robbed Ja Rule of some jewelry in
broad daylight; Fifty expected Ja to come over and cause some trouble.
Instead he looked away and decided to ignore them. This was rather
shocking. Ja Rule was then one of the hottest rappers in the business; he had
built his reputation on being a gangsta from Southside Queens, his lyrics
reflecting his tough-guy image. He and his record label, Murder Inc., had
allied themselves with Kenneth “Supreme” McGriff, former head of the
Supreme Team, a gang that had dominated the New York drug business in
the 1980s with its ruthless tactics. Supreme gave them street credibility, and
Murder Inc. gave Supreme an entrée into the music business, something
legitimate to distance himself from his dark past.
No real hustler or gangsta would ever ignore the man who had robbed
him so brazenly. What this meant to Fifty was that Ja was fake, his lyrics
and image all a show to make money. He was arrogant yet insecure. As he
contemplated this, the idea for a masterful setup took shape in his mind, one
that would draw attention and help catapult him past all of those who stood
in his way.
In the weeks to come Fifty began releasing diss tracks that took aim at
Ja Rule, painting him as a studio gangsta who rapped about things that he
had never experienced. Ja must have been annoyed but he did not respond
to Fifty’s taunts. He was clearly too big to concern himself with small fry.
Fifty’s next move, however, could not be ignored. He released a song that
detailed the activities of the most notorious gang leaders (including
Supreme) in Southside Queens in the 1980s. As the song became popular on
the streets, it brought Supreme the kind of attention he was trying to avoid,
now that he was going legitimate. This made him angry and suspicious—
what might Fifty do next? He pressured Ja Rule to go after and destroy this
upstart before he went too far.
Ja was now forced into going after him. He tried whatever he could to
shut Fifty up: he spread nasty rumors about Fifty’s past and attempted to
block any record deals he might have; at one point, finding Fifty in the
same recording studio he was at, Ja and his cohorts started a brawl. Ja
wanted to intimidate Fifty with his muscle and reputation, but this only
made Fifty increase the pace of diss tracks that he released. He wanted to
push all of Ja’s buttons—make him angry and insecure, burning for
revenge. He’d stay cool and strategic, while Ja would lose control. To this
purpose, he called Ja a “wanksta,” a wannabe gangsta. He parodied his
singing style, his lyrics, everything about his supposed tough-guy image.
The songs were hard driving, biting, and humorous.
Slowly but surely, Ja became more and more furious as these songs
made it to the radio and journalists peppered him with questions about Fifty.
He had to prove his toughness, that he was no wanksta, so he released his
own diss tracks. These songs were not witty, however, only violent and
vicious. Without realizing it, he had become defensive and not very
entertaining.
Fifty’s first record came out at about the same time as one of Ja’s, and
its sales far eclipsed those of his rival’s. Now he was the star and Ja began
to fade from the scene. Befitting his new role, Fifty stopped the attacks,
almost out of pity for his former rival. Ja had served his purpose and it was
better to leave him to oblivion.
The Fearless Approach
THE WAY I LEARNED IT, THE KID IN THE SCHOOL YARD WHO DOESN’T
WANT TO FIGHT ALWAYS LEAVES WITH A BLACK EYE. IF YOU INDICATE
YOU’LL DO ANYTHING TO AVOID TROUBLE, THAT’S WHEN YOU GET
TROUBLE.
—50 Cent
Life involves constant battle and confrontation. This comes on two levels.
On one level, we have desires and needs, our own interests that we wish to
advance. In a highly competitive world, this means we must assert
ourselves and even occasionally push people out of position to get our way.
On the other level, there are always people who are more aggressive than
we are. At some point they cross our path and try to block or harm us. On
both levels, playing offense and defense, we have to manage people’s
resistance and hostility. This has been the human drama since the beginning
of history and no amount of progress will alter this dynamic. The only thing
that has changed is how we handle these inevitable moments of friction in
our lives.
In the past, people had a greater taste for battle. We can read signs of
this in all kinds of social behavior. At the theater, for instance, it was
common practice for nineteenth-century audiences in Europe and America
to verbally express their disapproval of the actors or the play, yelling,
hissing, or throwing things onto the stage. Fights would often break out in
the theater over differences of opinion; it was not cause for concern but part
of the appeal. In political campaigns, it was accepted as normal that
partisans of various parties would confront each other in the streets over
their divergent interests. Democracy was considered vibrant by allowing
such public disagreements, a kind of safety valve for human aggression.
Now we tend to find the opposite. We are generally much more skittish
when it comes to confrontation. We often take it personally if someone
overtly disagrees with us or expresses an opinion contrary to our own. We
are also more afraid of saying something that could possibly offend those
around us, as if their egos were too fragile. The culture tends to elevate as
its ideal a spirit of cooperation; being democratic and fair means getting
along with others, fitting in, and not ruffling feathers. Conflict and friction
are almost evil; we are encouraged to be deferential and agreeable.
Nevertheless, the human animal retains its aggressive impulses and all that
happens is that many people channel this energy into passive-aggressive
behavior, which makes everything more complicated.
In such an atmosphere, we all pay a price. When it comes to the
offensive side of power, in which we are required to take forceful and
necessary action to advance our interests, we are often hesitant and
uncertain. When dealing with the aggressors and passive aggressors around
us we can be quite naive; we want to believe that people are basically
peaceful and desire the same things as ourselves. We often learn too late
that this is not the case. This inability to deal with what is inevitable in life
is the cause of so many problems. We work to postpone or avoid conflicts,
and when they reach a point where we can no longer play such a passive
game, we lack the experience and the habit of meeting them head on.
The first step in overcoming this is to realize that the ability to deal with
conflict is a function of inner strength versus fear, and that it has nothing to
do with goodness or badness. When you feel weak and afraid, you have the
sense that you cannot handle any kind of confrontation. You might fall apart
or lose control or get hurt. Better to keep everything smooth and even. Your
main goal then is to be liked, which becomes a kind of defensive shield. (So
much of what passes for good and nice behavior is really a reflection of
deep fears.)
What you want instead is to feel secure and strong from within. You are
willing to occasionally displease people and you are comfortable in taking
on those who stand against your interests. From such a position of strength,
you are able to handle friction in an effective manner, being bad when it is
appropriate.
This inner strength, however, does not come naturally. What is required
is some experience. This means that in your daily life you must assert
yourself more than usual—you take on an aggressor instead of avoiding
him; you strategize and push for something you want instead of waiting for
someone to give it to you. You will generally notice that your fears have
exaggerated the consequences of this kind of behavior. You are sending
signals to others that you have limits they cannot cross, that you have
interests you are willing to defend or advance. You will find yourself
getting rid of this constant anxiety about confronting people. You are no
longer tied to this false niceness that wears on your nerves. The next battle
will be easier. Your confidence in handling such moments of friction will
grow with each encounter.
In the hood, people don’t have the luxury of worrying about whether
people like them. Resources are limited; everyone is angling for power and
trying to get what they can. It is a rough game and there is no room for
being naive or waiting for good things to happen. You learn to take what
you need and feel no guilt about it. If you have dreams and ambitions, you
know that to realize them you have to get active, make some noise, bruise a
few people in your path. And you expect others to do the same to you. It is
human nature, and instead of complaining you simply must get better at
protecting yourself.
We all face a similar competitive dynamic—people all around us are
struggling to advance their interests. But because our fights are more subtle
and veiled, we tend to lose sight of the harsh aspects of the game. We are
often too trusting—in others, in a future that will bring good things. We
could use some of the toughness and realism that people who grow up in
pressurized environments have. A simple line can be drawn—we all have
ambitions and large goals for ourselves. We are either waiting for some
perfect moment to realize them, or we are taking action in the present. This
action requires some aggressive energy channeled in a smart manner and
the willingness to displease a person or two who gets in our way. If we are
waiting and settling for what we have, it is not because we are good and
nice but because we are fearful. We need to get rid of the fear and guilt we
might have for asserting ourselves. It serves no purpose except to keep us
down.
The fearless types in history have often had to face a lot of hostility in
their lives, and in doing so they invariably discover the critical role that
one’s attitude plays in thwarting people’s aggression. Look at Richard
Wright, the first bestselling African American writer in U.S. history. His
father abandoned his mother shortly after Wright’s birth in 1908, and
Wright knew only poverty and starvation as a child. His uncle, with whom
they lived, was lynched by a white mob, and his family (Wright and his
mother and brother) was forced to flee from Arkansas and wander across
the South. When his mother fell ill and became an invalid, he was shunted
from family to family, even spending time in an orphanage. The family
members who took him in, themselves poor and frustrated, beat him
incessantly. His classmates at school, sensing he was different (he liked to
read books and was shy), taunted and ostracized him. At work, his white
employers subjected him to endless indignities, such as beatings and
dismissals from the job for no apparent reason.
These experiences created in him intricate layers of fear. But as he read
more books about the wider world and thought more deeply, a different
spirit rose inside of him—a need to rebel and not accept the status quo.
When an uncle threatened to beat him over a triviality, he decided he had
had enough. Although just a child, he clutched two razor blades in his hands
and told the uncle he was prepared to go down fighting. He was never
bothered by that uncle again. Seeing the power he had with such an attitude,
he now made it something more calculated and under control. When
conditions at work became impossible, he would leave the job—a sign of
impertinence to the white employers, who spread word of this around town.
He didn’t care if people thought he was different—he was proud of it.
Feeling like he was going to be trapped in Jackson, Mississippi, for the rest
of his life and yearning to escape to the North, he became a criminal for the
first and last time in his life, stealing enough to pay his way out of town. He
felt more than justified in doing this.
This spirit permeated his life to the very end. As a successful writer now
living in Chicago, he felt that his novels were being misread by the white
public—they invariably found a way to soften his message about racial
prejudices, to see what they wanted to see in his work. He realized he had
been holding back, tailoring his words to appeal to them. He had to rise
again above this fear of pleasing others and write a book that could not be
misread, that would be as bleak as the life he had known. This became
Native Son, his most famous and successful novel.
What Wright had discovered was simple: when you submit in spirit to
aggressors or to an unjust and impossible situation, you do not buy yourself
any real peace. You encourage people to go further, to take more from you,
to use you for their own purposes. They sense your lack of self-respect and
they feel justified in mistreating you. When you are humble, you reap the
wages of humility. You must develop the opposite—a fighting stance that
comes from deep within and cannot be shaken. You force some respect.
This is how it is in life for everyone: people will take from you what
they can. If they sense that you are the type of person who accepts and
submits, they will push and push until they have established an exploitative
relationship with you. Some will do this overtly; others are more slippery
and passive aggressive. You must demonstrate to them that there are lines
that cannot be crossed; they will pay a price for trying to push you around.
This comes from your attitude—fearless and always prepared to fight. It
radiates outward and can be read in your manner without you having to
speak a word. By a paradoxical law of human nature, trying to please
people less will make them more likely in the long run to respect and treat
you better.
Keys to Fearlessness
[F]OR HOW WE LIVE IS SO FAR REMOVED FROM HOW WE OUGHT TO
LIVE, THAT HE WHO ABANDONS WHAT IS DONE FOR WHAT OUGHT TO BE
DONE, WILL RATHER LEARN TO BRING ABOUT HIS OWN RUIN THAN HIS
PRESERVATION. A MAN WHO WISHES TO MAKE A PROFESSION OF
GOODNESS IN EVERYTHING MUST NECESSARILY COME TO GRIEF
AMONG SO MANY WHO ARE NOT GOOD. THEREFORE IT IS NECESSARY
FOR A PRINCE, WHO WISHES TO MAINTAIN HIMSELF, TO LEARN HOW
NOT TO BE GOOD, AND TO USE THIS KNOWLEDGE AND NOT USE IT,
ACCORDING TO THE NECESSITY OF THE CASE.
—Niccolò Machiavelli
When it comes to morality, almost all of us experience a split in our
consciousness. On one hand, we understand the need to follow certain basic
codes of behavior that have been in place for centuries. We try our best to
live by them. On the other hand, we also sense that the world has become
infinitely more competitive than anything our parents or grandparents have
known. To get ahead in this world we must be willing to occasionally bend
that moral code, to play with appearances, to hedge the truth and make
ourselves look better, to manipulate a person or two to secure our position.
The culture at large reflects this division. It emphasizes values of
cooperation and decency, while titillating us constantly in the media with
endless stories of those who have risen to the top by being bad and ruthless.
We are both drawn to and repulsed by these stories.
This split creates an ambivalence and awkwardness in our actions. We
are not very good at being either good or bad. When we do the manipulative
acts that are necessary, it is with half a heart and some guilt. We are not sure
how to operate in this way—when to play the more aggressive role, or how
far to go.
The great sixteenth-century Florentine writer Niccolò Machiavelli
noticed a similar phenomenon in his day, on a different level. Italy had
splintered into several city-states that were constantly intriguing for power.
It was a dangerous, complicated environment for a leader. In facing a rival
state, a prince had to be extremely careful. He knew that these rivals would
do anything to advance their interests, including cutting deals with others to
isolate or destroy him. He had to be ready to attempt any kind of maneuver
to protect his state. At the same time he was imbued with Christian values.
He had to juggle two codes of behavior—one for private life and another
for the game of power. This made for awkwardness. Nobody really defined
the moral parameters for how to defend and advance his state. If he became
too aggressive, he would look bad on the world stage and suffer for it. If he
was too good and gentle, his state could be overrun by a rival, bringing
misery for his citizenry.
For Machiavelli, the problem wasn’t a leader adjusting his morality to
the circumstance—everyone does that. It was that he did not do it well. Too
often he would be aggressive when he needed to be cunning, or vice versa.
He would not recognize in time the once friendly state that was now
plotting against him, and his response would be too desperate. When a
venture succeeds, people tend to overlook some of the nasty tactics you
were forced to use; when a venture fails, those same tactics become
scrutinized and condemned.
A prince or leader must first and foremost be effective in his actions and
to do so he must master the art of knowing when and how to be bad. This
requires some fearlessness and flexibility. When the situation calls for it, he
must be the lion—aggressive and direct in protecting his state, or grabbing
something to secure its interests. At other times, he has to be the fox—
getting his way through crafty maneuvers that disguise his aggression. And
often he must play the lamb—the meek, deferential, and good creature
exalted in culture. He is bad in the right way, calibrated to the situation, and
careful to make his actions look justified to the public, reserving his nastier
tactics for behind the scenes. If he masters the art of being bad, he uses it
sparingly and he creates more peace and power for his citizens than the
awkward prince who tries to be too good.
This should be the model for us as well. We are all now princes
competing with thousands of rival “states.” We have our aggressive
impulses, our desires for power. These impulses are dangerous. If we act
upon them unconsciously or awkwardly, we can create endless problems for
ourselves. We must learn to recognize the situations that require assertive
(yet controlled) actions, and which mode of attack (fox or lion) is suitable.
The following are the most common foes and scenarios that you will
encounter in which some form of badness is required to defend or advance
yourself.
AGGRESSORS
By 1935, there were some on the left in the United States who had grown
discontented with President Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s reforms, known as
the New Deal. They believed these reforms were not working fast enough.
They decided to band together to form what would later be known as the
Union Party, to galvanize this discontent. They were going to run against
FDR in 1936, and the threat was very real that they would gain enough
support to throw the election to the Republicans. Within this group was
Huey Long, the great populist senator from Louisiana, and Father Charles
Coughlin, the Catholic priest who had a popular radio program. Their ideas
were vaguely socialistic and appealed to many who felt disenfranchised
during the Great Depression. Their attacks on FDR began to have effect; his
poll numbers went down. Feeling emboldened, they became even more
aggressive and relentless in their campaign.
In the midst of this, FDR remained mostly silent, letting them fill the air
with their charges and threats. His advisers panicked; they felt he was being
too passive. But for Roosevelt it was part of a plan—he felt certain that the
public would grow tired of their shrill attacks as the months went on; he
sensed that the factions within the Union Party would begin to fight among
themselves as the election neared. He ordered his surrogates to not attack
these men.
At the same time, he went to work behind the scenes. In Louisiana, he
fired as many Long supporters working for the government as possible and
replaced them with those on his side. He launched detailed investigations
into the senator’s dubious financial affairs. With Coughlin, he worked to
isolate him from other notable Catholic priests, making him look like a
fringe radical. He introduced laws that forced Coughlin to get an operating
permit to broadcast his shows; the government found reasons to deny his
requests and temporarily silenced him. All of this served to confuse and
frighten FDR’s foes. As he had predicted, the party began to splinter and the
public lost interest. Roosevelt won the 1936 election in an unprecedented
landslide.
FDR had understood the basic principle in squaring off against
aggressors who are direct and relentless. If you meet them head on, you are
forced to fight on their terms. Unless you happen to be an aggressive type,
you are generally at a disadvantage against those who have simple ideas
and fierce energy. It is best to fight them in an indirect manner, concealing
your intentions and doing what you can behind the scenes—hidden from the
public—to create obstacles and sow confusion. Instead of reacting, you
must give aggressors some space to go further with their attacks, getting
them to expose themselves in the process and provide you plenty of juicy
targets to hit. If you become too active and forceful in response, you look
defensive. You are playing the fox to their lion—remaining cool and
calculating, doing whatever you can to make them more emotional and
baiting them to fall apart through their own reckless energy.
PASSIVE AGGRESSORS
These types are masters at disguise. They present themselves as weak and
helpless, or highly moral and righteous, or friendly and ingratiating. This
makes them hard to pick out at first glance. They send all kinds of mixed
signals—alternating between friendly, cool, and hostile—creating confusion
and conflicting emotions. If you try to call them on their behavior, they use
this confusion to make you feel guilty, as if you were the one who was the
source of the problem. Once you are drawn into their dramas, with your
emotions engaged, it can be very difficult to detach yourself. The key is
recognizing them in time to take appropriate action.
When the Grand Duchess Catherine (future empress of Russia,
Catherine the Great) met her husband-to-be, Peter, she felt he was an
innocent child at heart. He continued to play with toy soldiers and had a
petulant, moody temperament. Then shortly after their marriage in 1745,
she began to detect a different side to his character. In private they got along
well enough. But then she would hear from secondhand sources all kinds of
nasty stories about how he had regretted their marriage and how he
preferred her chambermaid. What was she to believe—these stories or his
geniality when they were together? After he became Czar Peter III, he
would graciously invite Catherine to visit him in the morning, but then he
would ignore her. When the royal gardener stopped delivering her favorite
fruits, she found out it was on his orders. Peter was doing everything he
could to make her life miserable and humiliate her in subtle ways.
Fortunately Catherine figured out early on that he was a master
manipulator. His childish exterior was clearly there to distract attention
from his petty, vindictive core. His goal, she believed, was to bait her into
doing something rash that would give him an excuse to isolate or get rid of
her. She decided to bide her time, be as gracious as possible, and win over
some key allies in the court and the military, many of whom had come to
despise the czar.
Finally, certain of her allies’ support, she instigated a coup that would
get rid of him once and for all. When it became clear that the military had
sided with Catherine and that he was to be arrested, Peter started to beg and
plead with her: he would change his ways, and they would rule together.
She did not reply. He sent another message saying he would abdicate, if
only he could return peacefully to his own estate with his mistress. She
refused to bargain. He was arrested and soon thereafter murdered by one of
the coup intriguers, perhaps with the approval of the empress.
Catherine was a classic fearless type. She understood that with passive
aggressors you must not get emotional and drawn into their endless
intrigues. If you respond indirectly, with a kind of passive aggression
yourself, you play into their hands—they are better at this game than you
are. Being underhanded and tricky only spurs on their insecurities and
intensifies their vindictive nature. The only way to treat these types is to
take bold, uncompromising action that either discourages further nonsense
or sends them running away. They respond only to power and leverage.
Having allies higher up the chain can serve as a means of blocking them.
You are playing the lion to their fox, making them afraid of you. They see
there will be real consequences if they continue their behavior in any form.
To recognize such types, look for extremes in behavior that are not
natural—too kind, too ingratiating, too moral. These are most likely
disguises that are worn to deflect attention from their true nature. Better to
be proactive and take precautionary measures the moment you feel they are
trying to get into your life.
UNJUST SITUATIONS
Some time in the early 1850s, Abraham Lincoln came to the conclusion that
the institution of slavery was the great stain on our democracy and had to be
eliminated. But as he surveyed the political landscape he became
concerned: the politicians on the left were too noisy and righteous—in their
fervor to promote abolition, they would polarize the country and the
slaveholders could easily exploit these political divisions to maintain their
way of life for decades. Lincoln was the consummate realist—if your goal
is to end an injustice, you have to aim for results, and that requires being
strategic and even deceptive. To end slavery he would be willing to do
almost anything.
He decided he was the politician best suited for this cause. His first step
was to present a moderate front to the public in the 1860 campaign and after
his election to the presidency. He gave the impression that his main goal
was to maintain the Union and to gradually phase slavery out of existence
through a policy of containment. When war became inevitable in 1861, he
decided to lay a clever trap for the South, baiting them into an attack on
Fort Sumter that would force him to declare war. This made it seem that the
North was the victim of aggression. All of these maneuvers were designed
to keep his support in the North relatively unified—to oppose him was to
oppose his efforts to defeat the South and maintain the Union, the slavery
issue slipping into the background. This unified front on his side made it
almost impossible for the enemy to play political games.
As the tide of the war turned in favor of the North, he gradually shifted
to more radical positions (stated in the Emancipation Proclamation and his
Gettysburg Address), knowing he had more leeway to reveal his real goals
and act on them. Leading the North to victory in the war, he had even more
room to continue his campaign. In sum, to defeat slavery Lincoln was
prepared to publicly manipulate opinion by concealing his intentions, and to
practice outright deceit in his political maneuverings. This required great
fearlessness and patience on his part, as almost everyone misread his
intentions and criticized him as an opportunist. (Some still do.)
In facing an unjust situation, you have two options. You can loudly
proclaim your intentions to defeat the people behind it, making yourself
look good and noble in the process. But in the end, this tends to polarize the
public (you create one hardened enemy for every sympathizer won over to
the cause), and it makes your intentions obvious. If the enemy is crafty, this
makes it almost impossible to defeat them. Or, if it is results you are after,
you must learn instead to play the fox, letting go of your moral purity. You
resist the pull to get emotional, and you craft strategic maneuvers designed
to win public support. You shift your position to suit the circumstance,
baiting the enemy into actions that will win you sympathy. You conceal
your intentions. Think of it as war—short of unnecessary violence, you are
called to do whatever it takes to defeat the enemy. There is no nobility in
losing if an injustice is allowed to prevail.
STATIC SITUATIONS
In any venture, people quickly create rules and conventions that must be
followed. This is often necessary to instill some discipline and order. But
most often these rules and conventions are arbitrary—they are based on
something that was successful in the past but might have little relevance to
the present. They are often instruments for those in power to maintain their
grip and keep the group unified. If this goes on long enough, they become
stultifying and crowd out any new ways for doing things. In such a
situation, what is called for is the total destruction of these dead
conventions, creating space for something new. In other words you must be
the complete lion, as bad as can be.
This was how several important black jazz musicians—such as Charlie
Parker, Thelonious Monk, and Dizzy Gillespie—responded to the musical
conventions that had hardened in the early 1940s. From its more
freewheeling earlier days, jazz had become co-opted by white performers
and audiences. The sound that became popular—big band, swing—was
more controlled and regimented. To make any money in the business you
had to play by the rules and perform these popular genres. But even those
black musicians who followed the conventions were still paid considerably
less than their white counterparts. The only way around this oppressive
situation was to destroy it with a completely new sound, in this case with
something that later became known as bebop. This new genre went against
all the current conventions. The music was wild and improvisatory. As it
became popular, it gave these musicians some space to perform on their
own terms and some control over their careers. Now the static situation was
broken and the field was left open to the great jazz innovations of the 1950s
and ’60s.
In general, you must be less respectful of the rules that other people
have established. They do not necessarily fit the times or your temperament.
And there is great power to be had by being the one to initiate a new order.
IMPOSSIBLE DYNAMICS
Sometimes in life you find yourself in a negative situation that cannot be
improved no matter what you do. You might find yourself working for
people who are irrational. Their actions seem to serve no purpose apart
from imposing their power and making you miserable. Everything you do is
wrong. Or it could be a relationship in which you are constantly forced to
rescue a person. This usually involves types who present themselves as
weak victims in need of attention and assistance. They stir up a lot of drama
around them. No matter what you do, the need to be rescued keeps
recurring.
You can recognize this dynamic by your emotional need to somehow
solve the problem, mixed with your complete frustration in finding any kind
of reasonable answer. In truth the only viable solution is to terminate the
relationship—no arguing, no bargaining, no compromising. You leave the
job (there are always others); you leave the person who is tormenting you
with as much finality as possible. Resist the temptation to feel any guilt.
You need to create as much distance as possible, so they cannot inveigle
these emotions into you. They must become dead to you so you can go on
with your life.
Reversal of Perspective
The problem with confrontational moments, and why we often seek to
avoid them, is that they churn up a lot of unpleasant emotions. We feel
personally aggrieved that someone is trying to hurt or harm us. This makes
us wonder about ourselves and feel insecure. Did we deserve this in some
way? If we go through a few of these unpleasant moments, we become
increasingly skittish. But this is really a problem of perception. In our own
inner turmoil we tend to exaggerate the negative intentions of our
opponents. In general we take conflicts far too personally. People have
problems and traumas that they carry with them from their childhood on.
Most often when they do something to harm or block us, it really is not
directed at us personally. It comes from some unfinished business from the
past, or deep insecurities. We happen to cross their path at the wrong
moment.
It is essential that you develop the reverse perspective: life naturally
involves conflicting interests; people have their own issues, their own
agendas, and they collide with yours. Instead of taking this personally or
concerning yourself with people’s intentions, you must simply work to
protect and advance yourself in this competitive game, this bloody arena.
Focus your attention on their maneuvers and how to deflect them. When
you have to resort to something that isn’t conventionally moral, it is just
another maneuver you are executing in the game—nothing to feel guilty
about. You accept human nature and the idea that people will resort to
aggression. This calm, detached perspective will make it that much easier to
design the perfect strategy for blunting their aggression. With your
emotions unscathed by these battles, you will grow accustomed to them and
will even take some pleasure in fighting them well.
IN THE RING, OUR OPPONENTS CAN GOUGE US WITH THEIR NAILS OR
BUTT US WITH THEIR HEADS AND LEAVE A BRUISE, BUT WE DON’T
DENOUNCE THEM FOR IT OR GET UPSET WITH THEM OR REGARD THEM
FROM THEN ON AS VIOLENT TYPES. WE JUST KEEP AN EYE ON THEM…
NOT OUT OF HATRED OR SUSPICION. JUST KEEPING A FRIENDLY
DISTANCE. WE NEED TO DO THAT IN OTHER AREAS. WE NEED TO EXCUSE
WHAT OUR SPARRING PARTNERS DO, AND JUST KEEP OUR DISTANCE—
WITHOUT SUSPICION OR HATRED.
—Marcus Aurelius

CHAPTER 6
Lead from the Front—Authority
IN ANY GROUP, THE PERSON ON TOP CONSCIOUSLY OR UNCONSCIOUSLY
SETS THE TONE. IF LEADERS ARE FEARFUL, HESITANT TO TAKE ANY
RISKS, OR OVERLY CONCERNED FOR THEIR EGO AND REPUTATION,
THEN THIS INVARIABLY FILTERS ITS WAY THROUGH THE ENTIRE GROUP
AND MAKES EFFECTIVE ACTION IMPOSSIBLE. COMPLAINING AND
HARANGUING PEOPLE TO WORK HARDER HAS A COUNTERPRODUCTIVE
EFFECT. YOU MUST ADOPT THE OPPOSITE STYLE: IMBUE YOUR TROOPS
WITH THE PROPER SPIRIT THROUGH YOUR ACTIONS, NOT WORDS. THEY
SEE YOU WORKING HARDER THAN ANYONE, HOLDING YOURSELF TO
THE HIGHEST STANDARDS, TAKING RISKS WITH CONFIDENCE, AND
MAKING TOUGH DECISION. THIS INSPIRES AND BINDS THE GROUP
TOGETHER. IN THESE DEMOCRATIC TIMES, YOU MUST PRACTICE WHAT
YOU PREACH.
 
The Hustler King
NO MAN CAN PROPERLY COMMAND AN ARMY FROM THE REAR. HE
MUST BE AT THE FRONT…AT THE VERY HEAD OF THE ARMY. HE MUST BE
SEEN THERE, AND THE EFFECT OF HIS MIND AND PERSONAL ENERGY
MUST BE FELT BY EVERY OFFICER AND MAN PRESENT WITH IT….
—General William T. Sherman
By the spring of 1991, young Curtis Jackson had proved himself to be one
of the savviest hustlers in the neighborhood. His pool of repeat customers
had increased to a point where he had to hire his own crew to keep up with
their demand. But as he knew, nothing good ever lasts too long in the hood.
Just as Curtis was making plans to expand his business, an older hustler
named Wayne began to make threatening gestures towards him. Wayne had
recently returned to the streets from prison; he was determined to make as
much money as fast as possible and then dominate the local drug trade.
Curtis, it seemed, was his main rival. He tried to intimidate the younger
hustler, warning him that he better curtail his operations or pay a price.
Curtis ignored him. Then Wayne decided to up the ante: he sent out word on
the street that he was going to have Curtis killed.
Curtis had seen this happen before and he knew what would happen
next. Wayne would never do the job himself—he could not risk a return to
prison. Instead he was banking on the fact that some young kid would hear
of his desire to kill Curtis and, eager to gain some street credibility, would
take it upon himself to do the dirty work. Sure enough, a few days after
hearing of Wayne’s intentions, Curtis noticed a young kid named Nitty
trailing him on the streets. He felt certain that Nitty was the one planning to
do the hit, and it would happen soon.
This was the depressing dynamic of hustling in the hood: the more
success a hustler had, the more he attracted the wrong kind of attention.
Unless he inspired some fear and terror, rivals would keep coming at him,
trying to take what he had and continually threatening his position on the
streets. Once that started to happen, the once successful dealer would find
himself drawn into a cycle of violence, reprisals, and time in the pen.
There were a few hustlers, however, who had somehow managed to rise
above this dynamic. In the hood, they were like kings—just hearing their
names or seeing them on the street would elicit a gut reaction, a mix of
fright and admiration. What elevated them above others was a series of
actions they had taken in the past that demonstrated they were fearless and
smart. Their maneuvers would be unpredictable and all the more terrifying
for it. If people thought of challenging them, they would quickly remember
what these types had done in other circumstances and back off. All of this
would give them an aura of power and mystery. Instead of challengers on
all sides, they would have disciples ready to follow them as far as they
wanted. If Curtis saw himself as the kingly type, it was time now to show it
to others, as dramatically as possible.
With death staring him in the face, he worked to control his emotions
and thought long and hard about the dilemma that Wayne had posed. If he
came after Wayne to kill him first, Wayne would be ready and would have
the perfect excuse to kill Curtis in self-defense. If instead he went after
Nitty and killed him, the police would catch Curtis and he would end up in
prison for a long time, an equally fortunate result for Wayne. And if he did
nothing, Nitty would finish him off. But Wayne’s strategy had a fatal flaw
—his fear of doing the job with his own hands. He was no king himself, but
just another frightened hustler pretending to be tough. Curtis would come
after him from an unexpected angle and turn everything around.
Without wasting any more time, he asked a member of his crew named
Tony to accompany him that afternoon. Together they surprised Nitty on the
street, and while Tony held him, Curtis slashed the kid in the face with a
razor blade. He did it just deep enough to send him screaming to the
hospital, and to leave a nice scar for a while. Then a few hours later, he and
Tony found Wayne’s empty car and shot it up—an ambiguous message that
meant either they hoped he was inside, or they were taunting him to come
out and attack them in the open.
The following day, the dominoes fell just as Curtis thought they would.
Nitty sought out Wayne, expecting that the two of them would then go
together to exact revenge on Curtis—after all, Wayne had been attacked as
well. Wayne, however, still insisted the kid do it alone. Now Nitty could see
through the game—he was just the patsy to do the dirty work, and Wayne
was not as tough as he had made himself out to be. Nitty would have
nothing more to do with him, but he was also too afraid to take on Curtis by
himself. He decided he could live with the scar. Wayne was now in a
delicate position. If he asked someone else to do the job it would start to
look like what it was—a man too scared to do it himself. Better to let the
whole thing just go away.
In the days to come, the hood was abuzz with the story of what had
happened. Young Curtis had outmaneuvered and outsmarted the older rival.
Unlike the latter, he was unafraid to do the violence himself. What he had
done was bold and dramatic—it had come out of nowhere. Every time
people would see Nitty on the streets with the long scar on his face, they
were reminded of the incident. Rivals would now have to think twice before
challenging his status—he showed he was tough and crafty. And those in
his crew were duly impressed with his sangfroid and how he had turned the
situation around. They now saw him differently, as somebody who could
last in this jungle and was worth following.
Curtis followed this up with other similar actions, and slowly he
elevated himself above the other hustlers. Now there were younger ones
who looked up to him and would soon form the core of a devoted band of
disciples who would help him in his transition into music.
 
After the success of his first album in 2003, Curtis (now known as 50 Cent)
began to realize his dream of forging a business empire. But as this took
shape in the months and years to follow, he began to feel that something
was wrong. It would be natural to believe that with his current position and
fame, those working for him would simply follow his lead and do what he
wanted. But his whole life had been a lesson in the opposite—people
continually take from you; they doubt your powers and challenge you.
In this environment, his executives and managers were not trying to
take his money or his life, but rather he had the feeling they were nibbling
away at his power, trying to soften his image and make him more corporate
and predictable. If he let this go on, he would lose the only quality that
made him different—his propensity to take risks and do the unexpected. He
might become a safe investment, but he would no longer be a leader and a
creative force. In this world, you cannot relax and rest on your name, your
past achievements, your title. You have to fight to impose your difference
and compel people to follow your lead.
All of these thoughts became painfully clear to him in the summer of
2007. His third album, Curtis, was to be released in September of that year,
and everyone seemed to be asleep. The record label, Interscope, was acting
as if the album would sell itself. His management team had put together a
marketing campaign that he felt was too tame, passive, and corporate. They
were trying to control too much. Then one August afternoon, an employee
at G-Unit Records (Fifty’s own label within Interscope) told him that a
video from the upcoming album somehow just got leaked to the Internet. If
it spread, it would mess up the carefully orchestrated rollout of songs that
had been planned for that month. Fifty was the first to hear of this, and after
contemplating what to do next, he decided it was finally time to shake up
the dynamic, do the unpredictable, and play the part of the hustler king.
He called into his office his radio and Internet team at G-Unit. Instead
of working to contain the viral spread of the video—the usual response to
such a problem and what management would advocate—he ordered them to
surreptitiously leak it to other sites and let it spread like wildfire.
On top of this move, they created the following story to tell journalists
for public consumption: When Fifty heard of the leak, he flew into a wild
rage. He threw his phone at the window with such force he cracked it. He
tore the plasma TV off the wall and smashed it into pieces. He left the
building in a fit, and the last thing they heard him yelling was that he was
shutting it all down and going on vacation. That evening, on Fifty’s orders,
they had the maintenance man for the building take pictures of the damage
(all faked for this purpose), and then “leaked” the photos to the Internet.
They were to keep all of this a secret—not even management was to know
that this drama was completely manufactured.
In the days to come Fifty watched with satisfaction as this story spread
everywhere. Interscope was awakened from its slumber. Management was
sent the message that he was now in command—if he refused to do any
more publicity, as he had threatened, their whole campaign was doomed.
They had to follow his lead here and let him set the tone for the publicity,
which meant something more aggressive and fluid. Among Fifty’s
executives and employees, word spread quickly of what had supposedly
happened—his reputation for being unpredictable and violent brought to
life. When they now saw him in the offices, they felt a twinge of fear. Better
to pay attention to what he wanted than risk witnessing his anger. And for
the public, this was just the kind of story they expected from the thug
rapper. It compelled their attention. They could laugh at his out-of-control
antics, not realizing that it was Fifty, directing the drama, who would have
the last laugh.
The Fearless Approach
WHEN I REACHED THE TOP IN BUSINESS, I ADJUSTED TO MY NEW
POSITION—I BECAME BOLDER AND CRAZIER THAN BEFORE. AND I
LISTENED EVEN LESS TO PEOPLE WHO TRIED TO SLOW ME DOWN.
—50 Cent
Throughout history we have witnessed the following pattern: certain people
stand out from the crowd because of some special skill or talent that they
have. Perhaps they are masters at the political game, knowing how to charm
and win the proper allies. Or maybe they have superior technical knowledge
in their field. Or maybe they are the ones who initiate some bold venture
that has success. In any event, these types suddenly find themselves in
leadership positions, something for which their past experience and
education has not prepared them.
Now they are alone and on the top, their every decision and action
scrutinized by the group and the public. The pressures can be intense. And
what inevitably happens is that many of them unconsciously succumb to all
kinds of fears. Whereas before they might have been bold and creative, now
they grow cautious and conservative, aware of the heightened stakes.
Secretly scared of being held accountable for the success of the group, they
over-delegate, poll everyone for their opinions, or refrain from making the
hard decisions. Or they become excessively dictatorial, trying to control
everything—another sign of weakness and insecurity. It is the story of great
senators who make lousy presidents, bold lieutenants who turn into
mediocre generals, or top-level managers who become incompetent
executives.
And yet among the group there are inevitably a few who demonstrate
the opposite—they rise to the position, displaying extraordinary leadership
skills that no one had suspected were in them. We find in this group people
like Napoleon Bonaparte, Mahatma Gandhi, and Winston Churchill. What
links these people together is not some mysterious skill or bit of knowledge,
but rather a quality of character, a temperament that reveals the essence of
the art. They are fearless. They do not shrink from making the hard
decisions by themselves—instead they seem to relish such responsibility.
They do not suddenly become more conservative, but in fact show a
propensity for bold action. They exhibit tremendous grace under fire.
Such types come to understand in various ways that a leader has a
unique power that generally goes untapped. Any group tends to assume the
spirit and energy of the person on top. If that person is weak and passive,
then the group tends to splinter into factions. If such leaders lack
confidence, their insecurities tend to filter their way down the line. Their
nervous, fretful moods put everyone on edge. But there is always the
opposite possibility. A leader who is audacious, out in front, and setting the
tone and agenda for the group sparks a higher energy level and confidence.
Such a person on top does not need to yell or push people around; those
below want to follow his or her lead because it is strong and inspiring.
In war, where leadership skills are more immediately apparent and
necessary because lives are at stake, we can distinguish two leadership
styles—from behind or from the front. The former type of general likes to
stay in his tent or headquarters and bark out orders, feeling that having such
distance makes it easier to command. This style can also mean involving
lieutenants and other generals in important decisions, choosing to lead by
committee. In both cases, the commander is trying to hide himself from
scrutiny, accountability, and danger. The greatest generals in history,
however, are invariably those who lead from the front and by themselves.
They can be seen by the troops at the head of the army, exposing
themselves to the same fate as any foot soldier. The Duke of Wellington
said that the mere appearance of Napoleon Bonaparte at the head of his
army translated into the equivalent of an additional forty thousand men. A
kind of electrical charge passes through the troops—he is sharing in their
sacrifices, leading by example. It has almost religious connotations.
We notice the same two styles in business and politics as well. The
executives who lead from behind will always try to disguise it as a virtue:
the need for secrecy, or their desire to be more fair and democratic. But it
really stems from fear and it invariably leads to a lack of respect from those
below. The opposite style, leading from the front and by example, has the
same power in the office as it does on the battlefield. Leaders who work
harder than anyone else, who practice what they preach, who are not afraid
to be accountable for tough decisions or to take risks, will find they have
created a well of respect that will pay great dividends down the road. They
can ask for sacrifices, punish troublemakers, and make occasional mistakes
all without facing the usual grumbling and doubts. They don’t have to yell,
complain, and force their men and women to follow. People do so willingly.
In urban environments such as Southside Queens, respect is an
extremely important issue. In other places, your background, education, or
résumé might lend you some authority and credibility, but not in the hood.
There, everyone starts from zero. To gain respect from your peers, you must
repeatedly prove yourself. People are constantly prone to doubting your
abilities and your power. You must show again and again that you have
what it takes to thrive and to last. Big words and promises mean nothing;
only actions carry weight. If you are authentic, as tough as you seem to be,
then you will earn the respect that will make people back off and make your
life that much easier.
This should be your perspective as well. You start with nothing in this
world. Any titles, money, or privilege you inherit are actually hindrances.
They delude you into believing you are owed respect. If you continue to
impose your will because of such privileges, people will come to disdain
and despise you. Instead only your actions can prove your worth. They tell
people who you are. You must imagine that you are continually being
challenged to show that you deserve the position you occupy. In a culture
full of fakery and hype, you will stand out as someone authentic and worthy
of respect.
The greatest leaders in history all inevitably learned by experience the
following lesson: it is much better to be feared and respected than to be
loved. As a prime example, look at the film director John Ford, the man
behind some of the greatest films in Hollywood history. The task of film
directors can be particularly difficult. They have to deal with large crews,
actors with their delicate egos, and dictatorial producers who want to
meddle every step of the way, all the while being under extreme time limits
and with large amounts of money at stake. The tendency for directors is to
give ground on these various battlefields—to placate and cajole the actors,
to let the producers have their way here and there, to gain some cooperation
by being pleasant and likable.
Ford was by nature a sensitive and empathetic man, but he learned that
if he revealed this side of his personality he quickly lost control over the
final product. The actors and producers would begin to assert themselves
and the film would lose any sense of cohesion. He noticed that the
notoriously nice directors never really lasted very long—they were pushed
around and their films were lousy. Early on in his career he decided he
would have to forge a kind of mask for himself—that of a man who was
implacable and even a bit frightening.
On the set, he made it clear he was not the usual prima donna director.
He would work longer hours than anyone. If they were filming on some
location with harsh conditions, he would sleep in a tent like everyone else
and share their bad food. On occasion he would get into violent fistfights on
the set, most often with his leading actors, such as John Wayne. These
fights were not for show; they were bruising and he engaged in them with
all his strength, making the actors fight back with equal force. This would
set a tone—an actor would tend to feel embarrassed by engaging in his
usual prissy behavior and ego tantrums. Everyone was treated the same.
Even the archduke of Austria—trying to carve out a career as a Hollywood
actor—was yelled at and pushed into a ditch by Ford himself.
He had a unique way of directing actors. He would say only a few, well-
chosen words about what he wanted from them. Then, if they did the wrong
thing on the set, he would brutally humiliate them in front of everyone.
They quickly learned they had to pay attention to the few words he spoke
and to his body language on the set, which would often tell more. They had
to raise their levels of concentration and bring even more of themselves into
the part. Once, when the famous producer Samuel Goldwyn visited the set,
he told Ford he just wanted to watch him work (a producer’s way of spying
and applying pressure). Ford didn’t say a word. The next day, however, he
visited Goldwyn in his office and just sat silently in the chair by Goldwyn’s
desk, glaring at him. After a while Goldwyn, exasperated, asked him what
he was doing. He just wanted to watch Goldwyn work, Ford answered.
Goldwyn never visited him again on the set and quickly learned to give him
his space.
All of this had a strange and paradoxical effect on the cast and crew.
They came to love working for John Ford and would die to gain a place
among his exclusive team of return staff. His standards were so high, it
forced them to work harder—he made them superior actors and technicians.
An occasional nice gesture or compliment on his part carried double the
weight and would be remembered for a lifetime. The end results of his
tough and unforgiving manner was that he managed to maintain a higher
degree of control over the final product than most other directors, and his
films were consistently of the highest quality. Nobody dared to challenge
his authority and he lasted in Hollywood as the king of Westerns and action
films for well over forty years—an unprecedented achievement in the
industry.
Understand: to be a leader often requires making tough choices, getting
people to do things against their will. If you have chosen the soft, pleasing,
compliant style of leadership, out of fear of being disliked, you will find
yourself with less and less room to compel people to work harder or make
sacrifices. If you suddenly try to be tough, they often feel wounded and
personally upset. They can move from love to hate. The opposite approach
yields the opposite result. If you build a reputation for toughness and
getting results, people might resent you, but you will establish a foundation
of respect. You are demonstrating genuine qualities of leadership that speak
to everyone. Now with time and a well-founded authority, you have room to
back off and reward people, even to be nice. When you do so, it will be
seen as a genuine gesture, not an attempt to get people to like you, and it
will have double the effect.
Keys to Fearlessness
FOR IT IS A GENERAL RULE OF HUMAN NATURE THAT PEOPLE DESPISE
THOSE WHO TREAT THEM WELL AND LOOK UP TO THOSE WHO MAKE
NO CONCESSIONS.
—Thurydides
Thousands of years ago, our most primitive ancestors formed groups for
power and protection. But as these groups got larger, they encountered a
problem with human nature that plagues us to this day. Individuals have
different levels of talent, ambition, and assertiveness; their interests do not
necessarily converge on all points. When it comes to the important
decisions upon which the fate of the tribe hangs, the members will often
think of their own narrow agendas. A group of humans is always on the
verge of splintering into a chaos of divergent interests.
For this purpose, leaders were chosen to make the hard decisions and
end all the dissension. But the members of the tribe would inevitably feel
ambivalence towards their leaders. They saw the necessity for them and the
respect that should be paid to their authority, but they feared that their
chieftains and kings would accumulate too much power and oppress them.
They often wondered why this particular person or family deserved such a
lofty position. In many ancient cultures, the king was ritually put to death
after a few years to ensure he would not turn into an oppressor. In more
advanced ancient civilizations, there were constant rebellions against those
in power—much more intense and numerous than anything we have known
in the modern era.
Of all the leaders in ancient times who had to deal with such difficulties,
none stands out more than Moses. He had been chosen by God to lead the
Hebrews out of slavery in Egypt and to the Promised Land. Although the
Hebrews suffered in Egypt, they had relative security. Moses wrested them
from this predictable life and set them to wander for forty years in the
wilderness, where they were plagued by a lack of food, shelter, and basic
comforts. They constantly doubted Moses and even came to hate him—
some plotting to kill him, as the king who needed to be sacrificed. They saw
him as an oppressor and madman. To aid his cause, God would perform
regular miracles to show that Moses was chosen and blessed, but these
miracles were quickly forgotten and the Hebrews kept resorting to their
endless complaining and recalcitrance.
To overcome the seemingly impossible obstacles in his path, Moses
resorted to a unique solution: he united the twelve constantly divided tribes
around a single, simple cause—one God to worship, and the attainable goal
of reaching the Promised Land. He was not there for power or glory but
merely to lead them to this much-desired goal. Moses could not afford to
absent himself for a day or two, or to ease up on his leadership. The tribes
were continually prone to doubt him and forget the larger picture, the
reason for their suffering. The Hebrew word for “lead” means to be out in
front, to drive. He had to be out there constantly in the vanguard, unifying
them around his vision of the Promised Land. This meant being ruthless
with internal dissenters, putting whole families to death that stood in the
way of the larger cause.
In essence, Moses learned to play a role for the Hebrews—the man who
is possessed of a vision from God, indomitable in spirit, and acting for the
greater good. A normal tribe member would have to ask him- or herself if
this Promised Land was not something that existed merely in Moses’s mind.
But the force of his conviction and the determination to lead people to the
Promised Land made it hard to doubt him. He had to play this role to the
hilt to convince them his top position was legitimate and sanctioned by
God. His ability to lead such a fractious group for some forty years has to
be considered the greatest masterpiece of leadership in history.
We moderns believe we have moved far beyond our primitive, tribal
origins. After all, we live in a secular, rational world. A leader today needs
to possess certain technical and managerial skills. But three thousand years
of civilization have not altered human nature, and in fact the endless
difficulties that plagued such leaders as Moses have become only more
acute. Whereas before we humans might think first of the tribe, we now
think primarily of ourselves, our careers, and our narrow interests. Office
politics is the extreme endpoint of this trend.
We are now more distracted than ever, with thousands of bits of
information competing for our attention in the course of a day. This makes
us less patient and capable of seeing the larger picture. If we were being led
out of slavery, we would not be able to focus on the Promised Land for
more than a few minutes. We are much more skeptical when it comes to
those in authority. We still feel the ancient ambivalence towards rulers;
instead of sacrificing them, we feed them to the press and secretly gloat in
their downfall. To be a leader now means overcoming these aspects of
human nature while still seeming to be fair and decent—an almost
impossible task.
At the same time, however, people feel this division and selfishness as a
depressing phenomenon. They desperately want to believe in a cause, to
work for the greater good, to follow a leader who imbues them with a sense
of purpose. They are more than receptive to the kind of quasi-religious
leadership that Moses embodies. As the one on top, you must rid yourself of
your modern prejudices, your fetishism of technical means. To be a leader
still means that you are playing a role, out in front, fearlessly driving the
group forward. If you fail to unify the group around some glorious cause,
some equivalent of the Promised Land, then you will find that you are
having to push and pull your followers, who are constantly splitting up into
factions. Instead you must assume a prophetic air, as if you were merely
chosen to lead them towards some higher goal. You are compelling them to
follow on their own, making less a show of personal power and more a
demonstration of the cause that unites them all. This will give you the
proper authority to lead and an aura of power.
To master the art of leadership you must see yourself as playing certain
parts that will impress your disciples and make them more likely to follow
you with the necessary enthusiasm. The following are the four main roles
you must learn to perform.
THE VISIONARY
By the beginning of the twentieth century, Thomas Alva Edison was seen as
America’s preeminent inventor and scientist. His research labs were the
source of some of the most important technological breakthroughs of the
time. But the truth is that Edison himself had only a few months of formal
education and was not really a scientist at all. Instead he was a mix of
visionary, strategist, and shrewd businessman.
His method was simple: he scoured the globe, looking at all of the latest
advances in science and technology. With his understanding of business and
the latest social trends, he thought long and hard about how some of these
advances could be translated into products with great commercial appeal,
that could transform how people lived—electricity lighting up cities,
improved telephones altering the course of commerce, motion pictures
entertaining the masses. He would then hire the best minds in these fields to
bring to life his ideas. Every product that came through his lab was
inevitably stamped with Edison’s particular vision and sense of marketing.
Understand: a group of any size must have goals and long-term
objectives to function properly. But human nature serves as a great
impediment to this. We are naturally consumed by immediate battles and
problems; we find it very difficult, if not unnatural, to focus with any depth
on the future. Thinking ahead requires a particular thought process that
comes with practice. It means seeing something practical and achievable
several years down the road, and mapping out how this goal can be
achieved. It means thinking in branches, coming up with several paths to
get there, depending on circumstances. It means being emotionally attached
to this idea, so that when a thousand distractions and interruptions seem to
push you off course, you have the strength and purpose to keep at it.
Without one person on top who charts the way to this larger goal, the
group will wander here and there, grasping at schemes for quick money, or
be moved by the narrow political aspirations of one member or another. It
will never accomplish anything great. You as the leader are the only
bulwark against this endless wandering. You must have the strength to
stamp the group with your own personality and vision, giving it a core and
an identity. If you lose sight of the larger picture, then only bad things will
ensue.
You must play this visionary role with some dramatic flair, like Edison
who was a consummate performer and promoter. He would give dazzling
presentations of his ideas, and stage events to get on the front page of
newspapers. Like Moses describing the Promised Land, he could paint an
alluring picture of the future that his inventions would help create. This
drew in money from investors and inspired his researchers to work even
harder. Your own level of excitement and self-belief will convince people
that you know where you are going and should be followed.
THE UNIFIER
When Louis XIV began ruling France in 1661, he inherited an almost
impossible situation. The feudal dukes and lords of France maintained tight
control over their various realms. Recent ministers such as the Duke de
Richelieu and Cardinal Mazarin had made most of the important decisions
that lay outside the control of the lords. The king had been mostly a
figurehead, presiding over a deeply fractured country whose power in
Europe had been on the decline for quite some time.
Louis was determined to reverse all of this, and his method was
powerful and dramatic. At first he kept his intentions to himself, and then
suddenly he announced to one and all that he would not appoint a minister
to run the country—from now on that would be his task. Next, he ordered
the aristocracy to take up residence in the palace of Versailles that he had
recently constructed. The closer they lived to him in the palace, the more
influence they would have; if they remained in their duchies, to conspire
against him, they would find themselves isolated from the new center of
power he had created.
His most brilliant maneuver, however, was the most subtle one of all.
He created a cause for the French people to believe in—the greatness and
glory of France itself, which had as its mission to be the center of
civilization and refinement, the model for all of Europe. For this purpose,
he led the country into various wars to extend France’s political might. He
became the preeminent patron of the arts, making France the cultural envy
of Europe. He created impressive spectacles to delight and distract the
public from his power moves. The nobility were not fighting for Louis but
for the greatness of the nation. In this way, he transformed a deeply divided,
almost chaotic country into the supreme power of Europe.
Understand: the natural dynamic of any group is to splinter into
factions. People want to protect and promote their narrow interests, so they
form political alliances from within. If you force them to unite under your
leadership, stamping out their factions, you may take control but it will
come with great resentment—they will naturally suspect you are increasing
your power at their expense. If you do nothing, you will find yourself
surrounded by lords and dukes who will make your job impossible.
A group needs a centripetal force to give it unity and cohesion but it is
not enough to have that be you and the force of your personality. Instead it
should be a cause that you fearlessly embody. This could be political,
ethical, or progressive—you are working to improve the lives of people in
your community, for instance. This cause elevates your group above others.
It has a quasi-religious aura to it, a kind of cult feeling. Now, to fight or
doubt you from within is to stand against this cause and seem selfish. The
group, infused with this belief system, will tend to police itself and root out
troublemakers. To play this role effectively, you must be a living example
of this cause, much as Louis exemplified the civilizing power of France in
his own carefully crafted behavior.
THE ROLE MODEL
You cannot control a large group on your own. You will turn into a
micromanager or dictator, making yourself exhausted and hated. You need
to develop a team of lieutenants who are infused with your ideas, your
spirit, and your values. Once you have such a team, you can give them
latitude to operate on their own, learning for themselves and bringing their
own creativity to the cause.
This is the system that Napoleon Bonaparte initiated and has since been
imitated by the greatest generals of the modern era. He would give his field
marshals a clear sense of the goals for a particular campaign or battle, what
has become known as the “mission statement.” They were then empowered
to reach those goals on their own, in their own way. All that mattered were
the results. The idea behind it is that those who are fighting on the ground
often have a better sense of what needs to be done in the here and now; they
have more information at their fingertips than the leader. With a degree of
trust in their decisions, they can operate fast and feel more engaged in the
execution of the war. This revolutionary system allowed Napoleon’s army
to move with greater speed and to cultivate a team of highly experienced
and brilliant field marshals. And it took great courage on his part to trust in
them and not try to control everything on the battlefield.
Operating with a mission statement is an effective way of softening
your image and disguising the extent of your power. You are seen as more
than just a leader; you are a role model, instructing, energizing, and
inspiring your lieutenants. In crafting this team, look for people who share
your values and are open to learning. Do not be seduced by a glittering
résumé. You want them near you, to absorb your spirit and ways of doing
things. Once you feel they have the proper training, you must not be afraid
to let go of the reins and give them more independence. In the end, this will
save you much energy and allow you to continue focusing on the greater
strategic picture.
THE BOLD KNIGHT
Every group has a kind of collective energy, and on its own this will tend
towards inertia. This comes from people’s powerful desires to keep things
comfortable, easy, and familiar. Over time, in any group, conventions and
protocol will assume greater importance and govern people’s behavior. The
larger the group, the more conservative it will tend to become, and the
greater this force of inertia. The paradox is that this defensive, passive
posture has a depressing effect on morale, much like sitting in one place for
too long will lower your spirits.
More than likely you rose to the top by virtue of your boldness and
desperate desire to get ahead. You took risks that made you rise to the
occasion with all of your energy and creativity, and this fearless spirit
attracted positive attention. The group inertia will naturally tend to tamp all
of that down and neutralize the source of your power.
Since you are the leader, you are the one who can alter this and set a
pace that is more alive and active. You remain the bold and enterprising
knight. You force yourself to initiate new projects and domains to conquer;
you take proactive measures against possible dangers on the horizon; you
seize the initiative against your rivals. You keep your group marching and
on the offensive. This will excite them and give them a feeling of
movement. You are not taking unnecessary risks, but simply adding a dash
of aggression to your normally staid group. They become used to seeing
you out in front and grow addicted to the excitement you bring with each
new campaign.
Reversal of Perspective
We live in times of great mistrust of any form of authority. Some of this
springs from envy of those who have power and have achieved something.
Some of it comes from experiences with people who abuse their position of
power to get their way. In any event, such distrust makes it harder and
harder to be a strong and effective leader. Under the sway of this leveling
force, you yourself might be tempted to act with less authority, to be more
like everyone else, or to make yourself likable. This will only make your
job that much harder. Instead it is better that you see the whole concept of
authority in a different light.
The word “authority” comes from the Latin root autore, meaning author
—a person who creates something new. This could be a work of art, a new
way of operating in the world, or new values. The health of any society
depends on those who infuse it with such innovations. These works or
actions by individuals give them credibility and authority to do more. The
great Roman general Scipio Africanus the Elder invented a whole new style
of warfare in the campaign against Hannibal that was tremendously
successful. This gave him the authority to lead the campaign itself, and later
to launch a political career. For the Romans, if you simply acted as if your
position entitled you to certain powers, you lost your authority. You were no
longer an author, a contributor, but a passive consumer of power.
As a leader this is how you must view yourself as well. You are an
author creating a new order, writing a new act in some drama. You never
rest on your laurels or past achievements. Instead you are constantly taking
action that moves the group forward and brings positive results; that record
speaks for itself. Despite the spirit of the times, people have a secret
yearning to be guided by a firm hand, by someone who knows where they
are going. It is distressful to always feel distracted and wandering. The
members of your group will give you the respect and authority you require
if you earn it as an author and creator. In the end, if people mistrust and
resist your authority, you really have only yourself to blame.
A DISTINGUISHED COMMANDER WITHOUT BOLDNESS IS UNTHINKABLE.
NO MAN WHO IS NOT…BOLD CAN PLAY SUCH A ROLE, AND THEREFORE
WE CONSIDER THIS QUALITY THE FIRST PREREQUISITE OF THE GREAT
MILITARY LEADER. HOW MUCH OF THIS QUALITY REMAINS BY THE
TIME HE REACHES SENIOR RANK, AFTER TRAINING AND EXPERIENCE
HAVE AFFECTED AND MODIFIED IT, IS ANOTHER QUESTION. THE
GREATER THE EXTENT TO WHICH IT IS RETAINED, THE GREATER THE
RANGE OF HIS GENIUS.
—Carl bon Clausewitz

CHAPTER 7
Know Your Environment from the Inside Out—
Connection
MOST PEOPLE THINK FIRST OF WHAT THEY WANT TO EXPRESS OR
MAKE, THEN FIND THE AUDIENCE FOR THEIR IDEA. YOU MUST WORK
THE OPPOSITE ANGLE, THINKING FIRST OF THE PUBLIC. YOU NEED TO
KEEP YOUR FOCUS ON THEIR CHANGING NEEDS, THE TRENDS THAT ARE
WASHING THROUGH THEM. BEGINNING WITH THEIR DEMAND, YOU
CREATE THE APPROPRIATE SUPPLY. DO NOT BE AFRAID OF PEOPLE’S
CRITICISMS—WITHOUT SUCH FEEDBACK YOUR WORK WILL BE TOO
PERSONAL AND DELUSIONAL. YOU MUST MAINTAIN AS CLOSE A
RELATIONSHIP TO YOUR ENVIRONMENT AS POSSIBLE, GETTING AN
INSIDE “FEEL” FOR WHAT IS HAPPENING AROUND YOU. NEVER LOSE
TOUCH WITH YOUR BASE.
 
Hood Economics
I KNEW THAT THE GHETTO PEOPLE KNEW THAT I NEVER LEFT THE
GHETTO IN SPIRIT, AND I NEVER LEFT IT PHYSICALLY ANY MORE THAN I
HAD TO. I HAD A GHETTO INSTINCT; FOR INSTANCE, I COULD FEEL IF
TENSION WAS BEYOND NORMAL IN A GHETTO AUDIENCE. AND I COULD
SPEAK AND UNDERSTAND THE GHETTO’S LANGUAGE.
—Malcolm X
Starting out as a drug dealer at the age of twelve, Curtis Jackson faced an
unfamiliar world that contained all kinds of dangers. The business side of
hustling was relatively easy to figure out. It was the people, the various
actors in the game—the rival hustlers, the big-time dealers, the police—
who could be tricky. But strangest and most impenetrable of all was the
world of the drug users themselves, the clientele upon which his business
depended. Their behavior could be erratic and even downright frightening.
With rival hustlers and the police, Curtis could get inside their way of
thinking because they all operated with a degree of rationality. But the drug
fiends seemed to be dominated by their needs, and they could turn
unfriendly or violent at any moment. Many dealers developed a kind of
phobia of the fiends. They saw in them the weaknesses and dependence that
could befall anyone who succumbed to addiction. The hustler relies on his
razor-sharp mind; to even flirt with drug use could destroy such power and
lead him down the slippery slope towards dependence. If he was around the
fiends too much he could become a user himself. Curtis understood this and
kept his distance from them, but this aspect of hustling bothered him.
On one particular occasion, the fiends were suddenly avoiding him and
he could not figure out why. All he knew was that he could not sell a batch
of drugs that he had on consignment. Under such an arrangement, a higher-
up source, or connect, had given him the drugs for free; once he sold the
entire lot, he would return a specified amount of the earnings to the connect
and keep the rest as profit. But in this instance it looked like he would not
make nearly enough to pay back the connect. That could prove damaging to
his reputation and lead to all kinds of trouble; he might have to steal to get
the money.
Feeling somewhat desperate, he went into full hustling mode, working
night and day, offering all kinds of discounts, whatever it took to unload the
drugs. He managed to make back just enough, but it was a close call.
Perhaps the quality of the batch he was selling was inferior, but how could
he tell beforehand and how could he prevent this from happening again and
again?
One day he sought the advice of a man named Dre, an older hustler who
had lasted an unusually long time dealing drugs on the streets. He was
considered a sharp businessman (in prison, he had studied economics on his
own), and he seemed to have an especially good rapport with the fiends.
Dre explained to Curtis that in his experience there are two kinds of hustlers
in this world—those who stay on the outside, and those who move to the
inside. The outside types never bother to learn anything about their
customers. It’s just about money and numbers. They have no concept of
psychology or the nuances of people’s needs and demands. They’re afraid
of getting too close to the customer—that might force them to reassess their
ideas and methods. The superior hustler moves to the inside. He’s not afraid
of the fiends; he wants to find out what’s going on in their heads. Drug
users are no different from anyone else. They have phobias and bouts of
boredom and a whole inner life. Because you remain on the outside, he told
Curtis, you don’t see any of this and your hustling is purely mechanical and
dead.
To raise your game, he explained, you have to first put into practice one
of the oldest hustling tricks in the book—the “tester.” What this means is
the following: whenever you get a batch of drugs, you separate a portion of
it to give out for free to certain fiends. They tell you right there on the spot
whether the stuff is good or bad. If their feedback is positive, they will
spread the word through their own networks, and such reports are so much
more credible, coming from a fellow user, than reports from a hustler
hyping his own stuff. If the feedback is negative, you will have to adjust
and find some way to cut it, to offer “illusions” (apparent two for one deals,
with the capsules simply loaded with dust), whatever it takes to unload it.
But you must always operate with feedback on the quality of your product.
Otherwise you will not survive on these streets.
Once you have this system in place, you use it to cultivate relationships
with your most reliable fiends. They supply you with valuable information
about any kind of change in tastes that are happening. Talking to them you
get all kinds of ideas for marketing schemes and new angles for hustling.
You gain a feel for how they think. From this inside position, the whole
game explodes into something creative and alive with possibility.
Curtis quickly incorporated this system and soon discovered that the
drug fiends were not at all as he had imagined. They became erratic only
when you were not consistent in your dealings with them. They valued
convenience and fast transactions, wanted something new every now and
then, and loved the thought of any kind of deal. With this growing body of
knowledge he could play to their needs and manipulate their demand. He
discovered something else—spending much of their time on the streets,
they were a great source of information about what was going on with the
police, or the weaknesses of rival hustlers. Knowing so much about the
neighborhood gave him a feeling of great power. Later he would translate
this same strategy to music and his mix-tape campaign on the streets of
New York. Maintaining a close connection to the tastes of his fans, he
would alter his music to their responses and create the kind of sound that
had a visceral appeal, something they had never heard before.
 
After the remarkable success of his first two commercial albums, Curtis
(now known as 50 Cent) stood on top of the music world, but his sense of
connection, so vital on the streets, was fading in this new environment he
now inhabited. He was surrounded by flatterers who wanted to be in his
entourage, and managers and industry people who saw in him only dollar
signs. His main interactions were with people in the corporate world or
other stars. He could no longer hang out on the streets or get firsthand looks
at the trends that were just starting up. All of this meant that he was flying
blind with his music, not really sure if it would connect anymore with his
audience. They were the source of his energy and spirit, but the distance
separating them was growing. Other stars seemed to not mind this; in fact,
they enjoyed living in this kind of celebrity bubble. They were afraid of
coming back down to earth. Fifty felt the opposite, but there seemed to be
no way out.
Then in early 2007, he decided to start up his own website. He thought
of it as a way to market his music and merchandise directly to the public,
without the screen of his record label, which was proving quite inept in
adapting to the Internet age. Soon this website transformed itself into a
social networking site, like Facebook for his fans, and the more he delved
into it, the more he began to sense that this represented much more than a
marketing gimmick—it was perhaps the ultimate tool for reconnecting with
his audience.
First, he decided to experiment. As he prepared to launch a G-Unit
record in the summer of 2008, he leaked one of the songs onto the website
on a Friday night, then the next day he refreshed the Comments page every
few minutes and tracked the members’ responses to it. After several
hundred comments it was clear that the verdict was negative. The song was
too soft, they judged; they wanted and expected something harder from a G-
Unit record. Taking their criticisms to heart, he shelved the song and soon
released another, creating the hard sound they had demanded. This time the
response was overwhelmingly positive.
This called for more experiments. He put up the latest single from his
archenemy, The Game, hoping to read negative comments from his fans. To
his surprise, many of them liked the song. He engaged in an online debate
with them and had his eyes opened about changes in people’s tastes and
why they might have grown distant from his music. It forced him to rethink
his own direction.
To draw more people to his site, he decided to break down the distance
in both directions. He posted blogs on personal subjects, and then
responded to his fans’ comments. They could feel they had complete access
to him. Using the latest advances in phone technology, he took this further,
having his team film him on their cell phones wherever he went; these
images were then streamed live on the website. This generated intense
traffic and online chatter—fans would never know when such moments
could happen, so they were forced to check in at regular intervals to try to
catch these spontaneous moments, sometimes riveting in their banality,
other times made dramatic by Fifty’s flair for confrontation. Membership
grew by leaps and bounds.
As it evolved, the website came to strangely resemble the world of
hustling that he had created for himself on the streets of Southside Queens.
He could produce testers (trial songs) for his fans, who were like drug
fiends, constantly hungry for new product from Fifty, and he could get
instant feedback on their quality. He could develop a feel for what they
were looking for and how he could manipulate their demand. He had moved
from the outside to the inside, and the hustling game came alive once more,
this time on a global scale.
The Fearless Approach
THE PUBLIC IS NEVER WRONG. WHEN PEOPLE DON’T RESPOND TO
WHAT YOU DO, THEY’RE TELLING YOU SOMETHING LOUD AND CLEAR.
YOU’RE JUST NOT LISTENING.
—50 Cent
All living creatures depend for their survival on their relationship to their
environment. If they are particularly sensitive to any kind of change—a
danger or an opportunity—they have greater power to dominate their
surroundings. It is not simply that the hawk can see farther than any other
creature, but that it can see great detail, picking out the slightest alteration
in the landscape. Its eyes give it tremendous sensitivity and supreme
hunting prowess.
We live in an environment that is mostly human. It consists of the
people that we interact with day in and day out. These humans come from
many varied backgrounds and cultures. They are individuals with their own
unique experiences. To know people well—their differences, their nuances,
their emotional life—would give us a great sense of connection and power.
We would know how to reach them, communicate more effectively, and
influence their actions. But so often we remain on the outside and lack this
power. To connect to the environment in this way would mean having to
move outside ourselves, train our eyes on people, but so often we prefer to
live in our heads, amid our own thoughts and dreams. We strive to make
everything in the world familiar and simple. We grow insensitive to
people’s differences, to the details that make them individuals.
At the root of this turning inward and disconnect is a great fear—one of
the most primal known to man, and perhaps the least understood. In the
beginning, our primitive ancestors formed groups for protection. To create a
sense of cohesion, they established all kinds of codes of behavior, taboos,
and shared rituals. They also created myths in which their tribe was
considered to be the favorite of the gods, chosen for some great purpose. To
be a member of the tribe was to be cleansed by rituals and to be favored by
the gods. Those who belonged to other groups had unfamiliar rituals and
belief systems—their own gods and origin myths. They were not clean.
They represented the Other—something dark, threatening, and a challenge
to the tribe’s sense of superiority.
This was part of our psychological makeup for thousands upon
thousands of years. It transformed itself into a great fear of other cultures
and ways of thinking—for Christians, this meant all heathens. And despite
millennia of civilization, it lives on within us to this day, in the form of a
mental process in which we divide the world into what is familiar and
unfamiliar, clean and unclean. We develop certain ideas and values; we
socialize with those who share those values, who form part of our inner
circle, our clique. We form factions of rigid beliefs—on the right, on the
left, for this or for that. We live in our heads, with the same thoughts and
ideas over and over, cocooned from the outside world.
When we are confronted with people or individuals who have different
values and belief systems, we feel threatened. Our first move is not to
understand them but to demonize them—that shadowy Other. Alternatively,
we may choose to look at them through the prism of our own values and
assume they share them. We mentally convert the Other into something
familiar—“they may come from a completely different culture, but after all,
they must want the same things we do.” This is a failure of our minds to
move outward and understand, to be sensitive to nuance. Everything must
be white or black, clean or unclean.
Understand: the opposite approach is the way to power in this world. It
begins with a fundamental fearlessness—you do not feel afraid or affronted
by people who have different ways of thinking or acting. You do not feel
superior to those on the outside. In fact, you are excited by such diversity.
Your first move is to open up your spirit to these differences, to understand
what makes the Other tick, to gain a feel for people’s inner lives, how they
see the world. In this way, you continually expose yourself to wider and
wider circles of people, building connections to these various networks. The
source of your power is your sensitivity and closeness to this social
environment. You can detect trends and changes in people’s tastes well
before anyone else.
In the hood, conditions are more crowded than elsewhere; people with
all kinds of different psychologies are constantly in your face. Any power
you have depends on your ability to know everything that is going on
around you, to be sensitive to changes, aware of the power structures that
are imposed from without and within. There is no time or room to escape to
some inner dreamland. You have a sense of urgency to stay connected to the
environment and the people around you—your life depends on it.
We now live in similar conditions—all kinds of people of divergent
cultures and psychologies are thrown together. But because we live in a
society of more apparent abundance and ease, we lack that sense of urgency
to connect to other people. This is dangerous. In such a melting pot as the
modern world, with people’s tastes changing at a faster pace than ever
before, our success depends on our ability to move outside ourselves and
connect to other social networks. At all costs, you need to continually force
yourself outward. You must reach a point where any sense of losing this
connection to your environment translates into a feeling of vulnerability and
peril.
In the end this primal fear of ours translates into a mental infirmity—the
closing of the mind to any ideas that are new and unfamiliar. The fearless
types in history learn to develop the opposite: an open spirit, a mind that is
constantly learning from experience. Look at the example of the great
British primatologist Jane Goodall, whose field research revolutionized our
ideas on chimpanzees and primates.
Prior to Goodall’s work, scientists had established certain accepted
ideas on how to do research on animals such as chimpanzees. They were
mostly to be studied in cages under very controlled circumstances. On
occasion, primatologists would research them in the wild; they would come
up with various tricks to lure the chimpanzees closer to them, while
remaining hidden behind some kind of protective screen. They would
conduct experiments by manipulating the animals and noting their
responses. The goal was to come up with general truths about chimpanzee
behavior. Only by keeping their distance from the animals could the
scientists study them.
Goodall did not have any formal training in the sciences when she
arrived in 1960 in what is now known as Tanzania to study chimpanzees in
the wild. Operating totally on her own, she devised a radically different
means of research. The chimps lived in the remotest parts of the country
and were notoriously shy. She tracked them from a distance, patiently
working to gain their trust. She dressed inconspicuously and was careful to
not look them in the eye. When she noticed they were uncomfortable with
her being in the area, she moved away, or acted like a baboon that was
merely there digging for insects.
Slowly, over the course of several months, she was able to move closer
and closer. Now she could begin to identify individual chimps that she kept
seeing; she gave them names, something scientists had never done before—
they had always been designated by numbers. With these names, she could
begin to detect subtle nuances in their individual behavior; they had
different personalities, like humans. After nearly a year of this patient
seduction, the chimps began to relax in her presence and allow her to
interact with them, something no one had ever achieved before in the
history of studying primates in the wild.
This took a tremendous degree of courage, as chimpanzees were
considered the most volatile of the primates, more dangerous and violent
than gorillas. As she interacted with them more and more, she noticed a
change in herself as well. “I think my mind works like a chimp’s,
subconsciously,” she wrote a friend. She felt this because she had developed
an uncanny ability to find them in the forest.
Now, gaining access to them, she took note of several phenomena that
belied the accepted data on chimpanzee behavior. Scientists had catalogued
the animals as vegetarians; she observed them hunting and eating monkeys.
Only humans were considered capable of making and using tools; she saw
them crafting elaborate instruments to catch insects for food. She saw them
engage in bizarre dance rituals during a rainstorm. She later observed a
horrific war that went on for four years between rival packs. She catalogued
some rather strange Machiavellian behavior among the males who fought
for supremacy. All in all, she revealed a degree of variety in their emotional
and intellectual lives that altered the concept not only of chimpanzees but
also of all primates and mammals.
This has great application beyond the realms of science. Normally when
you study something, you begin with certain preconceived notions about the
subject. (Because scientists had come to believe that chimpanzees had a
limited range of behavior, that is all that they saw, missing the much more
complex reality.) Your mind begins the process in a closed state—not really
sensitive to difference and nuance. You are afraid of having your
assumptions challenged. Instead, like Goodall, you must let go of this need
to control and narrow your field of vision. When you study an individual or
a group, your goal is to get inside their minds, their experiences, their way
of looking at things. To do this, you must interact with them on a more
equal plane. With this open and fearless spirit, you will discover things no
one had suspected before. You will have a much deeper appreciation for the
targets of your actions or the public you are trying to reach. And with such
understanding will come the power to move them.
Keys to Fearlessness
FEW PEOPLE HAVE THE WISDOM TO PREFER THE CRITICISM THAT
WOULD DO THEM GOOD, TO THE PRAISE THAT DECEIVES THEM.
—François de La Rochefoucauld
In the work that we produce for business or for culture, there is always a
telling moment—when it leaves our hands and reaches the public for which
it was intended. In that instant it ceases to be something that was in our
heads; it becomes an object that is judged by others. Sometimes this object
connects with people in a profound way. It strikes an emotional chord,
resonates, and has warmth. It meets a need. Other times it leaves people
surprisingly cold—in our minds we had imagined it having a much different
effect.
This process can seem rather mysterious. Some people seem to have a
knack for creating things that resonate with an audience. They are great
artists, politicians with the popular touch, or business people who are
endlessly inventive. Sometimes we ourselves produce something that
works, but we fail to understand why, and lacking this knowledge, we
cannot reproduce our success.
There is an aspect to this phenomenon, however, that is explicable.
Anything we create or produce is for a public—large or small, depending
on what we do. If we are the type that lives mostly in our heads, imagining
what the intended public will like, or not even caring, this spirit is
reproduced in the work itself. It is disconnected from the social
environment; it is a product of a person who is wrapped up in him- or
herself. If, on the other hand, we are deeply connected to the public, if we
have a profound sense of their needs and wants, then what we make tends to
resonate. We have internalized the way of thinking and feeling of our
audience and it shows in the work.
The great Russian writer Fyodor Dostoyevsky had almost two separate
parts to his career: in the first, he was a socialist who interacted mostly with
other intellectuals. His novels and stories were relatively successful. But
then in 1849 he was sentenced to several years of prison and hard labor in
Siberia for ostensibly conspiring against the government. There, he
suddenly discovered that he hadn’t known the Russian people at all. In
prison he was thrown in among the dregs of society. In the small village
where he did his hard labor, he finally mingled with the Russian peasantry
that dominated the country. Once he was freed, all of these experiences
became deeply embedded in his work, and suddenly his novels resonated
far beyond intellectual circles. He understood his public, the mass of
Russian people, from the inside, and his work became immensely popular.
Understand: you cannot disguise your attitude towards the public. If you
feel superior at all, part of some chosen elite, then this seeps out in the
work. It is conveyed in the tone and mood. It feels patronizing. If you have
little access to the public you are trying to reach but you feel that the ideas
in your head cannot fail to be interesting, then it almost inevitably comes
across as something too personal, the product of someone who is alienated.
In either case, what is really dominating the spirit of your work is fear. To
interact closely with the public and get its feedback might mean having to
adjust your “brilliant” ideas, your preconceived notions. This might
challenge your tidy vision of the world. You might disguise this with a
snobbish veneer, but it is the age-old fear of the Other.
We are social creatures who make things in order to communicate and
connect with those around us. Your goal must be to break down the distance
between you and your audience, the base of your support in life. Some of
this distance is mental—it comes from your ego and the need to feel
superior. Some of it is physical—the nature of your business tends to shut
you off from the public with layers of bureaucracy. In any event, what you
are seeking is maximum interaction, allowing you to get a feel for people
from the inside. You come to thrive off their feedback and criticism.
Operating this way, what you produce will not fail to resonate because it
will come from the inside. This deep level of interaction is the source of the
most powerful and popular works in culture and business, and a political
style that truly connects.
The following are four strategies you can use to bring yourself closer to
this ideal.
CRUSH ALL DISTANCE
The French artist Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec came from one of the oldest
aristocratic bloodlines in France, but from early on he felt estranged from
his family. Part of this came from his physical handicap—his legs had
stopped growing at the age of fourteen, giving him a dwarfish appearance.
Part of it came from his sensitive nature. He turned to painting as his only
interest in life, and in 1882, at the age of eighteen, he moved to Paris to
study with a famous artist whose studio was in Montmartre—the bohemian
and somewhat seedy part of the city. There Toulouse-Lautrec discovered a
whole new world—the cafés and dance halls frequented by prostitutes, con
artists, dancers, street performers, and all the shady characters who found
themselves drawn to this quartier. Perhaps because of his own alienation
from his family, he identified with these outcasts. And slowly he began to
immerse himself deeper and deeper in the social life of Montmartre.
He befriended the prostitutes and hired them as models, seeking to
capture the essence of their lives on canvas. He returned to the dance halls
often and sketched while he watched. He drank with the criminal types and
the anarchist agitators who passed through the neighborhood. He absorbed
every aspect of this world, including the habits of the rich people who came
to the area for entertainment and to slum it. Other painters like Degas and
Renoir, who both lived in Montmartre, painted many scenes of life there,
but it was always with a sense of distance, as if they were outsiders peeking
in. Toulouse-Lautrec was more of an active participant. And as his drawings
and paintings began to reflect this immersion, his work drew more attention
from the public.
All of this culminated in the posters that he did for the dance hall the
Moulin Rouge, which opened in 1889. The first and most famous one of all
was a scandalous image of a dancer kicking so high you can see her
underwear. The colors are intense and garish. But strangest of all is the kind
of flat space he created, which gives viewers the sensation that they are
there onstage with the performers, in the middle of all the activity and
bright lights. No one had created anything quite like it before. When the
poster was placed all over the city, people were mesmerized by the image. It
seemed to vibrate with a life of its own. More and more posters followed of
all the figures in the Moulin Rouge whom he came to know on intimate
terms, and an entire new aesthetic was forged around his complete,
democratic mingling with his subjects. His work became immensely
popular.
Understand: in this day and age, to reach people you must have access
to their inner lives—their frustrations, aspirations, resentments. To do so,
you must crush as much distance as possible between you and your
audience. You enter their spirit and absorb it from within. Their way of
looking at things becomes yours, and when you re-create it in some form of
work, it has life. What shocks and excites you will then have the same
effect on them. This requires a degree of fearlessness and an open spirit.
You are not afraid to have your whole personality shaped by these intense
interactions. You assume a radical equality with the public, giving voice to
people’s ideas and desires. What you produce will naturally connect, in a
deep way.
OPEN INFORMAL CHANNELS OF CRITICISM AND FEEDBACK
When Eleanor Roosevelt entered the White House as the First Lady in
1933, it was with much trepidation. She had a disdain for conventional
politics and for the kind of cliquish attitude it fostered. In her mind, her
husband’s power would depend on his connection to the people who had
elected him. To get out of the Depression, the public had to feel engaged in
the struggle, not merely be seduced by speeches and programs. When
people feel involved they bring their own ideas and energy to the cause. Her
fear was that the bureaucratic nature of government would swallow up her
husband. He would come to listen to his cabinet members and experts; his
contact with the public would be relegated to formal channels such as
reports, polls, and studies. This isolation would spell his doom, cutting him
off from his base of support. Denied an official position within the
administration, she decided to work to create informal channels to the
public on her own.
She traveled all over the country—to inner cities and remote rural towns
—listening to people’s complaints and needs. She brought many of these
people back to meet the president to give him firsthand impressions of the
effects of the New Deal. She started a column in The Woman’s Home
Companion, in which she had posted above the headline, “I want you to
write me.” She would use her column as a kind of discussion forum with
the American public, encouraging people to share their criticisms. Within
six months she had received over 300,000 letters, and with her staff she
worked to answer every last one of them. She opened other channels of
communication, for instance, planting her aides in various New Deal
programs who would then poll on her behalf the public affected by these
programs.
With this system in place, she began to see a pattern from the bottom up
—a growing disenchantment with the New Deal. Every day, she left a
memo in her husband’s basket, reminding him of these criticisms and the
need to be more responsive. And slowly she began to have an influence on
his policy, pushing him leftward—for instance, getting him to create
programs such as the NYA, the National Youth Administration, which
would involve young people actively in the New Deal. Over time she
became the unofficial channel of communication for women’s groups and
African Americans, shoring up FDR’s support in these two key
constituencies. All of this work took tremendous courage, for she was
continually ridiculed for her activist approach, long before any first lady
had ever thought of taking such a role. And her work played a major part in
FDR’s ability to maintain his image as a man of the people.
As Eleanor understood, any kind of group tends to close itself off from
the outside world. It is easier to operate this way. From within this bubble,
people will delude themselves into thinking they have insight into how their
audience or public feels—they read the papers, various reports, the poll
numbers, etc. But all of this information tends to be flat and highly filtered.
It is much different when you interact directly with the public and hear in
the flesh their criticisms and feedback. You discover what lies at the root of
their discontent, the various nuances of how your work affects them. Their
problems come to life, and any solutions you come up with have more
relevance. You create a back-and-forth dynamic in which their ideas,
involvement, and energy can be harnessed for your purposes. If some
distance between you and the public must be maintained, by the nature of
your group or enterprise, then the ideal is to open up as many informal
channels as possible, getting your feedback straight from the source.
RECONNECT WITH YOUR BASE
We see the following occur over and over: a person has success when they
are younger because they have deep ties with a social group. What they
produce and say comes from a real place and connects with an audience.
Then slowly they lose this connection. Success creates distance. They come
to spend most of their time with other successful people. Consciously or
unconsciously, they come to feel separated and above their audience. The
intensity in their work is gone and with it any kind of real effect on the
public.
In his own way the famous black activist Malcolm X struggled with this
problem. He had spent his youth as a savvy street hustler, ending up in
prison on drug charges. There, he discovered the religion of Islam, as
practiced by the Nation of Islam, and immediately converted. Out of prison
he became a highly visible spokesperson for the group. Eventually he broke
off from the Nation of Islam and transformed himself into a leading figure
in the growing black power movement of the 1960s.
In these various phases of his life, Malcolm felt intense anger and
frustration at the levels of injustice for African Americans, much of which
he had experienced firsthand. He channeled these emotions into powerful
speeches, seeming to give voice to the anger that many felt who lived deep
within the ghettos of America. But as he became more and more famous, he
felt some anxiety. Other leaders in the black community that he had known
had begun to live fairly well; they could not help but feel some distance and
superiority to those they were supposed to represent—like a father caring
for a child.
Malcolm hated that feeling of creeping paternalism. In his mind, people
can only help themselves—his role was to inspire them to action, not act in
their name. To inoculate himself against this psychic distance, he increased
his interactions with street hustlers and agitators, the kind of people from
the lower depths that most leaders would scrupulously avoid. Those from
the heart of the ghetto were his power base and he had to reconnect with
them. He made himself spend more time with those who had suffered recent
injustices, soaking up their experiences and sense of outrage. Most people
mellow with age—he would retain his anger, the intensity of emotions that
had impelled him in the first place and given him his charisma.
The goal in connecting to the public is not to please everyone or to
spread yourself out to the widest possible audience. Communication is a
power of intensity, not extensity and numbers. In trying to widen your
appeal, you will substitute quantity for quality and you will pay a price. You
have a base of power—a group of people, small or large, which identifies
with you. This base is also mental—ideas you had when you were younger,
which were tied to powerful emotions and inspired you to take a particular
path. Time and success tend to diffuse the sense of connection you have to
this physical and mental base. You will drift and your powers of
communication will diminish. Know your base and work to reconnect with
it. Keep your associations with it alive, intense, and present. Return to your
origins—the source of all inspiration and power.
CREATE THE SOCIAL MIRROR
Alone, in our minds, we can imagine we have all kinds of powers and
abilities. Our egos can inflate to any size. But when we produce something
that fails to have the expected impact, we are suddenly faced with a limit—
we are not as brilliant or skilled as we had imagined. In such a case, our
tendency is to blame others for not understanding it or getting in our way.
Our egos are bruised and delicate—criticism from the outside seems like a
personal attack, which we cannot endure. We tend to close ourselves off and
this makes it doubly difficult to succeed with our next venture.
Instead of turning inward, consider people’s coolness to your idea and
their criticisms as a kind of mirror they are holding up to you. A physical
mirror turns you into an object; you can see yourself as others see you. Your
ego cannot protect you—the mirror does not lie. You use it to correct your
appearance and avoid ridicule. The opinions of other people serve a similar
function. You view your work from inside your mind, encrusted with all
kinds of desires and fears. They see it as an object; they see it as it is.
Through their criticisms you can get closer to this objective version and
gradually improve what you do. (One caveat: beware of feedback from
friends whose judgments could be tainted by feelings of envy or the need to
flatter.)
When your work does not communicate with others, consider it your
own fault—you did not make your ideas clear enough and you failed to
connect with your audience emotionally. This will spare you any bitterness
or anger that might come from people’s critiques. You are simply perfecting
your work through the social mirror.
Reversal of Perspective
Science and the scientific method are very powerful and practical pursuits
of knowledge that have come to dominate much of our thinking for the past
few centuries. But they have also spawned a peculiar preconception—that
to understand anything we must study it from a distance and with a
detached perspective. For example, we tend to judge a book that is full of
statistics and quotes from various studies as carrying more weight because
it seems to have that requisite scientific objectivity and distance. Science,
however, often deals with matter that is inorganic or has a marginal
emotional life. Studying such things from a detached perspective makes
sense and yields profound results. But this does not translate so well when
dealing with people and creatures who respond from an emotional core. The
knowledge of what makes them tick on the inside is missing. To study them
from the outside is merely a prejudice, often one stemming from fear—
dealing with people’s experiences and subjectivity is messy and chaotic.
Distance is cleaner and easier.
It is time to reevaluate this preconception and see things from the
opposite perspective. Knowledge of human nature and social factors, the
kind that is often most valuable to us, depends on knowing people and
networks from the inside, on getting a feel for what they are experiencing.
This can best be gained by an intense involvement and participation, as
opposed to the pseudoscientific pose of the intellectual addicted to studies,
citations, and numbers, all designed to back up their preconceptions. This
other form of knowledge, from the inside, must be the one that you come to
esteem above all others in social matters. It is what will give you power to
affect people. To the extent that you feel yourself to be distant and on the
outside, you must tell yourself you do not understand what you are studying
or trying to reach—you are missing the mark and there is work to be done.
A REALLY INTELLIGENT MAN FEELS WHAT OTHER MEN ONLY KNOW.
—Baron de Montesquieu

CHAPTER 8
Respect the Process—Mastery
THE FOOLS IN LIFE WANT THINGS FAST AND EASY-MONEY, SUCCESS,
ATTENTION. BOREDOM IS THEIR GREAT ENEMY AND FEAR. WHATEVER
THEY MANAGE TO GET SLIPS THROUGH THEIR HANDS AS FAST AS IT
COMES IN. YOU, ON THE OTHER HAND, WANT TO OUTLAST YOUR RIVALS.
YOU ARE BUILDING THE FOUNDATION FOR SOMETHING THAT CAN
CONTINUE TO EXPAND. TO MAKE THIS HAPPEN, YOU WILL HAVE TO
SERVE AN APPRENTICESHIP. YOU MUST LEARN EARLY ON TO ENDURE
THE HOURS OF PRACTICE AND DRUDGERY, KNOWING THAT IN THE END
ALL OF THAT TIME WILL TRANSLATE INTO A HIGHER PLEASURE—
MASTERY OF A CRAFT AND OF YOURSELF. YOUR GOAL IS TO REACH THE
ULTIMATE SKILL LEVEL—AN INTUITIVE FEEL FOR WHAT MUST COME
NEXT.
 
Slow Money
MASTER THE INSTRUMENT, MASTER THE MUSIC, THEN FORGET ALL
THAT SHIT AND PLAY.
—Charlie Parker
Growing up in Southside Queens, the only people Curtis Jackson could see
who had any money and power were the street hustlers. So at the age of
eleven and with big dreams for the future, he chose just such a path for
himself. Almost immediately, however, he saw that the life of a hustler was
not glamorous at all. It consisted mostly of standing on a street corner day
after day, selling the same stuff to the same fiends. It meant enduring hours
with nothing to do, waiting for customers to come by, often in the bitter
cold or the blistering heat. And in those long, tedious hours on the streets,
Curtis’s mind naturally would wander; he would find himself wishing for
money that would come faster and easier, with more excitement. There
were opportunities for this in the hood—they mostly involved crime or
some dubious scheme. Sometimes he would feel tempted to try them, but in
such moments he would remind himself of the endless stories of the
hustlers he had known who had fallen for the illusion of fast, easy money—
all suckers who inevitably ended up dead or broke.
There was his friend TC who got tired of hustling and fell in with a
crew that would spend the summer robbing convenience stores and
occasionally a bank. He made quite a haul of money over those three
months and then blew it all over the fall and winter. The following summer
he was back at it again. It wasn’t just the money; it was the thrill that came
in flirting with so much danger. But that second summer his luck ran out
and he was killed in a gunfight with the police.
There was Curtis’s colleague Spite, a few years older, who had managed
to save some money from his hustling but had dreams of something much
bigger. He convinced himself he could make a fortune fast by buying a
piece of a franchise business that was new to the hood but that he felt was
certain to be hot. He poured all of his money into the venture, but he was
too impatient. He had not taken the time to accustom the public to his new
life. Everyone believed the business was just a front for some drug
operation. They avoided it and it soon became a hangout for hustlers and
fiends. It failed within a few months and he never recovered from the
experience.
This was the gist of the problem: to be a successful hustler you had to
accustom yourself to the slow, grinding pace of the job. But in the hood, the
future rarely seemed promising. It was hard for hustlers to imagine saving
their money for some rainy day in the future when that day would probably
never come. Inevitably the desire for something faster would creep into
their blood, and if they gave in, they created a cycle they could never
escape. If they were able to get some fast money, it would act like a drug—
they would get excited and spend it all on items to impress people. With no
money left, they would return to dealing drugs, but now it seemed too slow
and boring. They would try again for something fast. They became trapped
by their own greed, and as the years went by, they would fail to develop any
kind of patience or discipline. They could not manage this up-and-down
pace for too long. By the age of twenty-five or thirty they would burn
themselves out and have no skills or money to show for their years of work.
Their fate after that was generally unpleasant.
To resist this temptation, Curtis decided he would force himself in the
opposite direction. He treated hustling as a job. He showed up on the street
corner at the same hour every day, working from dawn to dusk. Gradually
he accustomed himself to this slow pace. During the long hours with
nothing to do, he would contemplate the future and come up with detailed
plans of what he would accomplish year by year—ending with his eventual
escape from street hustling. He would move into music, and then into
business. To take the first step, he would have to save his money. The
thought of this goal helped him endure the daily tedium of the job. In these
slow hours, he also devised new hustling schemes, with the idea of
continually improving himself at this job.
He took up boxing to discipline his mind and body. He was terrible at
first, but he was tenacious, training day in and day out, eventually becoming
a skilled fighter. This taught him invaluable lessons—he could get whatever
he wanted through sheer persistence rather than by violence or force;
progressing step-by-step was the only way to succeed in anything. By the
age of twenty, he made his break into music—all according to his original
plan.
 
In 1999, after a few years of apprenticing with Jam Master Jay, Curtis (now
known as 50 Cent) signed a deal with Columbia Records. It seemed like a
dream come true, but as he looked around at the other rappers who had been
at the label a little longer, he saw the dangers around him had only
increased. The tendency, as he saw it, was to immediately let up in your
energy and focus. Rappers would feel that they had arrived, and
unconsciously they wouldn’t work as hard and would spend less time
learning their craft. That sudden influx of money would go to their heads;
they would imagine they had the golden touch and could keep it coming.
One hit song or record would make this even worse. Not building
something slowly—a career, a future—it would all fall apart within a few
years, as younger and more eager rappers would take their place. Their life
would be all the more miserable for having once tasted some glory.
To Curtis, the solution was simple: this was a new world he had entered.
He had to take his time and learn it well. In the fast environment of hip-hop,
he would slow everything down. He avoided the partying and kept mostly
to himself. He decided to treat Columbia Records as a university, his one
chance to educate himself in the business. He would record his music at
night and spend the entire day at the Columbia offices, talking shop to
people in every division. Gradually he taught himself more and more about
marketing and distribution, and the nuts and bolts of the business. He
studied all aspects of production, what went into making a hit song. He
practiced his music over and over. When the label sent him and dozens of
other rappers to a retreat in upstate New York to write songs, he returned
with thirty-six tracks, while most of the others could barely muster five or
six.
In the wake of the assassination attempt on Fifty in 2000, Columbia
Records dropped him from the label, but by then he had outgrown his need
for their expertise. He had accumulated so much knowledge and skill that
he was able to apply it all to his mix-tape campaign, creating songs at an
insane pace and marketing his music as smartly as any professional. Step by
step he advanced, the campaign gaining the attention of Eminem, who
signed him to his label at Interscope in 2003.
 
Years later he found himself in the corporate world, and he quickly
discovered it was not much different from the streets. So many of the
business people and executives he met had that same level of impatience.
They could only think in terms of months or weeks. Their relationship to
money was emotional—a way to impose their importance and feed their
ego. They would come to him with schemes that seemed intriguing in the
present but that led nowhere down the road. They were not attuned to the
immense changes going on in the world and planning to exploit them in the
future—that would take too much effort and time.
These business types came at him from all directions with endorsement
deals that would make him some fast millions. They assumed he was like
all the other rappers who grabbed at such opportunities. But endorsement
deals would not help him build anything solid or real. It was illusion money.
He would turn them down, opting to start his own businesses on his own
terms—each business building on the other like links on a chain. The goal
this time was simple—to forge an empire that would last. And as before, he
would get there through his own grinding persistence.
The Fearless Approach
MOST PEOPLE CAN’T HANDLE BOREDOM. THAT MEANS THEY CAN’T
STAY ON ONE THING UNTIL THEY GET GOOD AT IT. AND THEY WONDER
WHY THEY’RE UNHAPPY.
—50 Cent
For our most primitive ancestors, life was a constant struggle, entailing
endless labor to secure food and shelter. If there was any free time, it
generally was reserved for rituals that would give meaning to such a hard
life. Then, over thousands of years of civilization, life gradually became
easier for many, and with that came more and more free time. In such
moments, there was no need to work the fields or worry about enemies or
the elements—just an expanse of hours to somehow fill. And suddenly a
new emotion was born into this world—boredom.
At work or in rituals, the mind would be filled with various tasks to
accomplish; but alone in one’s house, this free time would allow the mind
to roam wherever it wanted. Confronted with such freedom, the mind has a
tendency to gravitate towards anxieties about the future—possible problems
and dangers. Such empty time faintly echoes the eternal emptiness of death
itself. And so with this new emotion that assailed our ancestors came a
desire that haunts us to this day—to escape boredom at all cost, to distract
ourselves from these anxieties.
The principal means of distraction are all forms of public entertainment,
drugs and alcohol, and social activities. But such distractions have a drug-
like effect—they wear off. We crave new ones, faster ones, to lift us out of
ourselves and divert us from the harsh realities of life and creeping
boredom. An entire civilization—ancient Rome—practically collapsed
under the weight of this new need and emotion. Their economy became tied
to the creation of novel luxuries and entertainments that sapped its citizens’
spirit; few were willing anymore to sacrifice their pleasures for hard work
or the public good.
This is the pattern that boredom has created for the human animal ever
since: we look outside ourselves for diversions and grow dependent on
them. These entertainments have a faster pace than the time we spend at
work. Work then is experienced as something boring—slow and repetitive.
Anything challenging, requiring effort, is viewed the same way—it’s not
fun; it’s not fast. If we go far enough in this direction, we find it
increasingly difficult to muster the patience to endure the hard work that is
required for mastering any kind of craft. It becomes harder to spend time
alone. Life becomes divided between what is necessary (time at work) and
what is pleasurable (distractions and entertainment). In the past, these
extremes of boredom assailed mostly those in the upper classes. Now it is
something that plagues almost all of us.
There is, however, another possible relationship to boredom and empty
time, a fearless one that yields much different results than frustration and
escapism. It goes as follows: you have some large goal that you wish to
achieve in your life, something you feel that you are destined to create. If
you reach that goal, it will bring you far greater satisfaction than the
evanescent thrills that come from outside diversions. To get there you will
have to learn a craft—educate yourself and develop the proper skills. All
human activities involve a process of mastery. You must learn the various
steps and procedures involved, proceeding to higher and higher levels of
proficiency. This requires discipline and tenacity—the ability to withstand
repetitive activity, slowness, and the anxiety that comes with such a
challenge.
Once you start down this path, two things will happen: First, having the
larger goal will lift your mind out of the moment and help you endure the
hard work and drudgery. Second, as you become better at this task or craft,
it becomes increasingly pleasurable. You see your improvement; you see
connections and possibilities you hadn’t noticed before. Your mind becomes
absorbed in mastering it further, and in this absorption you forget all your
problems—fears for the future or people’s nasty games. But unlike the
diversion that comes from outside sources, this one comes from within. You
are developing a lifelong skill, the kind of mental discipline that will serve
as the foundation of your power.
To make this work you must choose a career or a craft that excites you
in some deep way. You are creating no dividing line between work and
pleasure. Your pleasure comes in mastering the process itself, and in the
mental immersion it requires.
In the hood, most of the jobs that are available offer low money and the
kind of menial work that leads to no real skills. Even hustling is tedious and
not really a path with a future. In the face of this reality, people can go in
one of two directions—they can seek to escape this reality through drugs,
alcohol, gang activity, or whatever immediate pleasures can be had; or they
can get out of the cycle by developing an intense work ethic and discipline.
The types who go in the latter direction have a deep hunger for power and a
sense of urgency. Nipping at their heels at all times is the possibility of a
life of crap jobs or dangerous distractions. They teach themselves to be
patient and to practice something. They have learned from early on, through
their jobs or through hustling, to endure the long, boring stretches of time
that are necessary to master a process. They do not whine or seek to escape
this reality, but instead see it as a means to freedom.
For those of us who do not grow up in such an environment, we do not
feel this urgent connection between discipline and power. Our jobs are not
so dull. Some day they may lead to something really good, or so we think.
We have developed some discipline at school or on the job, and it’s enough.
But we are in fact deluding ourselves. More often than not our jobs are
something that we endure; we live for our time off and dream of the future.
We are not engaged in the daily activity of the job with our full mental
powers because it is not as exciting as life outside work. We develop less
and less tolerance for dull moments and repetitive activity. If we happen to
lose our job or want something else, we suddenly have to confront the fact
that we do not have the requisite patience to make the proper change.
Before it is too late we must wake up and realize that real power and
success can come only through mastering a process, which in turn depends
on a foundation of discipline that we are constantly keeping sharp.
The fearless types in history inevitably display in their lives a higher
tolerance than most of us for repetitive, boring tasks. This allows them to
excel in their field and master their craft. Part of this comes from seeing
early on in life the tangible results that come from such rigorousness and
patience. In this vein, the story of Isaac Newton is particularly illuminating.
In early 1665 he was a twenty-three-year-old student at Cambridge
University, on the verge of taking his exams to be a scholar in mathematics,
when suddenly the plague broke out in London. The deaths were horrific
and multiplied by the day; many Londoners fled to the countryside where
they spread the plague far and wide. By that summer, Cambridge was
forced to close, and its students dispersed in all directions for their safety.
For these students, nothing could have been worse. They were forced to
live in scattered villages and experienced intense fear and isolation for the
next twenty months, as the plague raged throughout England. Their active
minds had nothing to seize upon and many went mad with boredom. For
Newton, however, the plague months represented something entirely
different. He returned to his mother’s home in Woolsthorpe, Lincolnshire.
At Cambridge he had been bothered by a series of mathematical problems
that tortured not only him but his professors as well. He decided he would
spend the time in Woolsthorpe working over such problems. He had carried
with him a large number of books on mathematics that he had accumulated,
and he proceeded to study them in intense detail. He went over the same
problems, day after day, filling notebooks with endless calculations.
When the sky was clear he would wander outside and continue these
musings, seated in the apple orchards surrounding the house. He would look
up at an apple dangling on a branch, the same size to his eye as the moon
above, and he would ponder the relationship between the two—what held
the one on the tree and the other within the earth’s orbit—leading him to
ideas about gravity. Staring at the sun and its optical effect on everything
around him, he began to conduct his own experiments on the movement and
properties of light itself. His mind flowed naturally from problems of
geometry to how it all related to motion and mechanics.
The deeper he went into these studies, the more he would see
connections and have sudden insights. He solved problem after problem, his
enthusiasm and momentum quickening as he realized the powers he was
unleashing in himself. While the others were paralyzed with fear and
boredom, he passed the entire twenty months without a thought of the
plague or any worries for the future. And in that time, he essentially created
modern mathematics, mechanics, and optics. It is generally considered the
most prolific, concentrated period of scientific thinking in the history of
mankind. Of course, Isaac Newton possessed a rare mind, but at Cambridge
nobody had suspected him of such mental powers. It took this period of
forced isolation and repetitive labor to transform him into a genius.
When we look at those who stand out in history, we tend to focus on
their achievements. From such an angle, it is easy for us to be dazzled and
see their success as stemming from genetics and perhaps some social
factors. They are gifted. We could never reach their level, or so we think.
But we are choosing to ignore that telling period in their lives, when each
and every one of them underwent a rather tedious apprenticeship in their
field. What kept them going was the power they quickly discovered through
mastery of certain steps. Sudden insights came to them that seem like
genius to us, but are actually part of any intense learning process.
If only we were to study that part of their lives as opposed to the
legends they later became, we would understand that we too could have
some or all of that power by a patient immersion in any field of study.
Many people cannot handle the boredom this might entail; they fear starting
out on such an arduous process. They prefer their distractions, dreams, and
illusions, never aware of the higher pleasures that are there for those who
choose to master themselves and a craft.
Keys to Fearlessness
ALL OF MAN’S TROUBLES COME FROM NOT KNOWING HOW TO SIT
STILL, ALONE IN A ROOM.
—Blaise Pascal
As children learning language, we all undergo the same process. At first we
experience a level of frustration—we have desires and needs we wish to
express, but we lack the words. Slowly we pick up phrases and absorb
patterns of speech. We accumulate vocabulary, word by word. Some of this
is tedious but we are impelled by our intense curiosity and hunger for
knowledge. At a certain point we attain a level of fluency in which we can
communicate as fast as we think. Soon we don’t have to think at all—words
come naturally, and at times when we are inspired, they flow out of us in
ways we cannot even explain. Learning a language—our own or a foreign
one—involves a process that cannot be avoided. There are no shortcuts.
Learning language sets the pattern for all human activities—purely
intellectual or physical. To master a musical instrument or a game, we begin
at the lowest level of competence. The game seems boring as we have to
learn the rules and play on a simple level. As with learning language, we
feel frustrated. We see others play well and we imagine how that could feel,
but we are locked in this mode of tedious practice and repetition. At such a
point we either give in to our frustration and give up the process, or we
proceed, intuiting the power that lies just around the corner. Slowly our
ability rises and the frustration lowers. We don’t need to think so much; we
are surprised by our fluency and connections that come to us in a flash.
Once we reach a certain level of mastery, we see there are higher levels
and challenges. If we are disciplined and patient, we proceed. At each
higher level, new pleasures and insights await us—ones not even suspected
when we started out. We can take this as far as we want—in any human
activity there is always a higher level to which we can aspire.
For thousands of years this concept of learning was an elemental part of
practical wisdom. It was embedded in the concept of mastering a craft.
Human survival depended on the construction of instruments, buildings,
ships, and more. To build them well, a person had to learn the craft,
spending years as an apprentice, advancing step by step. With the advent of
the printing press and books that could be distributed widely, this discipline
and patience was then applied to education—to formally gaining
knowledge. Those who posed as people who possessed learning, without
the years of accumulating knowledge, were thought of as charlatans and
quacks, to be despised.
Today, however, we have reached a dangerous point in which this
elemental wisdom is being forgotten. Much of this is due to the destructive
side of technology. We all understand its immense benefits and the power it
has brought us. But with the intense speed and ease with which we can get
what we want, a new pattern of thinking has evolved. We are by nature
creatures of impatience. It has always been hard for us to want something
and not have the capacity to get it. The increased speed from technology
accentuates this childish aspect of our character. The slow accumulation of
knowledge seems unnecessarily boring. Learning should be fun, fast, and
easy. On the Internet we can make instant connections, skimming along the
surface from one subject to the next. We come to value breadth of
knowledge over depth, the power to move here or there rather than digging
deeper to the source of a problem and finding out how things tick.
We lose a sense of process. In such an atmosphere, charlatans sprout
like weeds. They offer the age-old myth of the quick transformation—the
shortcut to power, beauty, and success—in the form of books, CDs,
seminars, ancient “secrets” brought back to life. And they find many
suckers on which to prey.
This new pattern of thinking and learning is not progress. It creates a
phenomenon that we shall call the “short-circuit.” To reach the end of
anything, to master a process, requires time, focus, and energy. When
people are so distracted, their minds constantly moving from one thing to
another, it becomes increasingly difficult to maintain concentration on one
thing for a few hours, let alone for months and years. Under this influence,
the mind will tend to short-circuit; it will not be able to go all the way to the
end of a task. It will want to move on to something else that seems more
enticing. It becomes hard to make things well when the focus is broken—
which is why we find a gradual increase in products that are shoddy, made
with less and less attention to detail.
Understand: the real secret, the real formula for power in this world, lies
in accepting the ugly reality that learning requires a process, and this in turn
demands patience and the ability to endure drudge work. It is not sexy or
seductive at first glance, but this truth is based on something real and
substantial—an age-old wisdom that will never be overturned. The key is
the level of your desire. If you are really after power and mastery, then you
will absorb this idea deeply and engrave it in your mind: there are no
shortcuts. You will distrust anything that is fast and easy. You will be able to
endure the initial months of dull, repetitive labor, because you have an
overall goal. This will prevent you from short-circuiting, knowing many
things but mastering none of them. In the end, what you really will be doing
is mastering yourself—your impatience, your fear of boredom and empty
time, your need for constant fun and amusement.
The following are five principal strategies for developing the proper
relationship to process.
PROGRESS THROUGH TRIAL AND ERROR
Based on his street fighting as a teenager, Jack Johnson had the feeling that
he could some day become a great boxer. But he was black and poor, too
poor to afford a trainer. And so in 1896, at the age of eighteen, he began a
rather remarkable process. He looked for any conceivable fight he could
have in the ring, with any kind of opponent. In the beginning he suffered
some terrible beatings from boxers who used him as sparring material. But
since this was his only form of education, he quickly learned to become as
evasive as possible, to prolong the fights so he could learn.
At the time, fights could go a full twenty rounds, and Johnson’s goal
was always to drag them out to the maximum. In that time he would
carefully study his opponents. He observed how some types would move in
familiar patterns and how others would telegraph their punches. He could
categorize them by the look in their eye and their body language. He
learned to provoke some into a rage so he could study their reactions; others
he lulled to sleep with a calm style, to see the effects of this as well.
Johnson’s method was quite painful—it meant fifteen to twenty bouts a
year. He suffered innumerable hard blows. Even though he could knock out
most of his opponents, he preferred to be evasive and learn on the job. This
meant hearing endless taunts from the mostly white audiences that he was a
coward. Slowly, however, it began to pay off. He faced such a variety of
foes that he became adept at recognizing their particular style the instant the
fight began. He could sense their weaknesses and when exactly he should
move in for the kill. He accustomed himself—mentally and physically—to
the pace of a long, grueling bout. He gained an intuitive feel for the space of
the boxing ring itself, and how to maneuver and exhaust his opponents over
the course of twenty rounds. Many of them later confessed that he seemed
to have the ability to read their minds; he was always a step ahead.
Following this path, within a few short years Johnson transformed himself
into the heavyweight champion of the world and the greatest fighter of his
era.
Too often our concept of learning is to absorb ideas from books, to do
what others tell us to, and perhaps to do some controlled exercises. But this
is an incomplete and fearful concept of learning—cut off from practical
experience. We are creatures who make things; we don’t simply imagine
them. To master any process you must learn through trial and error. You
experiment, you take some hard blows, and you see what works and doesn’t
work in real time. You expose yourself and your work to public scrutiny.
Your failures are embedded in your nervous system; you do not want to
repeat them. Your successes are tied to immediate experience and teach you
more. You come to respect the process in a deep way because you see and
feel the progress you can make through practice and steady labor. Taken far
enough, you gain a fingertip feel for what needs to be done because your
knowledge is tied to something physical and visceral. And having such
intuition is the ultimate point of mastery.
MASTER SOMETHING SIMPLE
Often we have a general feeling of insecurity because we have never really
mastered anything in life. Unconsciously we feel weak and never quite up
to the task. Before we begin something, we sense we will fail. The best way
to overcome this once and for all is to attack this weakness head-on and
build for ourselves a pattern of confidence. And this must be done by first
tackling something simple and basic, giving us a taste for the power we can
have.
Demosthenes—one of the greatest political figures in ancient Athens—
followed such a path, determined to overcome his intense fear of public
speaking. As a child, he was frail and nervous. He talked with a stammer
and always seemed out of breath. He was constantly ridiculed. His father
had died when he was young, leaving him a nice sum of money, but his
guardians quickly stole all of it. He decided to become a lawyer and
eventually take the perpetrators to court on his own. But a lawyer needed to
be an eloquent speaker, and he was an abysmal failure at that. He decided
he would give up law—it seemed too difficult. With what little money he
had, he would retire from the world and attempt somehow to master his
speech impediment. At least then he could take on some kind of public
career.
He built an underground study where he could practice alone. He
shaved half his head so he would be too embarrassed to go out in public. To
overcome his stammer, he walked along the beach with his mouth full of
pebbles, forcing himself to speak without stopping, louder and more
forcefully than the waves. He wrote speeches that he then recited while
running up steep slopes, to develop better breathing techniques. He installed
a looking glass in his study, allowing him to monitor closely the looks on
his face as he declaimed. He would engage in conversations with visitors to
his house and gauge how each word or intonation would affect them.
Within a year of such dedicated practice, he had completely eliminated his
stammer and had transformed himself into a more than adequate orator. He
decided to return to law after all. With each new case that he won, his
confidence rose to new heights.
Understanding the value of practice, he then worked on improving the
delivery of his speeches. Slowly he transformed himself into the supreme
orator of ancient Athens. This newfound confidence translated into
everything he did. He became a leading political figure, renowned for his
fearlessness in the face of any foe.
When you take the time to master a simple process and overcome a
basic insecurity, you develop certain skills that can be applied to anything.
You see instantly the reward that comes from patience, practice, and
discipline. You have the sense that you can tackle almost any problem in the
same way. You create for yourself a pattern of confidence that will continue
to rise.
INTERNALIZ THE RULES OF THE GAME
As a law student at Howard University in the early 1930s, Thurgood
Marshall could contemplate many injustices that blacks experienced in the
United States, but the one that burned in him most deeply was the vast
inequalities in education. He had toured the South on fact-finding missions
for the NAACP and had seen firsthand the abysmal quality of schools set
apart for blacks. And he had felt this injustice himself. He had wanted to go
to the University of Maryland, near his home—it had an excellent law
school. But black students were not admitted there, no matter their
academic record. They were directed towards black universities such as
Howard, which at the time were inferior. Marshall vowed that some day, in
some way, he would help take this unjust system apart.
Upon graduation from Howard in 1933, he faced a crucial decision for
his future. He had been offered a scholarship at Harvard University to study
for an advanced law degree. This represented an incredible opportunity. He
could carve out for himself a nice position within the academic world and
promote his ideas in various journals. It was also the middle of the
Depression, and jobs for black people were few and far between; a degree
from Harvard would ensure him a prosperous future. But something
impelled Marshall in the opposite direction; he decided instead to set up a
private practice in Baltimore and learn from the ground up how the justice
system worked. At first it seemed a foolish decision—he had little work and
his debts were mounting. The few cases he had, he lost and he could not
figure out why. The justice system seemed to have its own rules and codes
to which he had no access.
Marshall decided to employ a unique strategy to overcome this. First, he
made sure that his legal briefs were masterpieces of research and detail,
without any errors or erasures. He made a point of always dressing in the
most professional manner and acting with the utmost courtesy, without
appearing to bow and scrape. In other words, he gave no one the slightest
pretext for judging against him. In this way, he defused suspicion, began to
win a few cases, and gained entrée to the world of white lawyers. Now he
studied that world closely. He saw the importance of certain connections
and friendships, power networks he had not known about before. He
recognized that certain judges required certain treatment. He learned to talk
the language and fit in socially as best he could. He found out that in most
cases, it was best to argue on points of narrow procedure rather than on
grand concepts.
Knowing how to maneuver within these rules and conventions, he
began to win more and more cases. In 1935 he took on the University of
Maryland on behalf of a black student who had been denied admission to its
law school, and won. From then on, he used his knowledge to take on all
forms of segregation in the education system, culminating in 1954 with his
greatest triumph of all, arguing before the U.S. Supreme Court the case
known as Brown v. Board of Education. The court’s decision in his favor
effectively ended any basis for educational segregation in the United States.
What Marshall (who would later become the first African American
appointed to the Supreme Court) had learned by immersing himself in the
white-controlled justice system of his time is that the social process is just
as important as the legal or technical one. This was not something taught in
law school and yet learning it was the key to his ability to function within
the system and advance the cause for which he was fighting.
Understand: when you enter a group as part of a job or a career, there
are all kinds of rules that govern behavior—values of good and bad, power
networks that must be respected, patterns to be followed for successful
action. If you do not patiently observe and learn them well, you will make
all kinds of mistakes without knowing why or how. Think of social and
political skills as a craft that you must master as well as any other. In the
initial phase of your apprenticeship you must do as Marshall did and mute
your colors. Your goal here is not to impress people with your brilliance but
to learn these conventions from the inside. Watch for telling mistakes that
others have made in the group and for which they have paid a price—that
will reveal particular taboos within the culture. With a deepening
knowledge of these rules you can begin to maneuver them for your purpose.
If you find yourself confronting an unjust and corrupt system, it is much
more effective to learn its codes from the inside and discover its
vulnerabilities. Knowing how it works, you can take it apart—for good.
ATTUNE YOURSELF TO THE DETAILS
As a young student-artist in late fifteenth-century Italy, Michelangelo had to
confront a personal limitation. He had grand concepts of things he wanted
to paint and sculpt, but not the requisite skill. He looked at the masterpieces
of other artists and wanted his own work to have a similar aura and effect,
but he was frustrated at the flatness and conventionality of what he created.
He tried an experiment: he began to copy his favorite masterworks down to
the smallest brush stroke, and he discovered that the effect he had so
admired was embedded in certain details—the way these artists were able to
make figures or landscapes come to life by their intense attention to the fine
points. And so began a remarkable apprenticeship to his craft that would
last the rest of his life and completely alter his way of thinking.
In creating his sculptures, he became obsessed with bone structure, but
the books and techniques on the subject seemed woefully inadequate. He
started dissecting human corpses, one after another. This gave him a
profound feel for human anatomy that he could now reproduce in his work.
He developed an interest in texture, how each kind of fabric would fold in
its own way. He worked on perfecting his reproduction of clothes. He
extended these studies of detail to animals and how they moved. When he
was commissioned to do his larger pieces, he avoided that old temptation of
beginning with some grand concept—instead he looked at the material he
was to work with, the space, the individual figures that might comprise it,
and from there he would conceive the overall shape and effect. In this
intense attention to detail, Michelangelo seemed to have discovered the
secret for making his figures come to life in a way that exceeded any other
artist of his time.
Often when you begin a project of any kind, it is from the wrong end.
You tend to think first of what you want to accomplish, imagining the glory
and money it will bring you if it succeeds. You then proceed to make this
concept come to life. But as you go forward you often lose patience,
because the small steps to get there are not nearly as exciting as the
ambitious visions in your head. You must try instead the opposite approach,
which can lead to very different results. You have a project you wish to
bring to life, but you begin by immersing yourself in the details of the
subject or field. You look at the materials you have to work with, the tastes
of your target audience, and the latest technical advances in the field. You
take pleasure in going deeper and deeper into these fine points—your
research is intense. From this knowledge, you shape the project itself,
grounding it in reality rather than in airy concepts in your head. Operating
this way helps you slow your mind down and develop patience for detailed
work, an essential skill for mastering any craft.
REDISCOVER YOUR NATURAL PERSISTENCE
This is the dilemma we all face: to accomplish anything worthwhile in life
generally takes some time—often in blocks of years. But we are creatures
who find it very hard to manage such long periods. We are immersed in the
day-to-day; our emotions fluctuate with each encounter. We have immediate
desires we are constantly working to satisfy. In that long period of time that
we need to reach a goal, we are assailed by a thousand distractions and
temptations that seem more interesting. We lose sight of our objectives and
end up following some detour. This is the source of so many of the failures
in our lives.
To force yourself past any obstacle or temptation, you must be
persistent. As children we all had this quality because we were single-
minded; you must simply rediscover and redevelop this character trait.
First, you must understand the role that your energy level plays in mastering
a process and bringing something to completion. If you take on added goals
or new tasks, your focus will be broken up and you will never attain what
you wanted in the first place. You cannot persist on two or three paths, so
avoid that temptation. Second, try breaking things up into smaller blocks of
time. You have a large goal, but there are steps along the way, and steps
within the steps. These steps represent months instead of years. Reaching
these smaller goals gives you a sense of tangible reward and progress. This
will make it easier for you to resist any diversions along the way and
fearlessly push ahead. Remember: anything will give way to a sustained,
persistent attack on your part.
Reversal of Perspective
We generally experience boredom as something painful and to be avoided
at all costs. From childhood on, we develop the habit of immediately
looking for some activity to kill the feeling. But this activity, if repeated
often enough, becomes boring as well. And so for our entire lives we must
search and search for novel amusements—new friends, new trends to latch
on to, new forms of entertainment, new religions or causes to believe in.
This search might lead us to change our careers and set us on a path of
meandering here and there, in search of something to dull the sensation. But
in all of these cases, the root of the problem is not boredom itself but our
relationship to it.
Try to look at boredom from the opposite perspective—as a call for you
to slow yourself down, to stop searching for endless distractions. This might
mean forcing yourself to spend time alone, overcoming that childish
inability to sit still. When you work through such self-imposed boredom,
you will find your mind clicks into gear—new and unexpected thoughts
will come to you to fill the void. To feel inspired you must first experience a
moment of emptiness. Use such moments to assess the day that went by, to
measure where you are headed. It is a relief to not feel that constant need
for outside entertainment.
On a higher level of this reeducation, you might choose a book to
overcome your boredom, but instead of reading being a passive process of
diversion, you actively mentally engage the author in an argument or
discussion, making the book come to life in your head. At a further point,
you take up a side activity—cultural or physical—that requires a repetitive
process to master. You discover a calming effect in the repetitive element
itself. In this way, boredom becomes your great ally. It helps you to slow
things down, develop patience and self-discipline. Through this process you
will be able to withstand the inevitable empty moments of life and convert
them into your own private pleasures.
NOW THERE ARE…INDIVIDUALS WHO WOULD RATHER PERISH THAN
WORK WITHOUT TAKING PLEASURE IN THEIR WORK; THEY ARE
CHOOSY…AND HAVE NO USE FOR AMPLE REWARDS IF THE WORK IS NOT
ITSELF THE REWARD OF REWARDS…. THEY DO NOT FEAR BOREDOM AS
MUCH AS WORK WITHOUT PLEASURE; INDEED, THEY NEED A LOT OF
BOREDOM IF THEIR WORK IS TO SUCCEED. FOR…ALL INVENTIVE
SPIRITS, BOREDOM IS THAT DISAGREEABLE “LULL” OF THE SOUL THAT
PRECEDES A HAPPY VOYAGE AND CHEERFUL WINDS.
—Friedrich Nietzsche

CHAPTER 9
Push Beyond Your Limits—Self-Belief
YOUR SENSE OF WHO YOU ARE WILL DETERMINE YOUR ACTIONS AND
WHAT YOU END UP GETTING IN LIFE. IF YOU SEE YOUR REACH AS
LIMITED, THAT YOU ARE MOSTLY HELPLESS IN THE FACE OF SO MANY
DIFFICULTIES, THAT IT IS BEST TO KEEP YOUR AMBITIONS LOW, THEN
YOU WILL RECEIVE THE LITTLE THAT YOU EXPECT. KNOWING THIS
DYNAMIC, YOU MUST TRAIN YOURSELF FOR THE OPPOSITE—ASK FOR
MORE, AIM HIGH, AND BELIEVE THAT YOU ARE DESTINED FOR
SOMETHING GREAT. YOUR SENSE OF SELF-WORTH COMES FROM YOU
ALONE—NEVER THE OPINION OF OTHERS. WITH A RISING CONFIDENCE
IN YOUR ABILITIES, YOU WILL TAKE RISKS THAT WILL INCREASE YOUR
CHANCES OF SUCCESS. PEOPLE FOLLOW THOSE WHO KNOW WHERE
THEY ARE GOING, SO CULTIVATE AN AIR OF CERTAINTY AND BOLDNESS.
 
The Hustler’s Ambition
LET ME POINT OUT TO YOU THAT FREEDOM IS NOT SOMETHING THAT
ANYBODY CAN BE GIVEN; FREEDOM IS SOMETHING PEOPLE TAKE AND
PEOPLE ARE AS FREE AS THE WANT TO BE.
—James Baldwin
Curtis Jackson’s mother, Sabrina, had one powerful ambition in her life—to
somehow make enough money to move her and her son far away from the
hood. She had had Curtis when she was fifteen, and the only reasonable
outlet at that age for making any good money was dealing drugs. It was a
particularly dangerous life for a female hustler, and so she built up an
intimidating presence to protect herself. She was tougher and more fearless
than many of the male dealers. Her only soft spot was her son—she wanted
a different fate for him than hustling. To shelter him from the life she led,
she had him stay with her parents in Southside Queens. As often as
possible, she would show up with presents for the boy and to keep an eye
on him. Some day soon they would move to a better place.
As part of a drug beef, Sabrina was murdered at the age of twenty-three,
and from that moment on, it looked like Curtis’s fate in this world had been
sealed. He was now essentially alone—no parents or real mentor to give
him a sense of direction. It seemed almost certain that the following
scenario would play itself out: He would drift towards life on the streets. To
prove his toughness, he would eventually have to resort to violence and
crime. He would find his way into the prison system, and he would
probably return for several stints. His life would basically be confined to
this neighborhood, and as he got older he could turn to drugs or alcohol to
see him through, or at best a series of menial jobs. All the statistics on
parentless children growing up in such an environment pointed towards this
limited and bleak future.
And yet in his mind something much different was taking shape. With
his mother gone, he spent more and more time alone and began to indulge
himself in fantasies that carried him far beyond his neighborhood. He saw
himself as a leader of some sort, perhaps in business or in war. He
visualized in great detail the places where he would live, the cars he would
drive, the outside world he would some day explore. It was a life of
freedom and possibility. But these were not mere fantasies—they were real;
they were destined to happen. He could see them clearly. Most important,
he felt that his mother was looking after him—her energy and ambition
were inside him now.
Oddly enough, he would follow in her footsteps with the same plan—to
hustle and get out of the game. To avoid her fate he forged an intense belief
that nothing could stop him—not a gunshot, the schemes of other hustlers,
or the police. These streets would not confine him.
 
In May of 2000, Curtis (now known as 50 Cent) somehow survived the nine
bullets that a hired assassin had pumped into his body. The timing of the
attack had been particularly poignant—after years of hustling on the streets
and in music, his first album had been about to come out. But then in the
aftermath of the shooting, Columbia Records canceled the album and
dropped him from the label. He would have to start all over. In the months
to come, as he lay in bed recovering from his wounds, he began to
reconstruct himself mentally, much as he had done after the murder of his
mother. He saw in his mind, in even fresher detail than ever, the path he
would now have to take. He would conquer the rap world with a mix-tape
campaign the likes of which no one had ever seen before. It would come
from his intense energy, his persistence, the even tougher sound he would
create, and the image he would now project of an indestructible gangsta.
Within a year of the shooting, he was on his way to making this vision a
reality. His first songs hit the streets and created a sensation. As he
progressed on this path, however, he saw one very large impediment still
blocking his path: the assassins were looking to finish the job and they
could show up at any moment. Fifty was forced to keep a low profile and
stay on the run, but this feeling of being hunted was intolerable. He would
not live this way, and so he decided that what he needed was a group of
tight-knit disciples who would help protect him and overcome his sense of
isolation.
To make this a reality, he told his closest friends to convene a meeting
in his grandparents’ house in Southside Queens. They were to invite his
most fervent fans in the neighborhood—the young men whom they knew to
be loyal and dependable. And they should all bring guns to help secure the
street before Fifty showed up.
When Fifty finally entered the living room of his grandparents’ house
the day of the meeting, he could feel the energy and excitement. The space
was filled with over twenty young men, all ready to do his bidding. He
began by painting for them his precise vision of the future. His music now
was hot, but it was going to get a lot hotter. Within two more years, he was
certain to land a major record deal. In his head, he already could hear the
songs for his first record, visualize the cover and the overall concept—it
was to be the story of his life. This record, he assured them, would be an
astronomical success, because he had figured out a kind of formula for how
to make and market hit songs. He was not the usual rap star, he explained.
He was not in this for the bling or the attention, but for the power. He would
take the money from the record sales to establish his own businesses. This
was destiny—everything in his life was meant to happen as it did, including
the assassination attempt, including this very meeting that afternoon.
He was going to forge a business empire and he wanted to take all of
them with him. Whatever any of them wanted, he would provide, as long as
they proved themselves dependable and shared his sense of purpose. They
could be rappers on the record label he would establish or road managers
for his tours; or they could go to college and get a degree—he would pay
for it all. You are like my pack of wolves, he explained, but none of this will
happen if the alpha wolf is killed. What he asked for was their help—in
providing security, in keeping him in touch with what was happening on the
streets, and in doing some of the legwork for the promotion and distribution
of his mix-tapes. He needed followers and he had chosen them.
Almost all of them agreed to the proposal, and over the years to come
many of them stayed on to gain important positions within his expanding
empire. And if they ever stopped to think about it, it was uncanny how close
the future had come to resemble the picture he had painted so many years
before.
 
By 2007, after the tremendous success of his first two records, Fifty began
to sense a problem looming on the horizon. He had created an image for the
public, a Fifty myth that centered on his tough and menacing presence and
his indestructibility. This was projected in his videos and interviews, and
the photos of him with his glare and tattoos. Most of it was real, but it was
all heightened for dramatic effect. This image had brought him a great deal
of attention, but it was turning into an elaborate trap. To prove to his fans
that he was still the same Fifty, he would have to keep upping the ante,
engaging in more and more outrageous antics. He could not afford to seem
like he was going soft. But it was not real to him anymore. He had moved
on to a different life, and to stay rooted in this past image would prove to be
the ultimate limit to his freedom. He would be trapped in the past and the
prisoner of the very image he had created. It would all grow stale and his
popularity would wane.
In each phase of his life he had found himself challenged by some
seemingly insurmountable obstacle—surviving on the streets without
parents to guide him, keeping away from the violence and time in prison,
eluding the assassins on his heels, etc. If at any moment he had doubted
himself or accepted the normal limits to his mobility, he would be dead or
powerless, which was as good as dead in his mind. What had saved him in
each case was the intensity of his ambition and self-belief.
Now was not the time to get complacent or have doubts about the
future. He would have to transform himself again. He would have his
signature tattoos removed; perhaps he would also change his name again.
He would create a new image and myth to fit this period of his life—part
business mogul, part power broker, slowly withdrawing from the public eye
and flexing his muscles behind the scenes. This would surprise the public,
keep him a step ahead of their expectations, and remove yet another barrier
to his freedom. Reinventing himself in this way would be the ultimate
reversal of the fate that seemed to await him after the death of his mother.
The Fearless Approach
YOUR OPINION OF YOURSELF BECOMES YOUR REALITY. IF YOU HAVE
ALL THESE DOUBTS, THEN NO ONE WILL BELIEVE IN YOU AND
EVERYTHING WILL GO WRONG. IF YOU THINK THE OPPOSITE, THE
OPPOSITE WILL HAPPEN. IT’S THAT SIMPLE.
—50 Cent
When you were born, you entered this world with no identity or ego. You
were simply a bundle of chaotic impulses and desires. But slowly you
acquired a personality that you have more or less built upon over the years.
You are outgoing or shy, bold or skittish—a mix of various traits that
defines you. You tend to accept this personality as something very real and
established. But much of this identity is shaped and constructed by outside
forces—the opinions and judgments of hundreds of other people who have
crossed your path over the years.
This process began with your parents. As a child you paid extra close
attention to what they said about you, modeling your behavior to win their
approval and love. You closely monitored their body language to see what
they liked and didn’t like. Much of this had a tremendous impact on your
evolution. If, for example, they commented about your shyness, it could
easily strengthen any tendencies you had in that direction. You suddenly
became aware of your own awkwardness and it stuck inside you. If they
had said something different, trying to encourage you in your social skills
and draw you out, it might have had a much different impact. Either way,
shyness is a fluid quality—it fluctuates according to the situation and the
people you are around. It should never be felt as a set personality trait. And
yet these judgments from parents, friends, and teachers are given inordinate
weight and become internalized.
Many of these criticisms and opinions are not objective at all. People
want to see certain qualities in you. They project onto you their own fears
and fantasies. They want you to fit a conventional pattern; it is frustrating
and often frightening for people to think they cannot figure someone out.
Behavior that is considered abnormal or different, which may very well be
coming from somewhere deep within you, is actively discouraged. Envy
plays a role as well—if you are too good at something, you might be made
to feel strange or undesirable. Even the praise of others is often designed to
hem you in to certain ideals they want to see in you. All of this shapes your
personality, limits your range of behavior, and becomes like a mask that
hardens on your face.
Understand: you are in fact a mystery to yourself. You began life as
someone completely unique—a mix of qualities that will never be repeated
in the history of the universe. In your earliest years, you were a mass of
conflicting emotions and desires. Then something foreign to you is placed
over this reality. Who you are is much more chaotic and fluid than this
surface character; you are full of untapped potential and possibility.
As a child you had no real power to resist this process, but as an adult
you could easily rebel and rediscover your individuality. You could stop
deriving your sense of identity and self-worth from others. You could
experiment and push past the limits people have set for you. You could take
action that is different from what they expect. But that is to incur a risk. You
are being unconventional, perhaps a bit strange in the eyes of those who
know you. You could fail in this action and be ridiculed. Conforming to
people’s expectations is safer and more comfortable, even if doing so makes
you feel miserable and confined. In essence, you are afraid of yourself and
what you could become.
There is another, fearless way of approaching your life. It begins by
untying yourself from the opinions of others. This is not as easy as it
sounds. You are breaking a lifelong habit of continually referring to other
people when measuring your value. You must experiment and feel the
sensation of not concerning yourself with what others think or expect of
you. You do not advance or retreat with their opinions in mind. You drown
out their voices that often translate into doubts inside you. Instead of
focusing on the limits you have internalized, you think of the potential you
have for new and different behavior. Your personality can be altered and
shaped by your conscious decision to do so.
We barely understand the role that willpower plays in our actions. When
you raise your opinion of yourself and what you are capable of it has a
decided influence on what you do. For instance, you feel more comfortable
taking some risk, knowing that you are always able to get back up on your
feet if it fails. Taking this risk will then make your energy levels rise—you
have to meet the challenge or go under, and you will find untapped
reservoirs of creativity within you. People are drawn to those who act
boldly, and their attention and faith in you will have the effect of
heightening your confidence. Feeling less confined by doubts, you give
freer rein to your individuality, which makes everything you do more
effective. This movement towards confidence has a self-fulfilling quality
that is impossible to deny.
Moving towards such self-belief does not mean you cut yourself off
from others and their opinions of your actions. You must take constant
measure of how people receive your work, and use to maximum effect their
feedback (see chapter 7). But this process must begin from a position of
inner strength. If you are dependent on their judgments for your sense of
worth, then your ego will always be weak and fragile. You will have no
center or sense of balance. You will wilt under criticisms and soar too high
with any praise. Their opinions are merely helping you shape your work,
not your self-image. If you make mistakes, if the public judges you
negatively, you have an unshakable inner core that can accept such
judgments, but you remain convinced of your own worth.
In impoverished environments like the hood, people’s sense of who they
are and what they deserve is continually under attack. People from the
outside tend to judge them for where they come from—as violent,
dangerous, or untrustworthy—as if the accident of where they were born
determines who they are. They tend to internalize many of these judgments
and perhaps deep inside feel that they don’t deserve much of what is
considered good in this world. Those from the hood who want to overcome
this pronouncement of the outside world have to fight with double the
energy and desperation. They have to convince themselves first that they
are worth much more and can rise as far as they want, through willpower.
The intensity of their ambition becomes the deciding factor. It has to be
supremely high. That is why the most ambitious and confident figures in
history often emerge from the most impoverished and arduous of
circumstances.
For those of us who live outside such an environment, “ambition” has
almost become a dirty word. It is associated with such historical types as
Richard III or Richard Nixon. It reeks of insecurity and evil deeds to reach
the top. People who want power so badly must have psychological
problems, or so we think. Much of this social prudery around the idea of
power and ambition comes from an unconscious guilt and desire to keep
other people down. To those occupying a position of privilege, the
ambitiousness of those from below seems like something scary and
threatening.
If you come from relative prosperity, you are more than likely tainted
with some of this prejudice and you must extirpate it as much as possible. If
you believe ambition is ugly and needs to be disguised or repressed, you
will have to tiptoe around others, making a show of false humility, in two
minds every time you contemplate some necessary power move. If you see
it as beautiful, as the driving force behind all great human
accomplishments, then you will feel no guilt in raising your level of
ambition as high as you want and pushing aside those who block your path.
One of the most fearless men in history has to be the great nineteenth-
century abolitionist Frederick Douglass. He was born into the cruelest
system known to man—slavery. It was designed in every detail to destroy a
person’s spirit. It did so by separating people from their families, so they
could develop no real emotional attachments in their lives. It used constant
threats and fear to break any sense of free will, and it made sure that slaves
were kept illiterate and ignorant. They were to form only the lowest
opinions of themselves. Douglass himself suffered all of these fates as a
child, but somehow from his earliest years he believed that he was worth
much more, that something powerful had been crushed but that it could
spring back to life. As a child he saw himself escaping the clutches of
slavery some day, and he nourished himself on that dream.
Then in 1828, at the age of ten, Douglass was sent by his master to
work in the home of a son-in-law in Baltimore, Maryland. Douglass read
this as some kind of providence working in his favor. It meant he would
escape the hard labor on the plantation and have more time to think. In
Baltimore, the mistress of the house was constantly reading the Bible, and
one day he asked her if she would teach him to read. She happily obliged
and he quickly learned. The master of the house heard of this and severely
upbraided his wife—a slave must never be allowed to read and write. He
forbade her to continue with the teachings. Douglass, however, could now
manage on his own, getting books and dictionaries for himself on the sly.
He memorized famous speeches, which he could go over in his mind at any
time of day. He saw himself becoming a great orator, railing against the
evils of slavery.
With growing knowledge of the outside world, he came to resent even
more bitterly the life he was forced to lead. This infected his attitude, and
his owners sensed it. At the age of fifteen he was sent to a farm run by a Mr.
Covey, whose sole task in life was to break the spirit of a rebellious slave.
Covey, however, was not successful. Douglass had already created in
his mind an identity for himself that would not match what Covey wanted
to impose on him. This image of his own high value, believed in with all his
energy, would become reality. He maintained his inner freedom and his
sanity. He converted all of the whippings and mistreatment into a spur for
him to escape to the North; it gave him more material to some day share
with the world on the evils of slavery. Several years later, Douglass
managed to escape to the north. There he became a leading abolitionist,
eventually founding his own newspaper and always pushing against the
limits people tried to impose on him.
Understand: people will constantly attack you in life. One of their main
weapons will be to instill in you doubts about yourself—your worth, your
abilities, your potential. They will often disguise this as their objective
opinion, but invariably it has a political purpose—they want to keep you
down. You are continually prone to believe these opinions, particularly if
your self-image is fragile. In every moment of life you can defy and deny
people this power. You do so by maintaining a sense of purpose, a high
destiny you are fulfilling. From such a position, people’s attacks do not
harm you; they only make you angry and more determined. The higher you
raise this self-image, the fewer judgments and manipulations you will
tolerate. This will translate into fewer obstacles in your path. If someone
like Douglass could forge this attitude amid the most unfree of
circumstances, then we should surely be able to find our own way to such
inner strength.
Keys to Fearlessness
ONE’S OWN FREE, UNTRAMMELED DESIRES, ONE’S OWN WHIM…ALL OF
THIS IS PRECISELY THAT WHICH FITS NO CLASSIFICATION, AND WHICH
IS CONSTANTLY KNOCKING ALL SYSTEMS AND THEORIES TO HELL. AND
WHERE DID OUR SAGES GET THE IDEA THAT MAN MUST HAVE NORMAL,
VIRTUOUS DESIRES? WHAT MAN NEEDS IS ONLY HIS OWN INDEPENDENT
WISHING, WHATEVER THAT INDEPENDENCE MAY COST AND WHEREVER
IT MAY LEAD.
—Fyodor Dostoyevsky
In today’s world our idea of freedom largely revolves around the ability to
satisfy certain needs and desires. We feel free if we can gain the kind of
employment we desire, buy the things we want, and engage in a wide range
of behavior, as long as it does not harm others. According to this concept,
freedom is something essentially passive—it is given and guaranteed to us
by our government (often by not meddling in our affairs) and various social
groups.
There is, however, a completely different concept of liberty. It is not
something that people grant us as a privilege or right. It is a state of mind
that we must work to attain and hold on to—with much effort. It is
something active and not passive. It comes from exercising free will. In our
day-to-day affairs much of our actions are not free and independent. We
tend to conform to society’s norms in behavior and thinking. We generally
act out of habit, without much thought as to why we do things. When we act
with freedom, we ignore any pressures to conform; we step beyond our
usual routines. Asserting our will and our individuality, we move on our
own.
Let us say we have a career that affords us enough money to live
comfortably and offers us a reasonable future. But this job is not deeply
satisfying; it doesn’t lead us anywhere we want to go. Perhaps we also have
to deal with a boss who is difficult and imperious. Our fears for the future,
our comfortable habits, and our sense of propriety will compel us to stay on.
All of these factors are forces that limit and confine us. But at any moment
we could let go of the fear and leave the job, not really certain where we are
headed but confident we can do better. In that moment we have exercised
free will. It initiates from our own deepest desire and need. Once we leave,
our mind must rise to the challenge. To continue on this path, we have to
take more independent actions, because we cannot depend on habits or
friends to see us through. Free action has a momentum of its own.
Many will argue that this idea of active freedom is basically an illusion.
We are products of our environment, so they say. If people become
successful, it is because they benefited from certain favorable social
circumstances—they were in the right place at the right time; they got the
proper education and mentoring. Their willpower played a part, no doubt,
but a small part. If circumstances were different, so the argument goes,
these types would not have had the success they had, no matter how strong
their willpower.
All kinds of statistics and studies can be trotted out to support this
argument, but in the end this concept is merely a product of our times and
the emphasis on passive freedom. It chooses to focus on circumstance and
environment, as if the exceptionally free actions of a Frederick Douglass
could also be explained by his physiology or the luck he had in learning to
read. In the end, such a philosophy wants to deny the essential freedom we
all possess to make a decision independent of outside forces. It wants to
diminish individuality—we are just products of a social process, they imply.
Understand: at any moment you could kick this philosophy and its ideas
into the trashcan by doing something irrational and unexpected, contrary to
what you have done in the past, an act not possibly explained by your
upbringing or nervous system. What prevents you from taking such action
is not mommy, daddy, or society, but your own fears. You are essentially
free to move beyond any limits others have set for you, to re-create yourself
as thoroughly as you wish.
If you had some terribly painful experience in the past, you could
choose to let that pain sit there and you could soak in it. On the other hand,
you could decide to convert it into anger, a cause to promote, or some form
of action. Or you could choose to simply drop it and move on, relishing the
freedom and power that that brings you. No one can take away these
options or force your response. It is all up to you.
Moving to this more active form of freedom does not mean that you are
giving yourself over to wild and ill-considered action. Your decision to alter
a career path, for instance, is based on careful consideration of your
strengths and deepest desires and the future you want. It comes from
thinking for yourself and not accepting what others think about you. The
risks you take are not emotional and for the sake of a thrill; they are
calculated. The need to conform and please others will always play a role in
our actions, consciously or unconsciously. To be completely free is
impossible and undesirable. You are merely exploring a freer range of
action in your life and the power it could bring you.
What block us from moving in this direction are the pressures we feel to
conform; our rigid, habitual patterns of thinking; and our self-doubts and
fears. The following are five strategies to help you push past these limits.
DEFY ALL CATEGORIES
As a young girl growing up in Kansas at the turn of the twentieth century,
Amelia Earhart felt oddly out of place. She liked to do things her own way
—playing rough games with the boys, spending hours by herself reading
books, or disappearing on long hikes. She was prone to behavior that others
considered strange and unorthodox—at boarding school she was kicked out
for walking on the roof in her nightgown. As she got older she felt intense
pressure to settle down and be more like other girls. Earhart had an
abhorrence, however, of marriage and the constrictions it represented for
women, so she looked for a career, trying her hand at all kinds of jobs. But
she craved adventure and challenges, and the jobs available to her were
menial and mindless.
Then one day in 1920 she went for a short ride in an airplane, and
suddenly she knew she had found her calling. She took lessons and became
a pilot. In the air she felt the freedom she had always been looking for.
Piloting a plane was a constant challenge—physical and mental. She could
express the daring side of her character, her love of adventure, as well as
her interest in the mechanics of flying.
Female pilots at the time were not taken seriously. The men were the
ones who set records and blazed new paths. To combat this, Earhart had to
push the limits as far as she could, doing feats of flying that would make
headlines and contribute something to the profession. In 1932 she became
the first woman to pilot a plane solo across the Atlantic, in what would turn
out to be her most death-defying and physically arduous flight. In 1935 she
contemplated doing a crossing of the Gulf of Mexico. One of the most
famous male pilots of the time told her it was too dangerous and not worth
the risk. Feeling there was a challenge in this, she decided to attempt the
flight anyway and managed it with relative ease, showing others how it
could be done.
If at any moment in her life she had succumbed to the pressure to be
more like others, she would have lost that magic that now seemed to follow
her when she went her own direction. She decided to continue being
herself, whatever the consequences might be. She dressed in her
unconventional manner and spoke her mind on political matters, even
though that was considered unbecoming. When the famous publicist and
promoter George Putnam asked for her hand in marriage, Earhart accepted
under the condition that he sign a contract guaranteeing he would respect
her desires for maximum freedom within the relationship.
People who met her invariably commented that she was not really
masculine or feminine or even androgynous, but completely herself, a
unique mix of qualities. It was this part of her that fascinated people and
kept her in the limelight. In 1937, she attempted the riskiest flight of her
career—to circle the world via the equator, including a stopover on a tiny
island in the Pacific. She disappeared somewhere near the island, never to
be found, all of which only added to the legend of Earhart as the
consummate risk taker who did everything her own way.
Understand: the day you were born you became engaged in a struggle
that continues to this day and will determine your success or failure in life.
You are an individual, with ideas and skills that make you unique. But
people are constantly trying to fit you into narrow categories that make you
more predictable and easier to manage. They want to see you as shy or
outgoing, sensitive or tough. If you succumb to this pressure, then you may
gain some social acceptance, but you will lose the unconventional parts of
your character that are the source of your uniqueness and power. You must
resist this process at all costs, seeing people’s neat and tidy judgments as a
form of confinement. Your task is to retain or rediscover those aspects of
your character that defy categorization, and to give them even greater play.
Remaining unique, you will create something unique and inspire the kind of
respect you would never receive from tepid conformity.
CONSTANTLY REINVENT YOURSELF
As a child, the future president John F. Kennedy was extremely frail and
prone to illness. He spent much time in various hospitals, and grew up to be
rather frail and weak looking. From these experiences he developed a
horror of anything that made him feel that he had no control over his life.
And one form of powerlessness particularly irked him—the judgments
people made of him based on his appearance. They would see him as weak
and fragile, underestimating his underlying strength of character. So he
initiated a lifelong process of wresting this control from others, constantly
re-creating himself and casting the image that he wanted people to see of
him.
As a youth, he was perceived as the pleasure-loving son of a powerful
father, so at the outbreak of World War II, despite his physical limitations,
he enlisted in the navy, determined to show another side of himself. As a
lieutenant on a patrol torpedo in the Pacific, his boat was rammed and cut in
two by a Japanese destroyer. He proceeded to lead his men to safety in a
way that earned him numerous medals for bravery. During this incident he
displayed an almost callous disregard for his own life, perhaps in an attempt
once and for all to prove his masculinity. In 1946, he decided to run for
Congress, and he used his war record to craft the image of a young man
who would be an equally fearless fighter for his constituency.
A few years later, as a senator, he realized that many in the public
perceived him as a bit of a lightweight—young and unproven. And so yet
again, he chose to reinvent himself, this time by writing a book (authored
with his speechwriter Theodore Sorenson) called Profiles in Courage,
cataloguing stories of famous senators who defied convention and achieved
great things. The book won a Pulitzer Prize, and more important, it
completely altered the image the public had of Kennedy. He was now seen
as thoughtful and independent, somehow following the path of the senators
he had written about—clearly an intended effect.
In 1960, when Kennedy was running for president, people once again
underestimated him. They saw him as the young Catholic liberal senator
who could not possibly appeal to the majority of Americans. This time he
decided to recast himself as the inspiring prophet who would lead the
country out of the doldrums of the Eisenhower era, returning America to its
frontier roots and creating a sense of unified purpose. It was an image of
vigor and youth (contrary to his still physical weakness) and it proved
compelling enough to captivate the public and win the election.
Understand: people judge you by appearances, the image you project
through your actions, words, and style. If you do not take control of this
process, then people will see and define you the way they want to, often to
your detriment. You might think that being consistent with this image will
make others respect and trust you, but in fact it is the opposite—over time
you seem predictable and weak. Consistency is an illusion anyway—each
passing day brings changes within you. You must not be afraid to express
these evolutions. The powerful learn early in life that they have the freedom
to mold their image, fitting the needs and moods of the moment. In this
way, they keep others off balance and maintain an air of mystery. You must
follow this path and find great pleasure in reinventing yourself, as if you
were the author writing your own drama.
SUBVERT YOUR PATTERNS
Animals depend on instincts and habits to survive. We as humans depend on
our conscious, rational thinking, which gives us greater freedom of action,
the ability to alter our behavior according to circumstance. And yet that
animal part of our own nature, that compulsion to repeat the same things,
tends to dominate our way of thinking. We succumb to mental patterns,
which makes our actions repetitive as well. This was the problem that the
great architect Frank Lloyd Wright was obsessed with, and he came up with
a powerful solution.
As a young architect in the 1890s, Wright could not understand why
most people in his profession chose to design buildings based on patterns.
Houses had to follow a certain model, determined by materials and cost.
One style became popular, and people copied it endlessly. Living in such a
house or working in such offices would make people feel soulless, like cogs
in a machine. In nature, no two trees are ever the same. A forest is formed in
a kind of random fashion and that is its beauty. Wright was determined to
follow this organic model rather than the mass-produced model of the
machine age. Despite the cost and energy, he decided that no two buildings
of his would ever be the same in any way. He would extend this to his own
behavior and interactions with others—he took delight in being capricious,
in doing the opposite of what colleagues and clients expected from him.
This eccentric manner of working led to the creation of revolutionary
designs that made him the most famous architect of his time.
In 1934 he was commissioned by Edgar Kaufmann, a Pittsburgh
department-store magnate, to design a vacation house facing a waterfall on
Bear Creek in rural Pennsylvania. Wright needed to see the design in his
mind before he could commit it to paper; for this project nothing would
come to him, and so he decided to play a game on himself. He simply
ignored the work. Months went by. Finally Kaufmann had had enough and
telephoned Wright—he demanded to see the design. Wright exclaimed that
it was finished. Kaufmann said he would be over in two hours to look it
over.
Wright’s associates were aghast—he had not yet penciled in one line.
Nonplussed and with a rush of creative energy, he began to design the
house. It would not face the waterfall, he decided, but stand over and
incorporate it. When Kaufmann saw the design, he was delighted. The
house became known as Fallingwater, often considered Wright’s most
beautiful creation. In essence, Wright had forced his mind to face the
problem without research or preconceptions, completely in the moment. It
was an exercise to free himself from prior habits and create something
totally new.
What often prevent us from using the mental fluidity and freedom that
we naturally possess are the physical routines in our lives. We see the same
people and do the same things, and our minds follow these patterns. The
solution then is to break this up. For instance, we could deliberately indulge
in some random, even irrational act, perhaps doing the very opposite of
what we would normally do in our day-to-day life. By taking an action we
have never done before, we place ourselves in unfamiliar territory—our
minds naturally awaken to the novel situation. In a similar vein, we can
force ourselves to take different routes, visit strange places, encounter
different people, wake up at odd hours, or read books that challenge our
minds instead of dull them. We should practice this when we feel
particularly blocked and uncreative. In such moments, it is best to be
ruthless with ourselves and our patterns.
CREATE A SENSE OF DESTINY
In the year 1428, soldiers stationed at the garrison at the French town of
Vaucouleurs began to receive visits from a sixteen-year-old girl named
Jeanne d’Arc (Joan of Arc). She was the daughter of lowly peasants from a
nearby poor village, and she repeated to these soldiers the same message:
she had been chosen by God to rescue France from the desperate state it had
fallen into. In the previous few years, the country had become overrun by
English invaders, who now held the French king hostage in England. The
English were on the verge of conquering the key French city of Orléans.
The Dauphin, heir to the French throne, was languishing away at a castle in
the country, choosing to do nothing. Jeanne had had visions from various
saints who explained to her precisely what she must do—convince the
Dauphin to give her troops to lead to Orléans, defeat the English there, and
then lead the Dauphin to Reims, where he would be crowned the new king
of France, to be known as Charles VII.
Many people in France at the time were having such visions, and the
soldiers who listened to Jeanne could not help but feel skeptical. But Jeanne
was different from the others. Despite the soldiers’ lack of interest, she kept
returning with her usual message. Nothing could discourage her. She was
fearless, moving unescorted among so many restless soldiers. She spoke
plainly, like any peasant girl, but there was not a shred of doubt in her
voice, and her eyes were lit up with conviction. She was certain of these
visions and would not rest until she had fulfilled her destiny. Her
explanations of what she would do were so detailed that they seemed to
have the weight of reality.
And so a few soldiers came to believe she was for real and set in motion
a chain of events. They convinced the local governor to allow them to
escort her to the Dauphin. The Dauphin eventually believed her story as
well and gave her the troops she requested. The citizens of Orléans,
convinced she was destined to be their savior, rallied to her side and helped
her defeat the English. The momentum she brought to the French side
continued for well over a year, until she was captured and sold to the
English and, after a lengthy trial, burned at the stake as a witch.
The story of Jeanne d’Arc demonstrates a simple principle: the higher
your self-belief, the more your power to transform reality. Having supreme
confidence makes you fearless and persistent, allowing you to overcome
obstacles that stop most people in their tracks. It makes others believe in
you as well. And the most intense form of self-belief is to feel a sense of
destiny impelling you forward. This destiny can come from otherworldly
sources or it can come from yourself. Think of it in these terms: you have a
set of skills and experiences that make you unique. They point towards
some life task that you were meant to accomplish. You see signs of this in
the predilections of your youth, certain tasks you were naturally drawn to.
When you are involved in this task, everything seems to flow more
naturally. Believing you are destined to accomplish something does not
make you passive or unfree, but the opposite. You are liberated of the
normal doubts and confusions that plague us. You have a sense of purpose
that guides you but does not chain you to one way of doing things. And
when your willpower is so deeply engaged, it will push you past any limits
or dangers.
BET ON YOURSELF
It is always easy to rationalize your own doubts and conservative instincts,
particularly when times are tough. You will convince yourself that it is
foolhardy to take any risks, that it is better to wait for when circumstances
are more propitious. But this is a dangerous mentality. It signifies an overall
lack of confidence in yourself that will carry over to better times. You will
find it hard to rouse yourself out of your defensive posture. The truth is that
the greatest inventions and advances in technology or business generally
come in negative periods because there is a greater necessity for creative
thinking and radical solutions that break with the past. These are moments
that are ripe for opportunity. While others retrench and retreat, you must
think of taking risks, trying new things, and looking at the future that will
come out of the present crisis.
You must always be prepared to place a bet on yourself, on your future,
by heading in a direction that others seem to fear. This means you believe
that if you fail, you have the inner resources to recover. This belief acts as a
kind of mental safety net. When you move ahead on some new venture or
direction, your mind will snap to attention; your energy will be focused and
intense. By making yourself feel the necessity to be creative, your mind will
rise to the occasion.
Reversal of Perspective
For most of us, the words “ego” and “egotism” express something negative.
Egotistical people have an oversize opinion of themselves. Instead of
considering what is important for society, a group, or family, they think first
and foremost of themselves and act upon this. Their vision is narrowed to
the point of seeing everything in reference to their needs and desires. But
there is another way to look at it: we all have an ego, a sense of who we are.
And this ego, or self-relationship, is either strong or weak.
People with a weak ego do not have a secure sense of their worth or
potential. They pay extra attention to the opinions of others. They might
perceive anything as a personal attack or affront. They need constant
attention and validation from others. To compensate for and disguise this
fragility, they will often assume an arrogant, aggressive front. This needy,
dependent, self-obsessed variety of ego is what we find irritating and
distasteful.
A strong ego, however, is completely different. People who have a solid
sense of their own value and who feel secure about themselves have the
capacity to look at the world with greater objectivity. They can be more
considerate and thoughtful because they can get outside of themselves.
People with a strong ego set up boundaries—their sense of pride will not
allow them to accept manipulative or hurtful behavior. We generally like to
be around such types. Their confidence and strength is contagious. To have
such a strong ego should be an ideal for all of us.
So many people who attain the heights of power in this culture—
celebrities, for instance—have to make a show of false humility and
modesty, as if they got as far as they did by accident and not by ego or
ambition. They want to act as if they are no different from anyone else and
are almost embarrassed by their power and success. These are all signs of a
weak ego. As an egotist of the strong variety, you trumpet your
individuality and take great pride in your accomplishments. If others cannot
accept that, or judge you as arrogant, that is their problem, not yours.
WE ARE FREE WHEN OUR ACTS PROCEED FROM OUR ENTIRE
PERSONALITY, WHEN THEY EXPRESS IT, WHEN THEY EXHIBIT THAT
INDEFINABLE RESEMBLANCE TO IT WHICH WE FIND OCCASIONALLY
BETWEEN THE ARTIST AND HIS WORK.
—Henri Bergson

CHAPTER 10
Confront Your Mortality—the Sublime
IN THE FACE OF OUR INEVITABLE MORTALITY WE CAN DO ONE OF TWO
THINGS. WE CAN ATTEMPT TO AVOID THE THOUGHT AT ALL COSTS,
CLINGING TO THE ILLUSION THAT WE HAVE ALL THE TIME IN THE
WORLD. OR WE CAN CONFRONT THIS REALITY, ACCEPT AND EVEN
EMBRACE IT, CONVERTING OUR CONSCIOUSNESS OF DEATH INTO
SOMETHING POSITIVE AND ACTIVE. IN ADOPTING SUCH A FEARLESS
PHILOSOPHY, WE GAIN A SENSE OF PROPORTION, BECOME ABLE TO
SEPARATE WHAT IS PETTY FROM WHAT IS TRULY IMPORTANT. KNOWING
OUR DAYS TO BE NUMBERED, WE HAVE A SENSE OF URGENCY AND
MISSION. WE CAN APPRECIATE LIFE ALL THE MORE FOR ITS
IMPERMANENCE. IF WE CAN OVERCOME THE FEAR OF DEATH, THEN
THERE IS NOTHING LEFT TO FEAR.
 
The Hustler’s Metamorphosis
I HAD REACHED THE POINT AT WHICH I WAS NOT AFRAID TO DIE. THIS
SPIRIT MADE ME A FREEMAN IN FACT, WHILE I REMAINED A SLAVE IN
FORM.
—Frederick Douglass
By the mid-1990s Curtis Jackson felt supremely dissatisfied with his life as
a hustler. The only way up and out that he could see was music. He had
some talent as a rapper, but that wouldn’t get him very far in this world. He
felt somewhat confused about how to break into the business, and he was
impatient to begin the process. Then one evening in 1996 all of that
changed: at a Manhattan nightclub Curtis (now known as 50 Cent) met the
famous rapper and producer Jam Master Jay. He could sense that this was
his one opportunity, and he would have to make the best of it. He talked Jay
into letting him visit his studio the following day to hear him rap. There he
managed to impress him enough that Jay agreed to serve as his mentor. It
seemed that everything now would fall into place.
Fifty had saved money to tide him over while he moved into this new
career, but it wouldn’t last forever. Jay got him a few gigs, but they didn’t
pay. On the streets near his home he would see his hustler friends doing
well, while his funds were dwindling to nothing. What would he do when
he ran out of money? He had already sold his car and jewelry. He had
recently fathered a son with his girlfriend and he needed money to support
the child. He started to feel more impatient than ever. After much
persistence he got someone at Columbia Records to hear his music, and the
label became interested in signing him to a deal. But to get out of a contract
he had signed with Jay, he had to give him almost all of the advance money
from Columbia. What was worse, at Columbia he now found himself lost
amid all the other rappers signed to the label. His future looked more
uncertain than ever.
With his savings almost gone, he would now have to return to hustling
on the streets, and this made him feel bitter. His former colleagues were not
too happy to see him again. Feeling like he needed money fast, he became
more aggressive than usual and made some enemies on the streets who
began to threaten him. He had been splitting his time between the record
studio and hustling, and his first album at Columbia was about to come out,
but the label was doing nothing to promote it. Everything in his life seemed
to be unraveling at the same time.
Then one afternoon in May of 2000, as he got into the backseat of a
friend’s car, a young man suddenly appeared at the car window brandishing
a gun and began firing at him at close range. The bullets went all over, nine
of them piercing his body, including one that opened a giant hole in his jaw.
The assassin then hurried away to an awaiting car, certain he had done his
job with the shot to Fifty’s head. Fifty’s friends quickly drove him to the
nearest hospital. As it all unfolded, the event itself didn’t appear real to him.
It was like a movie, something he had seen happen to others. But at one
point, while he was being operated on, he sensed that he was close to death
and suddenly it all seemed very real. A searing light flooded his eyes, and
for a few seconds a shadow crept over it, while everything else came to a
stop. It was an oddly calm moment; then it passed.
In the months to come he would stay in his grandparents’ house,
recovering from the near mortal wounds he had suffered. As he regained his
strength he could almost laugh at the whole thing. He had cheated death. Of
course, for hustlers in the hood this was no big deal and nobody would feel
sorry for him. He had to move on and not look back, while also keeping an
eye on the killers who would be looking to finish the job. In the wake of the
shooting, Columbia had canceled his album and dropped him from the label
—he was surrounded by too much violence. Fifty would get his revenge—
he would launch the kind of mix-tape campaign on the streets that would
make him famous and those same executives would come back, begging to
sign him.
As he geared up for action, however, he noticed that something had
changed inside him. He found himself getting up earlier than usual in the
morning and writing songs late into the night, completely immersed in his
work. When it came to distributing his tapes on the streets, he didn’t care
about making money in the present—he couldn’t care less anymore about
clothes, jewelry, or nightlife. Every penny he made he poured back into the
campaign. He didn’t pay attention to all of the petty squabbles others were
trying to drag him into. His eyes were focused on one thing alone, and
nothing else mattered. Some days he would work with an intensity that
surprised him. He was putting everything he had into this one shot at
success—there was no plan B.
In the back of his mind he knew that it was that moment near death that
had changed him for good. He could still feel the original sensation in his
body, the light and the shadow, and it filled him with a sense of urgency he
had never experienced before, as if death were on his heels. In the months
before the shooting, everything had been falling apart; now it was all falling
into place, like destiny.
 
Years later, as he amassed his business empire, Fifty began to encounter
more and more people playing strange power games. A company that had
partnered with him would suddenly want to renegotiate their contract or act
skittish and consider pulling out—acting as if they had just found out about
his notorious past. Perhaps it was just a ruse to squeeze out better terms.
Then there were those at his record label who treated him with increasing
disrespect and offered him meager publicity or marketing money, in a take-
it-or-leave-it ploy. Finally there were those who had worked for him from
the beginning, but now, smelling money from his success, began to make
unreasonable demands.
Certain things mattered to him more than anything else—maintaining
his long-term mobility, working with those who were excited and not
mercenary, controlling his image and not muddying it for the sake of quick
money. What this translated into was simple: he would exercise his power
to walk away from any situation or person that compromised these values.
He would tell the company trying to renegotiate terms that he was no longer
interested in working with them. With the record label, he would ignore the
ploy and pour his own money into the marketing of his album, with the idea
of leaving them soon and striking out on his own. He would cut loose the
former friends, without a second thought.
In his experience, whenever he felt as if he had too much to lose and he
held on to others or to deals out of fear of the alternative, he ended up
losing a lot more. He realized that the key in life is to always be willing to
walk away. He was often surprised that in doing so, or even feeling that
way, people would come back to him on his terms, now fearing what they
might lose in the process. And if they didn’t return, then good riddance.
If he had thought about it at the time, he would have realized that
turning his back in this way was an attitude and philosophy that had
crystallized in his mind that afternoon of the shooting, when death had
brushed against him. Clinging to people or situations out of fear is like
desperately holding on to life on even the worst terms, and he had now
moved far beyond such a point. He was not afraid of death, so how could he
be afraid of anything anymore?
The Fearless Approach
PEOPLE TALK ABOUT MY GETTING SHOT LIKE IT REPRESENTED
SOMETHING SPECIAL. THEY ACT LIKE THEY’RE NOT FACING THE SAME
THING. BUT SOME DAY EVERYBODY HAS TO FACE A BULLET WITH HIS
OR HER NAME ON IT.
—50 Cent
With the language skills that our primitive ancestors developed, we humans
became rational creatures, gaining the ability to look into the future and
dominate the environment. But with this good came a bad that has caused
us endless suffering—unlike any other animal, we are conscious of our
mortality. This is the source of all our fears. This consciousness of death is
nothing more than a thought of the future that awaits us, but this thought is
associated with intense pain and separation. It comes with an attendant
thought that occasionally haunts us—what good is it to work so hard, defer
immediate pleasures, and accumulate money and power, if one day, perhaps
tomorrow, we die? Death seems to cancel out all our efforts and make
things meaningless.
If we were to give ourselves up to these two trains of thought—the pain
and the meaninglessness—we would almost be paralyzed into inaction or
driven to suicide. But consciously and unconsciously we invented two
solutions to this awareness. The most primitive was the creation of the
concept of an afterlife that would alleviate our fears and give our actions in
the present much meaning. The second solution—the one that has come to
dominate our thinking in the present—is to attempt to forget our mortality
and bury ourselves in the moment. This means actively repressing any
thought of death itself. To aid in this, we distract our minds with routines
and banal concerns. Occasionally we are reminded of our fear when
someone close to us dies, but generally we have developed the habit of
drowning it out with our daily concerns.
The problem, however, is that this repression is not really effective. We
generally become conscious of our mortality at the age of four or five. At
that moment, such a thought had a profound impact on our psyches. We
associated it with feelings of separation from loved ones, with any kind of
darkness, chaos, or the unknown. And it troubled us deeply. This fear has
sat inside of us ever since. It is impossible to completely eradicate or avoid
such an immense thought; it sneaks in through another door, seeps into our
behavior in ways we cannot even begin to imagine.
Death represents the ultimate reality—a limit to our days and efforts in
a definitive fashion. We have to face it alone and leave behind all that we
know and love—a complete separation. It is associated with physical and
mental pain. To repress the thought, we must then avoid anything that
reminds us of death. We therefore indulge in all kinds of fantasies and
illusions, struggling to keep out of our minds any kind of hard and
unavoidable reality. We cling to jobs, relationships, and comfortable
positions, all to elude the feeling of separation. We grow overly
conservative because any kind of risk might entail adversity, failure, or
pain. We keep ourselves surrounded by others to drown out the thought of
our essential aloneness. We may not be consciously aware of this, but in the
end we expend an intense amount of psychic energy in these repressions.
The fear of death does not go away; it merely returns in smaller anxieties
and habits that limit our enjoyment of life.
There is a third and fearless way, however, to deal with mortality. From
the moment we are born, we carry inside ourselves our death. It is not some
outside event that ends our days but something within us. We have only so
many days to live. This amount of time is something unique to us; it is ours
alone, our only true possession. If we run away from this reality by
avoiding the thought of death, we are really running away from ourselves.
We are denying the one thing that cannot be denied; we are living a lie. The
fearless approach requires that you accept the fact that you have only so
much time to live, and that life itself inevitably involves levels of pain and
separation. By embracing this, you embrace life itself and accept everything
about it. Depending on a belief in an afterlife or drowning yourself in the
moment to avoid pain is to despise reality, which is to despise life itself.
When you choose to affirm life by confronting your mortality,
everything changes. What matters to you now is to live your days well, as
fully as possible. You could choose to do this by pursuing endless pleasures,
but nothing becomes boring more quickly than having to always search for
new distractions. If attaining certain goals becomes your greatest source of
pleasure, then your days are filled with purpose and direction, and
whenever death comes, you have no regrets. You do not fall into nihilistic
thinking about the futility of it all, because that is a supreme waste of the
brief time you have been given. You now have a way of measuring what
matters in life—compared to the shortness of your days, petty battles and
anxieties have no weight. You have a sense of urgency and commitment—
what you do you must do well, with all of your energy, not with a mind
shooting off in a hundred directions.
To accomplish this is remarkably simple. It is a matter of looking
inward and seeing death as something that you carry within. It is a part of
you that cannot be repressed. It does not mean that you brood about it, but
that you have continual awareness of a reality that you come to embrace.
You convert the terrified, denial-type relationship to death into something
active and positive—finally released from pettiness, useless anxieties, and
fearful, timid responses.
This third, fearless way of approaching death originated in the ancient
world, in the philosophy known as Stoicism. The core of Stoicism is
learning the art of how to die, which paradoxically teaches you how to live.
And perhaps the greatest Stoic writer in the ancient world was Seneca the
Younger, born around 4 B.C. As a young man, Seneca was an extremely
gifted orator, which led to a promising political career. But as part of a
pattern that would continue throughout his life, this gift incurred the envy of
those who felt inferior.
In A.D. 41, with trumped-up charges from an envious courtier, Emperor
Claudius banished Seneca to the island of Corsica, where he would languish
essentially alone for eight long years. Seneca had been familiar with Stoic
philosophy, but now on this barely inhabited island he would have to
practice it in real life. It was not easy. He found himself indulging in all
kinds of fantasies and falling into despair. It was a constant struggle,
reflected in his many letters to friends back in Rome. But slowly he
conquered all of his fears by first conquering his fear of death.
He practiced all kinds of mental exercises, imagining painful forms of
death and possible tragic endings. He would make them familiar and not
frightening. He used a sense of shame—to fear his mortality would mean he
abhorred nature itself, which decreed the death of all living things, and that
would mean he was inferior to the smallest animal that accepted its death
without complaint. Slowly he extirpated this fear and felt a sense of
liberation. Feeling that he had a mission to communicate this newfound
power of his to the world, he wrote at a furious pace.
In A.D. 49 he was finally exonerated, recalled to Rome, and appointed to
a high position as praetor and private tutor to the twelve-year-old boy
Lucius Domitius Ahenobarbus (soon to be known as Emperor Nero).
During the first five years of Nero’s reign, Seneca was the de facto ruler of
the Roman Empire, as the young Emperor gave himself over to the
pleasures that were to later dominate his life. Seneca had to constantly
struggle to rein in some of Nero’s violent tendencies, but for the most part
those years were prosperous and the empire was well governed. Then envy
set in again, and Nero’s courtiers began spreading stories that Seneca was
enriching himself at the expense of the state. By A.D. 62, Seneca could see
the writing on the wall, and he retired from public life to a country house,
handing over almost all of his wealth to Nero. In A.D. 65 he was implicated
in a plot to kill the emperor, and an officer was sent to, in the Roman style,
order Seneca to kill himself.
He calmly asked permission to review his will. This was refused. He
turned to his friends who were present and said, “Being forbidden to show
gratitude for your services, I leave you my one remaining possession and
my best: the pattern of my life.” Now he would be reenacting what he had
rehearsed in his mind so many years before. His ensuing suicide was
horrifically difficult—he sliced the veins in his arms and ankles, sat in a hot
bath to make the blood flow faster, and even drank poison. The death was
slow and incredibly painful, but he maintained his calmness to the end,
making sure that everyone would see that his death matched his life and his
philosophy.
As Seneca understood, to free yourself from fear you must work
backward. You start with the thought of your mortality. You accept and
embrace this reality. You think ahead to the inevitable moment of your
death and determine to face it as bravely as possible. The more you
contemplate your mortality, the less you fear it—it becomes a fact you no
longer have to repress. By following this path, you know how to die well,
and so you can now begin to teach yourself to live well. You will not cling
to things unnecessarily. You will be strong and self-reliant, unafraid to be
alone. You will have a certain lightness that comes with knowing what
matters—you can laugh at what others take so seriously. The pleasures of
the moment are heightened because you know their impermanence and you
make the most of them. And when your time to die comes, as it will some
day, you will not cringe and cry for more time, because you have lived well
and have no regrets.
Keys to Fearlessness
THERE SEEMS TO HOVER SOMEWHERE IN THAT DARK PART OF ALL OUR
LIVES…AN OBJECTLESS, TIMELESS, SPACELESS ELEMENT OF PRIMAL
FEAR AND DREAD, STEMMING, PERHAPS, FROM OUR BIRTH…A FEAR
AND DREAD WHICH EXERCISES AN IMPELLING INFLUENCE UPON OUR
LIVES…. AND, ACCOMPANYING THIS FIRST FEAR, IS, FOR THE WANT OF A
BETTER NAME, A REFLEX URGE TOWARD ECSTASY, COMPLETE
SUBMISSION, AND TRUST.
—Richard Wright
In the past, our relationship to death was much more physical and direct.
We would routinely see animals killed before our eyes—for food or
sacrifices. During times of plague or natural disasters we would witness
countless deaths. Graveyards were not hidden away but would occupy the
center of cities or adjoin churches. People would die in their homes,
surrounded by friends and families. This nearness of death increased the
fear of it but also made it seem more natural, much more a part of life. To
mediate this fear, religion would play a powerful and important role.
The dread of death, however, has always remained intense, and with the
waning of the power of religion to soothe our anxieties, we found it
necessary to create a modern solution to the problem—we have almost
completely banished the physical presence of death. We do not see the
animals being slaughtered for our food. Cemeteries occupy outlying areas
and are not part of our consciousness. In hospitals, the dying are cloistered
from sight, everything made as antiseptic as possible. That we are not aware
of this phenomenon is a sign of the deep repression that has taken place.
We see countless images of death in movies and in the media, but this
has a paradoxical effect. Death is made to seem like something abstract,
nothing more than an image on the screen. It becomes something visual and
spectacular, not a personal event that awaits us. We may be obsessed with
death in the movies we watch, but this only makes it harder to confront our
mortality.
Banished from our conscious presence, death haunts our unconscious in
the form of fears, but it also reaches our minds in the form of the Sublime.
The word “sublime” comes from the Latin, meaning up to the threshold or
doorway. It is a thought or experience that takes us to the threshold of
death, giving us a physical intimation of this ultimate mystery, something so
large and vast it eludes our powers of description. It is a reflection of death
in life, but it comes in the form of something that inspires awe. To fear and
avoid our mortality is debilitating; to experience it in the Sublime is
therapeutic.
Children have this encounter with the Sublime quite often, particularly
when confronted with something too vast and incomprehensible for their
understanding—darkness, the night sky, the idea of infinity, the sense of
time in millions of years, a strange sense of affinity with an animal, etc. We
too have these moments in the form of any intense experience that is hard to
express in words. It can come to us in moments of extreme exhaustion or
exertion, when our bodies are pushed to the limit; in travel to some unusual
place; or in absorbing a work of art that is too packed with ideas or images
for us to process rationally. The French call an orgasm “le petit mort,” or
little death, and the Sublime is a kind of mental orgasm, as the mind
becomes flooded with something that is too much or too different. It is the
shadow of death overlapping our conscious minds, but inspiring a sense of
something vital and even ecstatic.
Understand: to keep death out, we bathe our minds in banality and
routines; we create the illusion that it is not around us in any form. This
gives us a momentary peace, but we lose all sense of connection to
something larger, to life itself. We are not really living until we come to
terms with our mortality. Becoming aware of the Sublime around us is a
way to convert our fears into something meaningful and active, to counter
the repressions of our culture. The Sublime in any form tends to evoke
feelings of awe and power. Through awareness of what it is, we can open
our minds to the experience and actively search it out. The following are the
four sensations of a sublime moment and how to conjure them.
THE SENSE OF REBIRTH
Growing up in the suburbs of Chicago at the turn of the twentieth century,
Ernest Hemingway felt completely suffocated by all the conformity and
banality of life there. It made him feel dead inside. He yearned to explore
the wider world, and so in 1917, at the age of eighteen, he volunteered as an
ambulance driver for the Red Cross in Italy, at one of the war fronts. There
he felt himself oddly impelled towards death and danger. In one incident he
was nearly killed by exploding shrapnel, and the experience forever altered
his way of thinking. “I died then…. I felt my soul or something coming
right out of my body, like you’d pull a silk handkerchief out of a pocket by
one corner.” This feeling remained in the back of his mind for months and
years to come, and it was oddly exhilarating. Surviving death in this way
made him feel like he was reborn inside. Now he could write of his
experiences and make his work vibrate with emotion.
This feeling, however, would fade. He would be forced into some
boring journalistic job or the routines of married life. That inner deadness
returned and his writing would suffer. He needed to feel that closeness to
death in life again. To do so, he would have to expose himself to new
dangers. This meant reporting on front-line activity in the Spanish Civil
War, and later covering the bloodiest battles in France in World War II—in
both cases going beyond reporting and involving himself in combat. He
took up bullfighting, deep-sea fishing, and big-game hunting. He would
suffer innumerable auto and airplane accidents, but that would only spur his
need for more risk. Out of each experience, that sensation of being sparked
back to life would return, and he could find his way to yet another novel.
This feeling of having your soul pulled out of your body like a
handkerchief is the essence of a sublime sensation. For Hemingway it could
be conjured only by something extreme, by a brush with death itself. We,
however, can feel the sensation and its reviving benefits in smaller doses.
Whenever life feels particularly dull or confining, we can force ourselves to
leave familiar ground. This could mean traveling to some particularly exotic
location, attempting something physically challenging (a sea voyage or
scaling a mountain), or simply embarking on a new venture in which we are
not certain we can succeed. In each case we are experiencing a moment of
powerlessness in the face of something large and overwhelming. This
feeling of control slipping out of our hands, however short and slight, is a
brush with death. We may not make it; we have to raise our level of effort.
In the process, our minds are exposed to new sensations. When we finish
the voyage or task and come to safe ground, we feel as if we are reborn. We
felt that slight pull of the handkerchief; we now have a heightened
appreciation for life and a desire to live it more fully.
THE SENSE OF EVANESCENCE AND URGENCY
The first half of the fourteenth century in Japan was a time of intense
turmoil—palace coups and civil wars turned the country upside down.
Those of the educated classes felt particularly disturbed by this chaos. In the
midst of all this revolution, a low-ranking palace poet later known as Kenkō
decided to take his vows and become a Buddhist monk. But instead of
retiring to a monastery, he remained in the capital, Kyoto, and quietly
observed life around him as the country seemed to fall apart.
He wrote a series of short pieces that were not published in his lifetime
but were later collected and printed under the name Essays in Idleness, the
fame of this book increasing with time. Many of his observations centered
on death, which was all too present in that period. But his thoughts around
death went the opposite direction of brooding and morbidity. He found in
them something pleasurable and even ecstatic. For instance, he pondered
the evanescence of beautiful things such as cherry blossoms or youth itself.
“If man were never to fade away like the dews of Adashino, never to vanish
like the smoke over Toribeyama, but lingered on forever in the world, how
things would lose their power to move us! The most precious thing in life is
its uncertainty.” This made him think of insects that lived for only a day or a
week and yet how crowded such time could be. It is the shadow of death
that makes everything poignant and meaningful to us.
Kenkō continually found new ways to measure the vastness of time, as
it stretches into eternity. A man was buried one day in a cemetery in view of
Kenkō’s residence in Kyoto, the grave marker surrounded by grieving
members of the family. As the years went by, he wrote, they would come
less and less often, their feelings of sorrow slowly fading away. Within a
span of time they would all be dead, and with them the memory of the man
they had buried. The grave marker would become largely covered by grass.
Those who would pass by centuries later would see it as a weird mix of
stone and nature. Eventually it would disappear altogether, dissolving into
the earth. In the face of this undeniable reality, of this eternal expanse, how
can we not feel the preciousness of the present? It is a miracle to be alive
even one more day.
There are two kinds of time we can experience—the banal and the
sublime variety. Banal time is extremely limited in scope. It consists of the
present moment and stretches out to a few weeks ahead of us, occasionally
farther. Locked in banal time, we tend to distort events—we see things as
being far more important than they are, unaware that in a few weeks or a
year, what stirs us all up will not matter. The sublime variety is an
intimation of the reality of the utter vastness of time and the constant
changes that are going on. It requires that we lift our heads out of the
moment and engage in the kinds of meditations that obsessed Kenkō. We
imagine the future centuries from now or what was happening in this very
spot millions of years ago. We become aware that everything is in a state of
flux; nothing is permanent.
Contemplating sublime time has innumerable positive effects—it makes
us feel a sense of urgency to get things done now, gives us a better grasp of
what really matters, and instills a heightened appreciation of the passage of
time, the poignancy and beauty of all things that fade away.
THE SENSE OF AWE
We are creatures that live in language. Everything we think and feel is
framed by words—which never really quite express reality. They are merely
symbols. Throughout history, people have had all kinds of unique
experiences in which they witness something that exceeds the capacity to
express it in words, and this elicits a feeling of awe. In 1915, the great
explorer Ernest Shackleton found himself and his crew marooned on an ice
floe near the continent of Antarctica. For months they floated in this
desolate landscape, before managing to rescue themselves later the
following year. During the time on the floe, Shackleton felt as if he were
visiting the planet before humans had arrived on the scene—seeing
something unchanged for millions of years—and despite the threat of death
this scene represented, he felt oddly exhilarated.
In the 1960s the neurologist Oliver Sacks worked on patients who had
been in a coma since the 1920s, victims of the sleeping-sickness epidemic
of the time. Thanks to a new drug, they were awakened from this coma and
he recorded their thoughts. He realized that they viewed reality in a much
different way than anyone else did, which made him wonder about our own
perception of the world—perhaps we see only a part of what is happening
around us because our mental powers are determined by habits and
conventions. There could be a reality we are missing. During such
meditations he slipped into a sense of the Sublime.
In the 1570s, a Huguenot pastor named Jean de Léry was one of the first
Westerners to live among the Brazilian tribes in the Bay of Rio. He
observed all kinds of rituals that frightened him in their barbarity, but then
one evening he heard tribesmen singing in a way that was so strange and
unearthly, he was overwhelmed with a sudden sense of awe. “I stood there
transported with delight,” he later wrote. “Whenever I remember it, my
heart trembles, and it seems their voices are still in my ears.”
This sense of awe can be elicited by something vast or strange—endless
landscapes (the sea or the desert), monuments from the distant past (the
pyramids of Egypt), the unfamiliar customs of people in a foreign land. It
can also be sparked by things in everyday life—for instance, focusing on
the dizzying variety of animal and plant life around us that took millions of
years to evolve into its present form. (The philosopher Immanuel Kant, who
wrote about the Sublime, felt it in holding a swallow in his hands and
gazing into its eye, feeling a strange connection between the two of them.)
It can be created by particular exercises in thinking. Imagine, for example,
that you had always been blind and were suddenly granted sight.
Everything you saw around you would seem strange and new—the freakish
form of trees, the garishness of the color green. Or try imagining the earth
in its actual smallness, a speck in vast space. The Sublime on this level is
merely a way of looking at things in their actual strangeness. This frees you
from the prison of language and routine, this artificial world we live in.
Experiencing this awe on any scale is like a sudden blast of reality—
therapeutic and inspiring.
THE SENSE OF THE OCEANIC, THE CONNECTION TO ALL LIFE
In not confronting our mortality, we tend to entertain certain illusions about
death. We believe that some deaths are more important or meaningful than
others—that of a celebrity or prominent politician, for instance. We feel that
some deaths are more tragic, coming too early or from some accident. The
truth, however, is that death makes no such discriminations. It is the
ultimate equalizer. It strikes rich and poor alike. For everyone, it seems to
come too early and can be experienced as tragic. Absorbing this reality
should have a positive effect upon us all. We share the same fate with
everyone; we all deserve the same degree of compassion. It is what
ultimately links all of us together, and when we look at the people around
us we should see their mortality as well.
This can be extended further and further, into the Sublime—death is
what links us to all living creatures as well. One organism must die so
another can live. It is an endless process that we are a part of. This is what
is known as an oceanic feeling—the sensation that we are not separated
from the outside world but that we are part of life in all its forms. Feeling
this at moments inspires an ecstatic reaction, the very opposite of a morbid
reflection on death.
Reversal of Perspective
In our normal perspective we see death as something diametrically opposed
to life, a separate event that ends our days. As such, it is a thought that we
must dread, avoid, and repress. But this is false, an idea that is actually born
out of our fear. Life and death are inextricably intertwined, not separate; the
one cannot exist without the other. From the moment we are born we carry
our death within ourselves as a continual possibility. If we try to avoid or
repress the thought, keep death on the outside, we are cutting ourselves off
from life as well. If we are afraid of death, then we are afraid of life. We
must turn this perspective around and face reality from within, finding a
way to accept and embrace death as part of being alive. Only from such a
position can we begin to overcome the fear of our mortality, and then all of
the smaller fears that plague our lives.
WHEN I NEARLY DIED IT MADE ME THINK—THIS CAN HAPPEN AGAIN
ANY SECOND. I BETTER HURRY AND DO WHAT I WANT. I STARTED TO
LIVE LIKE I NEVER LIVED BEFORE. WHEN THE FEAR OF DEATH IS GONE,
THEN NOTHING CAN BOTHER YOU AND NOBODY CAN STOP YOU.
—50 Cent




MASTERY
ALSO BY ROBERT GREENE
The 50th Law (with 50 Cent)
The 33 Strategies of War
(A Joost Elfers Production)
The Art of Seduction
(A Joost Elfers Production)
The 48 Laws of Power
(A Joost Elfers Production)
ROBERT GREENE
MASTERY
VIKING
VIKING
Published by the Penguin Group
Penguin Group (USA) Inc., 375 Hudson Street, New York, New York
10014, U.S.A. • Penguin Group (Canada), 90 Eglinton Avenue East, Suite
700, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4P 2Y3 (a division of Pearson Penguin
Canada Inc.) • Penguin Books Ltd, 80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL,
England • Penguin Ireland, 25 St. Stephen’s Green, Dublin 2, Ireland (a
division of Penguin Books Ltd) • Penguin Books Australia Ltd, 250
Camberwell Road, Camberwell, Victoria 3124, Australia (a division of
Pearson Australia Group Pty Ltd) • Penguin Books India Pvt Ltd, 11
Community Centre, Panchsheel Park, New Delhi—110 017, India •
Penguin Group (NZ), 67 Apollo Drive, Rosedale, Auckland 0632, New
Zealand (a division of Pearson New Zealand Ltd) • Penguin Books (South
Africa) (Pty) Ltd, 24 Sturdee Avenue, Rosebank, Johannesburg 2196, South
Africa
Penguin Books Ltd, Registered Offices:
80 Strand, London WC2R 0RL, England
First published in 2012 by Viking Penguin,
a member of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
Copyright © Robert Greene, 2012
All rights reserved
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Greene, Robert.
Mastery / Robert Greene.
p.   cm.
Includes bibliographical references (p.)
and index.
ISBN: 978-1-101-60102-0
1. Successful people. 2. Success.
3. Self-actualization (Psychology) I. Title.
BF637.S8G695 2012
158—dc23         2012027195
No part of this book may be reproduced, scanned, or distributed in any
printed or electronic form without permission. Please do not participate in
or encourage piracy of copyrighted materials in violation of the author’s
rights. Purchase only authorized editions.
To Anna
CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION
THE ULTIMATE POWER
Higher intelligence—definition of mastery—the three phases of mastery—intuitive intelligence
—connecting to reality—the latent power within us all
THE EVOLUTION OF MASTERY
Our primitive ancestors—evolution of the human brain—the ability to detach and focus—
social intelligence of early hominids—mirror neurons—thinking inside—mastery of time—
working with the grain of the human brain—connecting to our early roots
KEYS TO MASTERY
Charles Darwin following his inclination—traits of all great Masters—our uniqueness and
primal inclinations—political barriers to mastery crumbling—definition of genius—the
concept of mastery denigrated—role of desire in mastery—the danger of passivity—the
plasticity of the brain—overview of strategies and biographical figures in the book
I.
DISCOVER YOUR CALLING:
THE LIFE’S TASK
You possess an inner force that seeks to guide you toward your Life’s Task—what you are
meant to accomplish in the time that you have to live. The first move toward mastery is always
inward—learning who you really are and reconnecting with that innate force. Knowing it with
clarity, you will find your way to the proper career path and everything else will fall into
place. It is never too late to start this process.
THE HIDDEN FORCE
Leonardo da Vinci
KEYS TO MASTERY
Examples of Masters guided by a sense of destiny—the seed of your uniqueness—reconnecting
with your inclinations—definition of “vocation”—choosing a vocation—finding your niche—
the quest for accomplishment—learn who you really are
STRATEGIES FOR FINDING YOUR LIFE’S TASK
1. Return to your origins—The primal inclination strategy
Albert Einstein—Marie Curie—Ingmar Bergman—Martha Graham—Daniel Everett—John
Coltrane
2. Occupy the perfect niche—The Darwinian strategy
A. V. S. Ramachandran
B. Yoky Matsuoka
3. Avoid the false path—The rebellion strategy
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart
4. Let go of the past—The adaptation strategy
Freddie Roach
5. Find your way back—The life-or-death strategy
Buckminster Fuller
REVERSAL
Temple Grandin
II.
SUBMIT TO REALITY:
THE IDEAL APPRENTICESHIP
After your formal education, you enter the most critical phase in your life—a second, practical
education known as The Apprenticeship. Before it is too late you must learn the lessons and
follow the path established by the greatest Masters, past and present—a kind of Ideal
Apprenticeship that transcends all fields. In the process you will master the necessary skills,
discipline your mind, and transform yourself into an independent thinker, prepared for the
creative challenges on the way to mastery.
THE FIRST TRANSFORMATION
Charles Darwin
KEYS TO MASTERY
The Ideal Apprenticeship defined—the goal of apprenticeship as self-transformation
The Apprenticeship Phase—
The Three Steps or Modes
Step One: Deep Observation—The Passive Mode
Mute your colors—observe the rules—observe power relationships—interpretation of Charles
Darwin story—know your environment
Step Two: Skills Acquisition—The Practice Mode
Gaining tacit knowledge—the apprenticeship system of the Middle Ages—the cycle of
accelerated returns—embracing tedium—the frontal cortex and learning tasks—hard-wiring
knowledge—the magical number of 10,000 hours
Step Three: Experimentation—The Active Mode
Gradual self-assertion and experiment—overcoming fears
Skill acquisition in the modern world—relevance of apprenticeship—the hand-eye connection
—you are a builder
STRATEGIES FOR COMPLETING THE IDEAL
APPRENTICESHIP
1. Value learning over money
Benjamin Franklin—Albert Einstein—Martha Graham—Freddie Roach
2. Keep expanding your horizons
Zora Neale Hurston
3. Revert to a feeling of inferiority
Daniel Everett
4. Trust the process
Cesar Rodriguez
5. Move toward resistance and pain
A. Bill Bradley
B. John Keats
6. Apprentice yourself in failure
Henry Ford
7. Combine the “how” and the “what”
Santiago Calatrava
8. Advance through trial and error
Paul Graham
Reversal
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart—Albert Einstein
III.
ABSORB THE MASTER’S POWER:
THE MENTOR DYNAMIC
Life is short, and your time for learning and creativity is limited. Without any guidance, you
can waste valuable years trying to gain knowledge and practice from various sources. Instead,
you must follow the example set by Masters throughout the ages and find the proper mentor.
Choose the mentor who best fits your needs and connects to your Life’s Task. Once you have
internalized their knowledge, you must move on and never remain in their shadow. Your goal
is always to surpass your mentors in mastery and brilliance.
THE ALCHEMY OF KNOWLEDGE
Michael Faraday
KEYS TO MASTERY
The importance of humility—the value of mentors—the mentor-protégé dynamic—learning as
alchemy—interpretation of Michael Faraday story—Alexander the Great—the value of
personal interaction—finding and attracting a mentor—famous figures or books as mentors—
the mentor as father figure—when to cut the Master
STRATEGIES FOR DEEPENING
THE MENTOR RELATIONSHIP
1. Choose the mentor according to your needs and inclinations
Frank Lloyd Wright—Carl Jung—V. S. Ramachandran—Yoky Matsuoka
2. Gaze deep into the mentor’s mirror
Hakuin Zenji
3. Transfigure their ideas
Glenn Gould
4. Create a back-and-forth dynamic
Freddie Roach
REVERSAL
Thomas Edison
IV.
SEE PEOPLE AS THEY ARE:
SOCIAL INTELLIGENCE
Often the greatest obstacle to our pursuit of mastery comes from the emotional drain we
experience in dealing with the resistance and manipulations of the people around us. We
misread their intentions and react in ways that cause confusion or conflict. Social intelligence
is the ability to see people in the most realistic light possible. Navigating smoothly through the
social environment, we have more time and energy to focus on learning and acquiring skills.
Success attained without this intelligence is not true mastery, and will not last.
THINKING INSIDE
Benjamin Franklin
KEYS TO MASTERY
Humans as the preeminent social animal—the Naïve Perspective holding us back—
interpretation of Benjamin Franklin story—adjusting your attitude
Specific Knowledge—Reading People
Nonverbal communication—paying attention to cues—looking for common emotional
experiences—reading people intuitively—looking for patterns—the danger of first impressions
General Knowledge—The Seven Deadly Realities
Envy
Conformism
Rigidity
Self-obsessiveness
Laziness
Flightiness
Passive Aggression
Social intelligence and creativity
STRATEGIES FOR ACQUIRING
SOCIAL INTELLIGENCE
1. Speak through your work
A. Ignaz Semmelweis
B. William Harvey
2. Craft the appropriate persona
Teresita Fernández
3. See yourself as others see you
Temple Grandin
4. Suffer fools gladly
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe—Josef von Sternberg—Daniel Everett
REVERSAL
Paul Graham
V.
AWAKEN THE DIMENSIONAL MIND:
THE CREATIVE-ACTIVE
As you accumulate more skills and internalize the rules that govern your field, your mind will
want to become more active, seeking to use this knowledge in ways that are more suited to
your inclinations. Instead of feeling complacent about what you know, you must expand your
knowledge to related fields, giving your mind fuel to make new associations between different
ideas. In the end, you will turn against the very rules you have internalized, shaping and
reforming them to suit your spirit. Such originality will bring you to the heights of power.
THE SECOND TRANSFORMATION
Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart
KEYS TO MASTERY
The Original Mind—the Conventional Mind—the Dimensional Mind—interpretation of
Mozart story—the three essential steps
Step One: The Creative Task
Altering your concept of creativity—searching for the Great White Whale—Thomas Edison,
Rembrandt, Marcel Proust, and the ultimate creative challenges—The Primary Law of the
Creative Dynamic—finding something to rebel against—remaining realistic—letting go of
security
Step Two: Creative Strategies
A. CULTIVATE NEGATIVE CAPABILITY
Keats on the creative process—definition of Negative Capability—Mozart and Bach—Einstein
and Negative Capability—Shakespeare as ideal—Faraday on humility—Negative Capability
as a tool to open the mind
B. ALLOW FOR SERENDIPITY
The brain as a dual processing system—definition of “serendipity”—William James and
mental momentum—maintaining openness of spirit—Louis Pasteur and serendipity—Thomas
Edison, serendipity, and the recording of sound—the fluid mind—serendipity strategies of
Anthony Burgess and Max Ernst—cultivating serendipity—analogical thinking and Galileo
C. ALTERNATE THE MIND THROUGH “THE CURRENT”
Charles Darwin and the Current—definition of “the Current”—our primitive ancestors and
the Current—short-circuiting the Current—Buckminster Fuller and artifacts—the importance
of creating objects—feedback loop
D. ALTER YOUR PERSPECTIVE
Typical patterns of thinking to alter
Looking at the “what” instead of the “how”
Avoiding shorthand—focusing on the structure—getting a feel for the whole—the importance
of relationships in science
Rushing to generalities and ignoring details
Shifting from the macro to the micro—Charles Darwin and the micro-study of barnacles—
Leonardo da Vinci’s attention to micro-detail in painting—letting details guide you
Confirming paradigms and ignoring anomalies
Overdependence on paradigms—the value of anomalies—Marie Curie and the anomaly of
radioactivity—the founders of Google and anomalies—anomalies fueling evolution
Fixating on what is present, ignoring what is absent
Sherlock Holmes and negative cues—Gowland Hopkins, negative cues, and scurvy—meeting
unfulfilled needs—Henry Ford, negative cues, and the assembly line—reversing your
emotional perspective—setbacks as opportunities
E. REVERT TO PRIMAL FORMS OF INTELLIGENCE
The intelligence of our primitive ancestors—the human brain as a multiuse instrument—
grammar as a limitation—thinking beyond language—examples of famous people who thought
in images—the limitations of memory—using diagrams and models—Schiller, Einstein, Samuel
Johnson, and synesthesia
Step Three: The Creative Breakthrough—
Tension and Insight
The high internal standards of Masters—letting go—Einstein, letting go, and the discovery of
relativity—Richard Wagner completing his opera in a dream—how the brain reaches peaks of
creativity—blocks that precede enlightenment—Evariste Galois’s sudden burst of genius—the
need for tension—manufacturing deadlines—Thomas Edison’s manufacture of pressure
Emotional Pitfalls
Complacency
Conservatism
Dependency
Impatience
Grandiosity
Inflexibility
STRATEGIES FOR THE CREATIVE-ACTIVE PHASE
1. The Authentic Voice
John Coltrane
2. The Fact of Great Yield
V. S. Ramachandran
3. Mechanical Intelligence
The Wright brothers
4. Natural Powers
Santiago Calatrava
5. The Open Field
Martha Graham
6. The High End
Yoky Matsuoka
7. The Evolutionary Hijack
Paul Graham
8. Dimensional Thinking
Jean-François Champollion
9. Alchemical Creativity and the Unconscious
Teresita Fernández
REVERSAL
John Coltrane—August Strindberg
VI.
FUSE THE INTUITIVE WITH
THE RATIONAL: MASTERY
All of us have access to a higher form of intelligence, one that can allow us to see more of the
world, to anticipate trends, to respond with speed and accuracy to any circumstance. This
intelligence is cultivated by deeply immersing ourselves in a field of study and staying true to
our inclinations, no matter how unconventional our approach might seem to others. This
power is what our brains were designed to attain, and we will be naturally led to this type of
intelligence if we follow our inclinations to their ultimate ends.
THE THIRD TRANSFORMATION
Marcel Proust
KEYS TO MASTERY
Examples of Masters seeing more—the fingertip feel—a power that is mystified— high-level
intuition—the Dynamic—gaining an intuitive feel for the whole—Jane Goodall’s feel for
chimpanzees—Erwin Rommel’s feel for battle—the fusing of the rational and the intuitive—
mastery at 20,000 hours—time as a crucial factor—make study time qualitatively rich—
interpretation of Proust story
The Roots of Masterly Intuition
The Ammophila wasp—intuition and our primitive ancestors—mnemonic networks in the
brain—Bobby Fischer and memory traces—engaging with complexity—gaining a tolerance
for chaos—increasing memory capacity—examples of high-level intuition and youthfulness
The Return to Reality
Overview of evolution from the beginning—the interconnectedness of all life—the ultimate
reality—our modern Renaissance—returning to the whole—the altered brain of the Master
STRATEGIES FOR ATTAINING MASTERY
1. Connect to your environment—Primal Powers
The Caroline Islanders
2. Play to your strengths—Supreme Focus
A. Albert Einstein
B. Temple Grandin
3. Transform yourself through practice—
The Fingertip Feel
Cesar Rodriguez
4. Internalize the details—The Life Force
Leonardo da Vinci
5. Widen your vision—The Global Perspective
Freddie Roach
6. Submit to the other—The Inside-out Perspective
Daniel Everett
7. Synthesize all forms of knowledge—
The Universal Man/Woman
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
REVERSAL
The false self—the true self—genius demystified—your purpose in life—realizing your
potential
CONTEMPORARY MASTER
BIOGRAPHIES
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY
INDEX
INTRODUCTION
THE ULTIMATE POWER
Everyone holds his fortune in his own hands, like a sculptor the raw material he will fashion
into a figure. But it’s the same with that type of artistic activity as with all others: We are
merely born with the capability to do it. The skill to mold the material into what we want must
be learned and attentively cultivated.
—JOHANN WOLFGANG VON GOETHE
There exists a form of power and intelligence that represents the high
point of human potential. It is the source of the greatest achievements and
discoveries in history. It is an intelligence that is not taught in our schools
nor analyzed by professors, but almost all of us, at some point, have had
glimpses of it in our own experience. It often comes to us in a period of
tension—facing a deadline, the urgent need to solve a problem, a crisis of
sorts. Or it can come as the result of constant work on a project. In any
event, pressed by circumstances, we feel unusually energized and focused.
Our minds become completely absorbed in the task before us. This intense
concentration sparks all kinds of ideas—they come to us as we fall asleep,
out of nowhere, as if springing from our unconscious. At these times, other
people seem less resistant to our influence; perhaps we are more attentive to
them, or we appear to have a special power that inspires their respect. We
might normally experience life in a passive mode, constantly reacting to
this or that incident, but for these days or weeks we feel like we can
determine events and make things happen.
We could express this power in the following way: Most of the time
we live in an interior world of dreams, desires, and obsessive thoughts. But
in this period of exceptional creativity, we are impelled by the need to get
something done that has a practical effect. We force ourselves to step
outside our inner chamber of habitual thoughts and connect to the world, to
other people, to reality. Instead of flitting here and there in a state of
perpetual distraction, our minds focus and penetrate to the core of
something real. At these moments, it is as if our minds—turned outward—
are now flooded with light from the world around us, and suddenly exposed
to new details and ideas, we become more inspired and creative.
Once the deadline has passed or the crisis is over, this feeling of power
and heightened creativity generally fades away. We return to our distracted
state and the sense of control is gone. If only we could manufacture this
feeling, or somehow keep it alive longer…but it seems so mysterious and
elusive.
The problem we face is that this form of power and intelligence is
either ignored as a subject of study or is surrounded by all kinds of myths
and misconceptions, all of which only add to the mystery. We imagine that
creativity and brilliance just appear out of nowhere, the fruit of natural
talent, or perhaps of a good mood, or an alignment of the stars. It would be
an immense help to clear up the mystery—to name this feeling of power, to
examine its roots, to define the kind of intelligence that leads to it, and to
understand how it can be manufactured and maintained.
Let us call this sensation mastery—the feeling that we have a greater
command of reality, other people, and ourselves. Although it might be
something we experience for only a short while, for others—Masters of
their field—it becomes their way of life, their way of seeing the world.
(Such Masters include Leonardo da Vinci, Napoleon Bonaparte, Charles
Darwin, Thomas Edison, and Martha Graham, among many others.) And at
the root of this power is a simple process that leads to mastery—one that is
accessible to all of us.
The process can be illustrated in the following manner: Let us say we
are learning the piano, or entering a new job where we must acquire certain
skills. In the beginning, we are outsiders. Our initial impressions of the
piano or the work environment are based on prejudgments, and often
contain an element of fear. When we first study the piano, the keyboard
looks rather intimidating—we don’t understand the relationships between
the keys, the chords, the pedals, and everything else that goes into creating
music. In a new job situation, we are ignorant of the power relationships
between people, the psychology of our boss, the rules and procedures that
are considered critical for success. We are confused—the knowledge we
need in both cases is over our heads.
Although we might enter these situations with excitement about what
we can learn or do with our new skills, we quickly realize how much hard
work there is ahead of us. The great danger is that we give in to feelings of
boredom, impatience, fear, and confusion. We stop observing and learning.
The process comes to a halt.
If, on the other hand, we manage these emotions and allow time to take
its course, something remarkable begins to take shape. As we continue to
observe and follow the lead of others, we gain clarity, learning the rules and
seeing how things work and fit together. If we keep practicing, we gain
fluency; basic skills are mastered, allowing us to take on newer and more
exciting challenges. We begin to see connections that were invisible to us
before. We slowly gain confidence in our ability to solve problems or
overcome weaknesses through sheer persistence.
At a certain point, we move from student to practitioner. We try out
our own ideas, gaining valuable feedback in the process. We use our
expanding knowledge in ways that are increasingly creative. Instead of just
learning how others do things, we bring our own style and individuality into
play.
As years go by and we remain faithful to this process, yet another leap
takes place—to mastery. The keyboard is no longer something outside of
us; it is internalized and becomes part of our nervous system, our fingertips.
In our career, we now have a feel for the group dynamic, the current state of
business. We can apply this feel to social situations, seeing deeper into other
people and anticipating their reactions. We can make decisions that are
rapid and highly creative. Ideas come to us. We have learned the rules so
well that we can now be the ones to break or rewrite them.
In the process leading to this ultimate form of power, we can identify
three distinct phases or levels. The first is the Apprenticeship; the second is
the Creative-Active; the third, Mastery. In the first phase, we stand on the
outside of our field, learning as much as we can of the basic elements and
rules. We have only a partial picture of the field and so our powers are
limited. In the second phase, through much practice and immersion, we see
into the inside of the machinery, how things connect with one another, and
thus gain a more comprehensive understanding of the subject. With this
comes a new power—the ability to experiment and creatively play with the
elements involved. In the third phase, our degree of knowledge, experience,
and focus is so deep that we can now see the whole picture with complete
clarity. We have access to the heart of life—to human nature and natural
phenomena. That is why the artwork of Masters touches us to the core; the
artist has captured something of the essence of reality. That is why the
brilliant scientist can uncover a new law of physics, and the inventor or
entrepreneur can hit upon something no one else has imagined.
We can call this power intuition, but intuition is nothing more than a
sudden and immediate seizing of what is real, without the need for words or
formulas. The words and formulas may come later, but this flash of
intuition is what ultimately brings us closer to reality, as our minds
suddenly become illuminated by some particle of truth previously hidden to
us and to others.
An animal has the capacity to learn, but it largely relies on its instincts
to connect to its surroundings and save itself from danger. Through instinct,
it can act quickly and effectively. The human relies instead on thinking and
rationality to understand its environment. But such thinking can be slow,
and in its slowness can become ineffective. So much of our obsessive,
internal thought process tends to disconnect us from the world. Intuitive
powers at the mastery level are a mix of the instinctive and the rational, the
conscious and the unconscious, the human and the animal. It is our way of
making sudden and powerful connections to the environment, to feeling or
thinking inside things. As children we had some of this intuitive power and
spontaneity, but it is generally drummed out of us by all of the information
that overloads our minds over time. Masters return to this childlike state,
their works displaying degrees of spontaneity and access to the
unconscious, but at a much higher level than the child.
If we move through the process to this endpoint, we activate the
intuitive power latent in every human brain, one that we may have briefly
experienced when we worked so deeply on a single problem or project. In
fact, often in life we have glimpses of this power—for instance, when we
have an inkling of what will come next in a particular situation, or when the
perfect answer to a problem comes to us out of nowhere. But these
moments are ephemeral and not based on enough experience to make them
repeatable. When we reach mastery, this intuition is a power at our
command, the fruit of working through the lengthier process. And because
the world prizes creativity and this ability to uncover new aspects of reality,
it brings us tremendous practical power as well.
Think of mastery in this way: Throughout history, men and women
have felt trapped by the limitations of their consciousness, by their lack of
contact with reality and the power to affect the world around them. They
have sought all kinds of shortcuts to this expanded consciousness and sense
of control, in the form of magic rituals, trances, incantations, and drugs.
They have devoted their lives to alchemy, in search of the philosopher’s
stone—the elusive substance that transformed all matter into gold.
This hunger for the magical shortcut has survived to our day in the
form of simple formulas for success, ancient secrets finally revealed in
which a mere change of attitude will attract the right energy. There is a
grain of truth and practicality in all of these efforts—for instance, the
emphasis in magic on deep focus. But in the end all of this searching is
centered on something that doesn’t exist—the effortless path to practical
power, the quick and easy solution, the El Dorado of the mind.
At the same time that so many people lose themselves in these endless
fantasies, they ignore the one real power that they actually possess. And
unlike magic or simplistic formulas, we can see the material effects of this
power in history—the great discoveries and inventions, the magnificent
buildings and works of art, the technological prowess we possess, all works
of the masterful mind. This power brings to those who possess it the kind of
connection to reality and the ability to alter the world that the mystics and
magicians of the past could only dream of.
Over the centuries, people have placed a wall around such mastery.
They have called it genius and have thought of it as inaccessible. They have
seen it as the product of privilege, inborn talent, or just the right alignment
of the stars. They have made it seem as if it were as elusive as magic. But
that wall is imaginary. This is the real secret: the brain that we possess is the
work of six million years of development, and more than anything else, this
evolution of the brain was designed to lead us to mastery, the latent power
within us all.
THE EVOLUTION OF MASTERY
For three million years we were hunter-gatherers, and it was through the evolutionary
pressures of that way of life that a brain so adaptable and creative eventually emerged. Today
we stand with the brains of hunter-gatherers in our heads.
—RICHARD LEAKEY
It is hard for us to imagine now, but our earliest human ancestors who
ventured out onto the grasslands of East Africa some six million years ago
were remarkably weak and vulnerable creatures. They stood less than five
feet tall. They walked upright and could run on their two legs, but nowhere
near as fast as the swift predators on four legs that pursued them. They were
skinny—their arms could not provide much defense. They had no claws or
fangs or poison to resort to if under attack. To gather fruits, nuts, and
insects, or to scavenge dead meat, they had to move out into the open
savanna where they became easy prey to leopards or packs of hyenas. So
weak and small in number, they might have easily become extinct.
And yet within the space of a few million years (remarkably short on
the time scale of evolution), these rather physically unimpressive ancestors
of ours transformed themselves into the most formidable hunters on the
planet. What could possibly account for such a miraculous turnaround?
Some have speculated that it was their standing on two legs, which freed up
the hands to make tools with their opposable thumbs and precision grip. But
such physical explanations miss the point. Our dominance, our mastery
does not stem from our hands but from our brains, from our fashioning the
mind into the most powerful instrument known in nature—far more
powerful than any claw. And at the root of this mental transformation are
two simple biological traits—the visual and the social—that primitive
humans leveraged into power.
Our earliest ancestors were descended from primates who thrived for
millions of years in a treetop environment, and who in the process had
evolved one of the most remarkable visual systems in nature. To move
quickly and efficiently in such a world, they developed extremely
sophisticated eye and muscle coordination. Their eyes slowly evolved into a
full-frontal position on the face, giving them binocular, stereoscopic vision.
This system provides the brain a highly accurate three-dimensional and
detailed perspective, but is rather narrow. Animals that possess such vision
—as opposed to eyes on the side or half side—are generally efficient
predators like owls or cats. They use this powerful sight to home in on prey
in the distance. Tree-living primates evolved this vision for a different
purpose—to navigate branches, and to spot fruits, berries, and insects with
greater effectiveness. They also evolved elaborate color vision.
When our earliest human ancestors left the trees and moved to the
open grasslands of the savanna, they adopted an upright stance. Possessing
already this powerful visual system, they could see far into the distance
(giraffes and elephants might stand taller, but their eyes are on the sides,
giving them instead panoramic vision). This allowed them to spot
dangerous predators far away on the horizon and detect their movements
even in twilight. Given a few seconds or minutes, they could plot a safe
retreat. At the same time, if they focused on what was nearest at hand, they
could identify all kinds of important details in their environment—
footprints and signs of passing predators, or the colors and shapes of rocks
that they could pick up and perhaps use as tools.
In the treetops, this powerful vision was built for speed—seeing and
reacting quickly. On the open grassland, it was the opposite. Safety and
finding food relied upon slow, patient observation of the environment, on
the ability to pick out details and focus on what they might mean. Our
ancestors’ survival depended on the intensity of their attention. The longer
and harder they looked, the more they could distinguish between an
opportunity and a danger. If they simply scanned the horizon quickly they
could see a lot more, but this would overload the mind with information—
too many details for such sharp vision. The human visual system is not built
for scanning, as a cow’s is, but for depth of focus.
Animals are locked in a perpetual present. They can learn from recent
events, but they are easily distracted by what is in front of their eyes.
Slowly, over a great period of time, our ancestors overcame this basic
animal weakness. By looking long enough at any object and refusing to be
distracted—even for a few seconds—they could momentarily detach
themselves from their immediate surroundings. In this way they could
notice patterns, make generalizations, and think ahead. They had the mental
distance to think and reflect, even on the smallest scale.
These early humans evolved the ability to detach and think as their
primary advantage in the struggle to avoid predators and find food. It
connected them to a reality other animals could not access. Thinking on this
level was the single greatest turning point in all of evolution—the
emergence of the conscious, reasoning mind.
The second biological advantage is subtler, but equally powerful in its
implications. All primates are essentially social creatures, but because of
their intense vulnerability in open areas, our earliest ancestors had a much
greater need for group cohesion. They depended on the group for vigilant
observation of predators and the gathering of food. In general, these early
hominids had many more social interactions than other primates. Over the
course of hundreds of thousands of years, this social intelligence became
increasingly sophisticated, allowing these ancestors to cooperate with one
another on a high level. And as with our understanding of the natural
environment, this intelligence depended on deep attention and focus.
Misreading the social signs in a tight-knit group could prove highly
dangerous.
Through the elaboration of these two traits—the visual and the social
—our primitive ancestors were able to invent and develop the complex skill
of hunting some two to three million years ago. Slowly, they became more
creative, refining this complex skill into an art. They became seasonal
hunters and spread throughout the Euro-Asian landmass, managing to adapt
themselves to all kinds of climates. And in the process of this rapid
evolution, their brains grew to virtually modern human size, some 200,000
years ago.
In the 1990s a group of Italian neuroscientists discovered something
that could help explain this increasing hunting prowess of our primitive
ancestors, and in turn something about mastery as it exists today. In
studying the brains of monkeys, they found that particular motor-command
neurons will not only fire when they execute a very specific action—such
as pulling a lever to get a peanut or taking hold of a banana—but that these
neurons will also fire when monkeys observe another performing the same
actions. These were soon dubbed mirror neurons. This neuronal firing
meant that these primates would experience a similar sensation in both
doing and observing the same deed, allowing them to put themselves in the
place of another and perceive its movements as if they were doing them. It
would account for the ability of many primates to imitate others, and for the
pronounced abilities of chimpanzees to anticipate the plans and actions of a
rival. Such neurons, it is speculated, evolved because of the social nature of
primate life.
Recent experiments have demonstrated the existence of such neurons
in humans, but on a much higher level of sophistication. A monkey or
primate can see an action from the point of view of the performer and
imagine its intentions, but we can take this further. Without any visual cues
or any action on the part of others, we can place ourselves inside their
minds and imagine what they might be thinking.
For our ancestors, the elaboration of mirror neurons would allow them
to read each other’s desires from the subtlest of signs and thus elevate their
social skills. It would also serve as a critical component in toolmaking—
one could learn to fashion a tool by imitating the actions of an expert. But
perhaps most important of all, it would give them the ability to think inside
everything around them. After years of studying particular animals, they
could identify with and think like them, anticipating behavioral patterns and
heightening their ability to track and kill prey. This thinking inside could be
applied to the inorganic as well. In fashioning a stone tool, expert
toolmakers would feel as one with their instruments. The stone or wood
they cut with became an extension of their hand. They could feel it as if it
were their own flesh, permitting much greater control of the tools
themselves, both in making and in using them.
This power of the mind could be unleashed only after years of
experience. Having mastered a particular skill—tracking prey, fashioning a
tool—it was now automatic, and so while practicing the skill the mind no
longer had to focus on the specific actions involved but instead could
concentrate on something higher—what the prey might be thinking, how
the tool could be felt as part of the hand. This thinking inside would be a
preverbal version of third-level intelligence—the primitive equivalent of
Leonardo da Vinci’s intuitive feel for anatomy and landscape or Michael
Faraday’s for electromagnetism. Mastery at this level meant our ancestors
could make decisions rapidly and effectively, having gained a complete
understanding of their environment and their prey. If this power had not
evolved, the minds of our ancestors would have become easily
overwhelmed by the mass of information they had to process for a
successful hunt. They had developed this intuitive power hundreds of
thousands of years before the invention of language, and that is why when
we experience this intelligence it seems like something preverbal, a power
that transcends our ability to put it into words.
Understand: This long stretch of time played a critical, elemental role
in our mental development. It fundamentally altered our relationship to
time. For animals, time is their great enemy. If they are potential prey,
wandering too long in a space can spell instant death. If they are predators,
waiting too long will only mean the escape of their prey. Time for them also
represents physical decay. To a remarkable extent, our hunting ancestors
reversed this process. The longer they spent observing something, the
deeper their understanding and connection to reality. With experience, their
hunting skills would progress. With continued practice, their ability to make
effective tools would improve. The body could decay but the mind would
continue to learn and adapt. Using time for such effect is the essential
ingredient of mastery.
In fact, we can say that this revolutionary relationship to time
fundamentally altered the human mind itself and gave it a particular quality
or grain. When we take our time and focus in depth, when we trust that
going through a process of months or years will bring us mastery, we work
with the grain of this marvelous instrument that developed over so many
millions of years. We infallibly move to higher and higher levels of
intelligence. We see more deeply and realistically. We practice and make
things with skill. We learn to think for ourselves. We become capable of
handling complex situations without being overwhelmed. In following this
path we become Homo magister, man or woman the Master.
To the extent that we believe we can skip steps, avoid the process,
magically gain power through political connections or easy formulas, or
depend on our natural talents, we move against this grain and reverse our
natural powers. We become slaves to time—as it passes, we grow weaker,
less capable, trapped in some dead-end career. We become captive to the
opinions and fears of others. Rather than the mind connecting us to reality,
we become disconnected and locked in a narrow chamber of thought. The
human that depended on focused attention for its survival now becomes the
distracted scanning animal, unable to think in depth, yet unable to depend
on instincts.
It is the height of stupidity to believe that in the course of your short
life, your few decades of consciousness, you can somehow rewire the
configurations of your brain through technology and wishful thinking,
overcoming the effect of six million years of development. To go against
the grain might bring temporary distraction, but time will mercilessly
expose your weakness and impatience.
The great salvation for all of us is that we have inherited an instrument
that is remarkably plastic. Our hunter-gatherer ancestors, over the course of
time, managed to craft the brain into its present shape by creating a culture
that could learn, change, and adapt to circumstances, that wasn’t a prisoner
to the incredibly slow march of natural evolution. As modern individuals,
our brains have the same power, the same plasticity. At any moment we can
choose to shift our relationship to time and work with the grain, knowing of
its existence and power. With the element of time working for us, we can
reverse the bad habits and passivity, and move up the ladder of intelligence.
Think of this shift as a return to your radical, deep past as a human,
connecting to and maintaining a magnificent continuity with your hunter-
gatherer ancestors in a modern form. The environment we operate in may
be different, but the brain is essentially the same, and its power to learn,
adapt, and master time is universal.
KEYS TO MASTERY
A man should learn to detect and watch that gleam of light which flashes across his mind from
within, more than the luster of the firmament of bards and sages. Yet he dismisses without
notice his thought, because it is his. In every work of genius we recognize our own rejected
thoughts; they come back to us with a certain alienated majesty.
—RALPH WALDO EMERSON
If all of us are born with an essentially similar brain, with more or less the
same configuration and potential for mastery, why is it then that in history
only a limited number of people seem to truly excel and realize this
potential power? Certainly, in a practical sense, this is the most important
question for us to answer.
The common explanations for a Mozart or a Leonardo da Vinci
revolve around natural talent and brilliance. How else to account for their
uncanny achievements except in terms of something they were born with?
But thousands upon thousands of children display exceptional skill and
talent in some field, yet relatively few of them ever amount to anything,
whereas those who are less brilliant in their youth can often attain much
more. Natural talent or a high IQ cannot explain future achievement.
As a classic example, compare the lives of Sir Francis Galton and his
older cousin, Charles Darwin. By all accounts, Galton was a super-genius
with an exceptionally high IQ, quite a bit higher than Darwin’s (these are
estimates done by experts years after the invention of the measurement).
Galton was a boy wonder who went on to have an illustrious scientific
career, but he never quite mastered any of the fields he went into. He was
notoriously restless, as is often the case with child prodigies.
Darwin, by contrast, is rightly celebrated as the superior scientist, one
of the few who has forever changed our view of life. As Darwin himself
admitted, he was “a very ordinary boy, rather below the common standard
in intellect…. I have no great quickness of apprehension…. My power to
follow a long and purely abstract train of thought is very limited.” Darwin,
however, must have possessed something that Galton lacked.
In many ways, a look at the early life of Darwin himself can supply an
answer to this mystery. As a child Darwin had one overriding passion—
collecting biological specimens. His father, a doctor, wanted him to follow
in his footsteps and study medicine, enrolling him at the University of
Edinburgh. Darwin did not take to this subject and was a mediocre student.
His father, despairing that his son would ever amount to anything, chose for
him a career in the church. As Darwin was preparing for this, a former
professor of his told him that the HMS Beagle was to leave port soon to sail
around the world, and that it needed a ship’s biologist to accompany the
crew in order to collect specimens that could be sent back to England.
Despite his father’s protests, Darwin took the job. Something in him was
drawn to the voyage.
Suddenly, his passion for collecting found its perfect outlet. In South
America he could collect the most astounding array of specimens, as well as
fossils and bones. He could connect his interest in the variety of life on the
planet with something larger—major questions about the origins of species.
He poured all of his energy into this enterprise, accumulating so many
specimens that a theory began to take shape in his mind. After five years at
sea, he returned to England and devoted the rest of his life to the single task
of elaborating his theory of evolution. In the process he had to deal with a
tremendous amount of drudgery—for instance, eight years exclusively
studying barnacles to establish his credentials as a biologist. He had to
develop highly refined political and social skills to handle all the prejudice
against such a theory in Victorian England. And what sustained him
throughout this lengthy process was his intense love of and connection to
the subject.
The basic elements of this story are repeated in the lives of all of the
great Masters in history: a youthful passion or predilection, a chance
encounter that allows them to discover how to apply it, an apprenticeship in
which they come alive with energy and focus. They excel by their ability to
practice harder and move faster through the process, all of this stemming
from the intensity of their desire to learn and from the deep connection they
feel to their field of study. And at the core of this intensity of effort is in fact
a quality that is genetic and inborn—not talent or brilliance, which is
something that must be developed, but rather a deep and powerful
inclination toward a particular subject.
This inclination is a reflection of a person’s uniqueness. This
uniqueness is not something merely poetic or philosophical—it is a
scientific fact that genetically, every one of us is unique; our exact genetic
makeup has never happened before and will never be repeated. This
uniqueness is revealed to us through the preferences we innately feel for
particular activities or subjects of study. Such inclinations can be toward
music or mathematics, certain sports or games, solving puzzle-like
problems, tinkering and building, or playing with words.
With those who stand out by their later mastery, they experience this
inclination more deeply and clearly than others. They experience it as an
inner calling. It tends to dominate their thoughts and dreams. They find
their way, by accident or sheer effort, to a career path in which this
inclination can flourish. This intense connection and desire allows them to
withstand the pain of the process—the self-doubts, the tedious hours of
practice and study, the inevitable setbacks, the endless barbs from the
envious. They develop a resiliency and confidence that others lack.
In our culture we tend to equate thinking and intellectual powers with
success and achievement. In many ways, however, it is an emotional quality
that separates those who master a field from the many who simply work at a
job. Our levels of desire, patience, persistence, and confidence end up
playing a much larger role in success than sheer reasoning powers. Feeling
motivated and energized, we can overcome almost anything. Feeling bored
and restless, our minds shut off and we become increasingly passive.
In the past, only elites or those with an almost superhuman amount of
energy and drive could pursue a career of their choice and master it. A man
was born into the military, or groomed for the government, chosen among
those of the right class. If he happened to display a talent and desire for
such work it was mostly a coincidence. Millions of people who were not
part of the right social class, gender, and ethnic group were rigidly excluded
from the possibility of pursuing their calling. Even if people wanted to
follow their inclinations, access to the information and knowledge
pertaining to that particular field was controlled by elites. That is why there
are relatively few Masters in the past and why they stand out so much.
These social and political barriers, however, have mostly disappeared.
Today we have the kind of access to information and knowledge that past
Masters could only dream about. Now more than ever, we have the capacity
and freedom to move toward the inclination that all of us possess as part of
our genetic uniqueness. It is time that the word “genius” becomes
demystified and de-rarefied. We are all closer than we think to such
intelligence. (The word “genius” comes from the Latin, and originally
referred to a guardian spirit that watched over the birth of each person; it
later came to refer to the innate qualities that make each person uniquely
gifted.)
Although we may find ourselves at a historical moment rich in
possibilities for mastery, in which more and more people can move toward
their inclinations, we in fact face one last obstacle in attaining such power,
one that is cultural and insidiously dangerous: The very concept of mastery
has become denigrated, associated with something old-fashioned and even
unpleasant. It is generally not seen as something to aspire to. This shift in
value is rather recent, and can be traced to circumstances peculiar to our
times.
We live in a world that seems increasingly beyond our control. Our
livelihoods are at the whim of globalized forces. The problems that we face
—economic, environmental, and so on—cannot be solved by our individual
actions. Our politicians are distant and unresponsive to our desires. A
natural response when people feel overwhelmed is to retreat into various
forms of passivity. If we don’t try too much in life, if we limit our circle of
action, we can give ourselves the illusion of control. The less we attempt,
the less chances of failure. If we can make it look like we are not really
responsible for our fate, for what happens to us in life, then our apparent
powerlessness is more palatable. For this reason we become attracted to
certain narratives: it is genetics that determines much of what we do; we are
just products of our times; the individual is just a myth; human behavior can
be reduced to statistical trends.
Many take this change in value a step further, giving their passivity a
positive veneer. They romanticize the self-destructive artist who loses
control of him-or herself. Anything that smacks of discipline or effort seems
fussy and passé: what matters is the feeling behind the artwork, and any
hint of craftsmanship or work violates this principle. They come to accept
things that are made cheaply and quickly. The idea that they might have to
expend much effort to get what they want has been eroded by the
proliferation of devices that do so much of the work for them, fostering the
idea that they deserve all of this—that it is their inherent right to have and
to consume what they want. “Why bother working for years to attain
mastery when we can have so much power with very little effort?
Technology will solve everything.” This passivity has even assumed a
moral stance: “mastery and power are evil; they are the domain of
patriarchal elites who oppress us; power is inherently bad; better to opt out
of the system altogether,” or at least make it look that way.
If you are not careful, you will find this attitude infecting you in subtle
ways. You will unconsciously lower your sights as to what you can
accomplish in life. This can diminish your levels of effort and discipline
below the point of effectiveness. Conforming to social norms, you will
listen more to others than to your own voice. You may choose a career path
based on what peers and parents tell you, or on what seems lucrative. If you
lose contact with this inner calling, you can have some success in life, but
eventually your lack of true desire catches up with you. Your work becomes
mechanical. You come to live for leisure and immediate pleasures. In this
way you become increasingly passive, and never move past the first phase.
You may grow frustrated and depressed, never realizing that the source of it
is your alienation from your own creative potential.
Before it is too late you must find your way to your inclination,
exploiting the incredible opportunities of the age that you have been born
into. Knowing the critical importance of desire and of your emotional
connection to your work, which are the keys to mastery, you can in fact
make the passivity of these times work in your favor and serve as a
motivating device in two important ways.
First, you must see your attempt at attaining mastery as something
extremely necessary and positive. The world is teeming with problems,
many of them of our own creation. To solve them will require a tremendous
amount of effort and creativity. Relying on genetics, technology, magic, or
being nice and natural will not save us. We require the energy not only to
address practical matters, but also to forge new institutions and orders that
fit our changed circumstances. We must create our own world or we will die
from inaction. We need to find our way back to the concept of mastery that
defined us as a species so many millions of years ago. This is not mastery
for the purpose of dominating nature or other people, but for determining
our fate. The passive ironic attitude is not cool or romantic, but pathetic and
destructive. You are setting an example of what can be achieved as a Master
in the modern world. You are contributing to the most important cause of all
—the survival and prosperity of the human race, in a time of stagnation.
Second, you must convince yourself of the following: people get the
mind and quality of brain that they deserve through their actions in life.
Despite the popularity of genetic explanations for our behavior, recent
discoveries in neuroscience are overturning long-held beliefs that the brain
is genetically hardwired. Scientists are demonstrating the degree to which
the brain is actually quite plastic—how our thoughts determine our mental
landscape. They are exploring the relationship of willpower to physiology,
how profoundly the mind can affect our health and functionality. It is
possible that more and more will be discovered about how deeply we create
the various patterns of our lives through certain mental operations—how we
are truly responsible for so much of what happens to us.
People who are passive create a mental landscape that is rather barren.
Because of their limited experiences and action, all kinds of connections in
the brain die off from lack of use. Pushing against the passive trend of these
times, you must work to see how far you can extend control of your
circumstances and create the kind of mind you desire—not through drugs
but through action. Unleashing the masterful mind within, you will be at the
vanguard of those who are exploring the extended limits of human
willpower.
In many ways, the movement from one level of intelligence to another can
be considered as a kind of ritual of transformation. As you progress, old
ideas and perspectives die off; as new powers are unleashed, you are
initiated into higher levels of seeing the world. Consider Mastery as an
invaluable tool in guiding you through this transformative process. The
book is designed to lead you from the lowest levels to the highest. It will
help to initiate you into the first step—discovering your Life’s Task, or
vocation, and how to carve out a path that will lead you to its fulfillment on
various levels. It will advise you how to exploit to the fullest your
apprenticeship—the various strategies of observation and learning that will
serve you best in this phase; how to find the perfect mentors; how to
decipher the unwritten codes on political behavior; how to cultivate social
intelligence; and finally, how to recognize when it is time to leave the
apprenticeship nest and strike out for yourself, entering the active, creative
phase.
It will show you how to continue the learning process on a higher
level. It will reveal timeless strategies for creative problem solving, for
keeping your mind fluid and adaptable. It will show you how to access
more unconscious and primitive layers of intelligence, and how to endure
the inevitable barbs of envy that will come your way. It will spell out the
powers that will come to you through mastery, pointing you in the direction
of that intuitive, inside feel for your field. Finally, it will initiate you into a
philosophy, a way of thinking that will make it easier to follow this path.
The ideas in the book are based on extensive research in the fields of
neuro-and cognitive science, studies on creativity, as well as the biographies
of the greatest Masters in history. These include Leonardo da Vinci, the Zen
Master Hakuin, Benjamin Franklin, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart, Johann
Wolfgang von Goethe, the poet John Keats, the scientist Michael Faraday,
Charles Darwin, Thomas Edison, Albert Einstein, Henry Ford, the writer
Marcel Proust, the dancer Martha Graham, the inventor Buckminster Fuller,
the jazz artist John Coltrane, and the pianist Glenn Gould.
To make it clear how this form of intelligence can be applied to the
modern world, nine contemporary Masters have been interviewed at length
as well. They are neuroscientist V. S. Ramachandran; anthropologist-
linguist Daniel Everett; computer engineer, writer, and tech-startup
mastermind Paul Graham; architect-engineer Santiago Calatrava; former
boxer and now trainer Freddie Roach; robotics engineer and green
technology designer Yoky Matsuoka; visual artist Teresita Fernández;
professor of animal husbandry and industrial designer Temple Grandin; and
U.S. Air Force fighter pilot ace Cesar Rodriguez.
The life stories of these various contemporary figures dispel the notion
that mastery is somehow passé or elitist. They come from all different
backgrounds, social classes, and ethnicities. The power they have achieved
is clearly the result of effort and process, not genetics or privilege. Their
stories also reveal how such mastery can be adapted to our times, and the
tremendous power it can bring us.
The structure of Mastery is simple. There are six chapters, moving
sequentially through the process. Chapter 1 is the starting point—
discovering your calling, your Life’s Task. Chapters 2, 3, and 4 discuss
different elements of the Apprenticeship Phase (learning skills, working
with mentors, acquiring social intelligence). Chapter 5 is devoted to the
Creative-Active Phase, and chapter 6 to the ultimate goal—Mastery. Each
chapter begins with the story of an iconic historical figure who exemplifies
the chapter’s overall concept. The section that follows, Keys to Mastery,
gives you a detailed analysis of the phase involved, concrete ideas on how
to apply this knowledge to your circumstances, and the mind-set that is
necessary to fully exploit these ideas. Following the Keys is a section
detailing the strategies of Masters—contemporary and historical—who
have used various methods to advance them through the process. These
strategies are designed to give you an even greater sense of the practical
application of the ideas in the book, and to inspire you to follow in the
footsteps of these Masters, showing how their power is eminently
attainable.
For all of the contemporary Masters and some of the historical ones,
their stories will continue over several chapters. In such cases there may be
a slight repetition of biographical information in order to recap what
happened in the previous phase of their lives. Hyperlinks in parentheses
will refer back to these earlier narrations.
Finally, you must not see this process of moving through levels of
intelligence as merely linear, heading toward some kind of ultimate
destination known as mastery. Your whole life is a kind of apprenticeship to
which you apply your learning skills. Everything that happens to you is a
form of instruction if you pay attention. The creativity that you gain in
learning a skill so deeply must be constantly refreshed, as you keep forcing
your mind back to a state of openness. Even knowledge of your vocation
must be revisited throughout the course of your life as changes in
circumstance force you to adapt its direction.
In moving toward mastery, you are bringing your mind closer to reality
and to life itself. Anything that is alive is in a continual state of change and
movement. The moment that you rest, thinking that you have attained the
level you desire, a part of your mind enters a phase of decay. You lose your
hard-earned creativity and others begin to sense it. This is a power and
intelligence that must be continually renewed or it will die.
Do not talk about giftedness, inborn talents! One can name great men of all kinds who were
very little gifted. They acquired greatness, became “geniuses” (as we put it), through qualities
the lack of which no one who knew what they were would boast of: they all possessed that
seriousness of the efficient workman which first learns to construct the parts properly before it
ventures to fashion a great whole; they allowed themselves time for it, because they took more
pleasure in making the little, secondary things well than in the effect of a dazzling whole.
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE
I
DISCOVER YOUR
CALLING: THE
LIFE’S TASK
You possess a kind of inner force that seeks to guide you toward your Life’s
Task—what you are meant to accomplish in the time that you have to live.
In childhood this force was clear to you. It directed you toward activities
and subjects that fit your natural inclinations, that sparked a curiosity that
was deep and primal. In the intervening years, the force tends to fade in and
out as you listen more to parents and peers, to the daily anxieties that wear
away at you. This can be the source of your unhappiness—your lack of
connection to who you are and what makes you unique. The first move
toward mastery is always inward—learning who you really are and
reconnecting with that innate force. Knowing it with clarity, you will find
your way to the proper career path and everything else will fall into place.
It is never too late to start this process.
THE HIDDEN FORCE
Toward the end of April 1519, after months of illness, the artist Leonardo
da Vinci felt certain that his death was only a few days away. For the past
two years Leonardo had been living in the château of Cloux in France, the
personal guest of the French king, François I. The king had showered him
with money and honors, considering him the living embodiment of the
Italian Renaissance, which he had wanted to import to France. Leonardo
had been most useful to the king, advising him on all kinds of important
matters. But now, at the age of sixty-seven, his life was about to end and his
thoughts turned toward other things. He made out his will, received the holy
sacrament in church, and then returned to his bed, waiting for the end to
come.
As he lay there, several of his friends—including the king—visited
him. They noticed that Leonardo was in a particularly reflective mood. He
was not someone who usually liked to talk about himself, but now he
shared memories from his childhood and youth, dwelling on the strange and
improbable course of his life.
Leonardo had always had a strong sense of fate, and for years he had
been haunted by one particular question: is there some kind of force from
within that makes all living things grow and transform themselves? If such
a force in nature existed, he wanted to discover it, and he looked for signs
of it in every thing he examined. It was an obsession. Now, in his final
hours, after his friends had left him alone, Leonardo would have almost
certainly applied this question in some form or another to the riddle of his
own life, searching for signs of a force or a fate that had brought about his
own development and guided him to the present.
Leonardo would have begun such a search by first thinking back to his
childhood in the village of Vinci, some twenty miles outside Florence. His
father, Ser Piero da Vinci, was a notary and staunch member of the
powerful bourgeoisie, but since Leonardo had been born out of wedlock, he
was barred from attending the university or practicing any of the noble
professions. His schooling therefore was minimal, and so as a child
Leonardo was left mostly to himself. He liked most of all to wander through
the olive groves around Vinci or to follow a particular path that led to a
much different part of the landscape—dense forests full of wild boar,
waterfalls cascading over fast-moving streams, swans gliding through
pools, strange wildflowers growing out of the sides of cliffs. The intense
variety of life in these forests enthralled him.
One day, sneaking into his father’s office, he grabbed some sheets of
paper—a rather rare commodity in those days, but as a notary his father had
a large supply. He took the sheets on his walk into the forest, and sitting
upon a rock he began to sketch the various sights around him. He kept
returning day after day to do more of the same; even when the weather was
bad, he would sit under some kind of shelter and sketch. He had no
teachers, no paintings to look at; he did everything by eye, with nature as
the model. He noticed that in drawing things he had to observe them much
more closely and catch the details that made them come to life.
Once he sketched a white iris, and in observing it so closely he was
struck by its peculiar shape. The iris begins as a seed, and then it proceeds
through various stages, all of which he had drawn over the past few years.
What makes this plant develop through its stages and culminate in this
magnificent flower, so unlike any other? Perhaps it possesses a force that
pushes it through these various transformations. He would wonder about the
metamorphosis of flowers for years to come.
Alone on his deathbed, Leonardo would have thought back to his
earliest years as an apprentice in the studio of the Florentine artist Andrea
del Verrocchio. He had been admitted there at the age of fourteen because
of the remarkable quality of his drawings. Verrocchio instructed his
apprentices in all of the sciences that were necessary to produce the work of
his studio—engineering, mechanics, chemistry, and metallurgy. Leonardo
was eager to learn all of these skills, but soon he discovered in himself
something else: he could not simply do an assignment; he needed to make it
something of his own, to invent rather than imitate the Master.
One time, as part of his studio work, he was asked to paint an angel in
a larger biblical scene designed by Verrocchio. He had decided that he
would make his portion of the scene come to life in his own way. In the
foreground in front of the angel he painted a flowerbed, but instead of the
usual generalized renderings of plants, Leonardo depicted the flower
specimens that he had studied in such detail as a child, with a kind of
scientific rigor no one had seen before. For the angel’s face, he
experimented with his paints and mixed a new blend that gave it a kind of
soft radiance that expressed the angel’s sublime mood. (To help capture this
mood, Leonardo had spent time in the local church observing those in
fervent prayer, the expression of one young man serving as the model for
the angel.) And finally, he determined that he would be the first artist to
create realistic angelic wings.
For this purpose, he went to the marketplace and purchased several
birds. He spent hours sketching their wings, how exactly they merged into
their bodies. He wanted to create the sensation that these wings had
organically grown from the angel’s shoulders and would bring it natural
flight. As usual, Leonardo could not stop there. After his work was
completed he became obsessed with birds, and the idea brewed in his mind
that perhaps a human could really fly, if Leonardo could figure out the
science behind avian flight. Now, several hours every week, he read and
studied everything he could about birds. This was how his mind naturally
worked—one idea flowed into another.
Leonardo would certainly have recalled the lowest point in his life—
the year 1481. The Pope asked Lorenzo de’ Medici to recommend to him
the finest artists in Florence to decorate a chapel he just had built, the
Sistine Chapel. Lorenzo complied and sent to Rome all of the best
Florentine artists, excluding Leonardo. They had never really gotten along.
Lorenzo was a literary type, steeped in the classics. Leonardo could not
read Latin and had little knowledge of the ancients. He had a more
scientific bent to his nature. But at the root of Leonardo’s bitterness at this
snub was something else—he had come to hate the dependence forced upon
artists to gain royal favor, to live from commission to commission. He had
grown tired of Florence and the court politics that reigned there.
He made a decision that would change everything in his life: He would
establish himself in Milan, and he would devise a new strategy for his
livelihood. He would be more than an artist. He would pursue all of the
crafts and sciences that interested him—architecture, military engineering,
hydraulics, anatomy, sculpture. For any prince or patron that wanted him,
he could serve as an overall adviser and artist, for a nice stipend. His mind,
he decided, worked best when he had several different projects at hand,
allowing him to build all kinds of connections between them.
Continuing his self-examination, Leonardo would have thought back
to the one great commission that he accepted during this new phase of his
life—an enormous bronze equestrian statue in memory of Francesco Sforza,
the father of the current duke of Milan. The challenge for him was too
irresistible. It would be of a scale no one had seen since the days of ancient
Rome, and to cast something so large in bronze would require an
engineering feat that had baffled all of the artists of his time. Leonardo
worked on the design for months, and to test it out he built a clay replica of
the statue and displayed it in the most expansive square in Milan. It was
gigantic, the size of a large building. The crowds that gathered to look at it
were awestruck—its size, the impetuous stance of the horse that the artist
had captured, its terrifying aspect. Word spread throughout Italy of this
marvel and people anxiously awaited its realization in bronze. For this
purpose, Leonardo invented a totally new way of casting. Instead of
breaking up the mold for the horse into sections, Leonardo would construct
the mold as one seamless piece (using an unusual mix of materials he had
concocted) and cast it as a whole, which would give the horse a much more
organic, natural appearance.
A few months later, however, war broke out and the duke needed every
bit of bronze he could lay his hands on for artillery. Eventually, the clay
statue was taken down and the horse was never built. Other artists had
scoffed at Leonardo’s folly—he had taken so long to find the perfect
solution that naturally, events had conspired against him. One time even
Michelangelo himself taunted Leonardo: “You who made a model of a
horse you could never cast in bronze and which you gave up, to your
shame. And the stupid people of Milan had faith in you?” He had become
used to such insults about his slowness at work, but in fact he regretted
nothing from this experience. He had been able to test out his ideas on how
to engineer large-scale projects; he would apply this knowledge elsewhere.
Anyway, he didn’t care so much about the finished product; it was the
search and process in creating something that had always excited him.
Reflecting on his life in this way, he would have clearly detected the
workings of some kind of hidden force within him. As a child this force had
drawn him to the wildest part of the landscape, where he could observe the
most intense and dramatic variety of life. This same force compelled him to
steal paper from his father and devote his time to sketching. It pushed him
to experiment while working for Verrocchio. It guided him away from the
courts of Florence and the insecure egos that flourished among artists. It
compelled him to an extreme of boldness—the gigantic sculptures, the
attempt to fly, the dissection of hundreds of corpses for his anatomical
studies—all to discover the essence of life itself.
Seen from this vantage point, everything in his life made sense. It was
in fact a blessing to have been born illegitimate—it allowed him to develop
in his own way. Even the paper in his house seemed to indicate some kind
of destiny. What if he had rebelled against this force? What if, after the
Sistine Chapel rejection, he had insisted on going to Rome with the others
and forced his way into the Pope’s good graces instead of seeking his own
path? He was capable of that. What if he had devoted himself to mostly
painting in order to make a good living? What if he had been more like the
others, finishing his works as fast as possible? He would have done well,
but he would not have been Leonardo da Vinci. His life would have lacked
the purpose that it had, and inevitably things would have gone wrong.
This hidden force within him, like that within the iris he had sketched
so many years before, had led to the full flowering of his capacities. He had
faithfully followed its guidance to the very end and, having completed his
course, now it was time to die. Perhaps his own words, written years before
in his notebook, would have come back to him in such a moment: “Just as a
well-filled day brings blessed sleep, so a well-employed life brings a
blessed death.”
KEYS TO MASTERY
Among his various possible beings each man always finds one which is his genuine and
authentic being. The voice which calls him to that authentic being is what we call “vocation.”
But the majority of men devote themselves to silencing that voice of the vocation and refusing
to hear it. They manage to make a noise within themselves…to distract their own attention in
order not to hear it; and they defraud themselves by substituting for their genuine selves a
false course of life.
—JOSÉ ORTEGA Y GASSET
Many of the greatest Masters in history have confessed to experiencing
some kind of force or voice or sense of destiny that has guided them
forward. For Napoleon Bonaparte it was his “star” that he always felt in
ascendance when he made the right move. For Socrates, it was his daemon,
a voice that he heard, perhaps from the gods, which inevitably spoke to him
in the negative—telling him what to avoid. For Goethe, he also called it a
daemon—a kind of spirit that dwelled within him and compelled him to
fulfill his destiny. In more modern times, Albert Einstein talked of a kind of
inner voice that shaped the direction of his speculations. All of these are
variations on what Leonardo da Vinci experienced with his own sense of
fate.
Such feelings can be seen as purely mystical, beyond explanation, or
as hallucinations and delusions. But there is another way to see them—as
eminently real, practical, and explicable. It can be explained in the
following way:
All of us are born unique. This uniqueness is marked genetically in our
DNA. We are a one-time phenomenon in the universe—our exact genetic
makeup has never occurred before nor will it ever be repeated. For all of us,
this uniqueness first expresses itself in childhood through certain primal
inclinations. For Leonardo it was exploring the natural world around his
village and bringing it to life on paper in his own way. For others, it can be
an early attraction to visual patterns—often an indication of a future interest
in mathematics. Or it can be an attraction to particular physical movements
or spatial arrangements. How can we explain such inclinations? They are
forces within us that come from a deeper place than conscious words can
express. They draw us to certain experiences and away from others. As
these forces move us here or there, they influence the development of our
minds in very particular ways.
This primal uniqueness naturally wants to assert and express itself, but
some experience it more strongly than others. With Masters it is so strong
that it feels like something that has its own external reality—a force, a
voice, destiny. In moments when we engage in an activity that corresponds
to our deepest inclinations, we might experience a touch of this: We feel as
if the words we write or the physical movements we perform come so
quickly and easily that they are coming from outside us. We are literally
“inspired,” the Latin word meaning something from the outside breathing
within us.
Let us state it in the following way: At your birth a seed is planted.
That seed is your uniqueness. It wants to grow, transform itself, and flower
to its full potential. It has a natural, assertive energy to it. Your Life’s Task
is to bring that seed to flower, to express your uniqueness through your
work. You have a destiny to fulfill. The stronger you feel and maintain it—
as a force, a voice, or in whatever form—the greater your chance for
fulfilling this Life’s Task and achieving mastery.
What weakens this force, what makes you not feel it or even doubt its
existence, is the degree to which you have succumbed to another force in
life—social pressures to conform. This counterforce can be very powerful.
You want to fit into a group. Unconsciously, you might feel that what makes
you different is embarrassing or painful. Your parents often act as a counter-
force as well. They may seek to direct you to a career path that is lucrative
and comfortable. If these counterforces become strong enough, you can lose
complete contact with your uniqueness, with who you really are. Your
inclinations and desires become modeled on those of others.
This can set you off on a very dangerous path. You end up choosing a
career that does not really suit you. Your desire and interest slowly wane
and your work suffers for it. You come to see pleasure and fulfillment as
something that comes from outside your work. Because you are
increasingly less engaged in your career, you fail to pay attention to changes
going on in the field—you fall behind the times and pay a price for this. At
moments when you must make important decisions, you flounder or follow
what others are doing because you have no sense of inner direction or radar
to guide you. You have broken contact with your destiny as formed at birth.
At all cost you must avoid such a fate. The process of following your
Life’s Task all the way to mastery can essentially begin at any point in life.
The hidden force within you is always there and ready to be engaged.
The process of realizing your Life’s Task comes in three stages: First,
you must connect or reconnect with your inclinations, that sense of
uniqueness. The first step then is always inward. You search the past for
signs of that inner voice or force. You clear away the other voices that
might confuse you—parents and peers. You look for an underlying pattern,
a core to your character that you must understand as deeply as possible.
Second, with this connection established, you must look at the career
path you are already on or are about to begin. The choice of this path—or
redirection of it—is critical. To help in this stage you will need to enlarge
your concept of work itself. Too often we make a separation in our lives—
there is work and there is life outside work, where we find real pleasure and
fulfillment. Work is often seen as a means for making money so we can
enjoy that second life that we lead. Even if we derive some satisfaction
from our careers we still tend to compartmentalize our lives in this way.
This is a depressing attitude, because in the end we spend a substantial part
of our waking life at work. If we experience this time as something to get
through on the way to real pleasure, then our hours at work represent a
tragic waste of the short time we have to live.
Instead you want to see your work as something more inspiring, as part
of your vocation. The word “vocation” comes from the Latin meaning to
call or to be called. Its use in relation to work began in early Christianity—
certain people were called to a life in the church; that was their vocation.
They could recognize this literally by hearing a voice from God, who had
chosen them for this profession. Over time, the word became secularized,
referring to any work or study that a person felt was suited to his or her
interests, particularly a manual craft. It is time, however, that we return to
the original meaning of the word, for it comes much closer to the idea of a
Life’s Task and mastery.
The voice in this case that is calling you is not necessarily coming
from God, but from deep within. It emanates from your individuality. It tells
you which activities suit your character. And at a certain point, it calls you
to a particular form of work or career. Your work then is something
connected deeply to who you are, not a separate compartment in your life.
You develop then a sense of your vocation.
Finally, you must see your career or vocational path more as a journey
with twists and turns rather than a straight line. You begin by choosing a
field or position that roughly corresponds to your inclinations. This initial
position offers you room to maneuver and important skills to learn. You
don’t want to start with something too lofty, too ambitious—you need to
make a living and establish some confidence. Once on this path you
discover certain side routes that attract you, while other aspects of this field
leave you cold. You adjust and perhaps move to a related field, continuing
to learn more about yourself, but always expanding off your skill base. Like
Leonardo, you take what you do for others and make it your own.
Eventually, you will hit upon a particular field, niche, or opportunity
that suits you perfectly. You will recognize it when you find it because it
will spark that childlike sense of wonder and excitement; it will feel right.
Once found, everything will fall into place. You will learn more quickly and
more deeply. Your skill level will reach a point where you will be able to
claim your independence from within the group you work for and move out
on your own. In a world in which there is so much we cannot control, this
will bring you the ultimate form of power. You will determine your
circumstances. As your own Master, you will no longer be subject to the
whims of tyrannical bosses or scheming peers.
This emphasis on your uniqueness and a Life’s Task might seem a
poetic conceit without any bearing on practical realities, but in fact it is
extremely relevant to the times that we live in. We are entering a world in
which we can rely less and less upon the state, the corporation, or family or
friends to help and protect us. It is a globalized, harshly competitive
environment. We must learn to develop ourselves. At the same time, it is a
world teeming with critical problems and opportunities, best solved and
seized by entrepreneurs—individuals or small groups who think
independently, adapt quickly, and possess unique perspectives. Your
individualized, creative skills will be at a premium.
Think of it this way: What we lack most in the modern world is a sense
of a larger purpose to our lives. In the past, it was organized religion that
often supplied this. But most of us now live in a secularized world. We
human animals are unique—we must build our own world. We do not
simply react to events out of biological scripting. But without a sense of
direction provided to us, we tend to flounder. We don’t how to fill up and
structure our time. There seems to be no defining purpose to our lives. We
are perhaps not conscious of this emptiness, but it infects us in all kinds of
ways.
Feeling that we are called to accomplish something is the most positive
way for us to supply this sense of purpose and direction. It is a religious-
like quest for each of us. This quest should not be seen as selfish or
antisocial. It is in fact connected to something much larger than our
individual lives. Our evolution as a species has depended on the creation of
a tremendous diversity of skills and ways of thinking. We thrive by the
collective activity of people supplying their individual talents. Without such
diversity, a culture dies.
Your uniqueness at birth is a marker of this necessary diversity. To the
degree you cultivate and express it you are fulfilling a vital role. Our times
might emphasize equality, which we then mistake for the need for everyone
to be the same, but what we really mean by this is the equal chance for
people to express their differences, to let a thousand flowers bloom. Your
vocation is more than the work that you do. It is intimately connected to the
deepest part of your being and is a manifestation of the intense diversity in
nature and within human culture. In this sense, you must see your vocation
as eminently poetic and inspiring.
Some 2,600 years ago the ancient Greek poet Pindar wrote, “Become
who you are by learning who you are.” What he meant is the following:
You are born with a particular makeup and tendencies that mark you as a
piece of fate. It is who you are to the core. Some people never become who
they are; they stop trusting in themselves; they conform to the tastes of
others, and they end up wearing a mask that hides their true nature. If you
allow yourself to learn who you really are by paying attention to that voice
and force within you, then you can become what you were fated to become
—an individual, a Master.
STRATEGIES FOR FINDING YOUR LIFE’S TASK
The misery that oppresses you lies not in your profession but in yourself! What man in the
world would not find his situation intolerable if he chooses a craft, an art, indeed any form of
life, without experiencing an inner calling? Whoever is born with a talent, or to a talent, must
surely find in that the most pleasing of occupations! Everything on this earth has its difficult
sides! Only some inner drive—pleasure, love—can help us overcome obstacles, prepare a
path, and lift us out of the narrow circle in which others tread out their anguished, miserable
existences!
—JOHANN WOLFGANG VON GOETHE
It might seem that connecting to something as personal as your inclinations
and Life’s Task would be relatively simple and natural, once you recognize
their importance. But in fact it is the opposite. It requires a good deal of
planning and strategizing to do it properly, since so many obstacles will
present themselves. The following five strategies, illustrated by stories of
Masters, are designed to deal with the main obstacles in your path over time
—the voices of others infecting you, fighting over limited resources,
choosing false paths, getting stuck in the past, and losing your way. Pay
attention to all of them because you will almost inevitably encounter each
one in some form.
1. Return to your origins—The primal inclination strategy
For Masters, their inclination often presents itself to them with remarkable
clarity in childhood. Sometimes it comes in the form of a simple object that
triggers a deep response. When Albert Einstein (1879–1955) was five, his
father gave him a compass as a present. Instantly, the boy was transfixed by
the needle, which changed direction as he moved the compass about. The
idea that there was some kind of magnetic force that operated on this
needle, invisible to the eyes, touched him to the core. What if there were
other forces in the world equally invisible yet equally powerful—ones that
were undiscovered or not understood? For the rest of his life all of his
interests and ideas would revolve around this simple question of hidden
forces and fields, and he would often think back to the compass that had
sparked the initial fascination.
When Marie Curie (1867–1934), the future discoverer of radium, was four
years old she wandered into her father’s study and stood transfixed before a
glass case that contained all kinds of laboratory instruments for chemistry
and physics experiments. She would return to that room again and again to
stare at the instruments, imagining all sorts of experiments she could
conduct with these tubes and measuring devices. Years later, when she
entered a real laboratory for the first time and did some experiments herself,
she reconnected immediately with her childhood obsession; she knew she
had found her vocation.
When the future film director Ingmar Bergman (1918–2007) was nine years
old his parents gave his brother for Christmas a cinematograph—a moving
picture machine with strips of film that projected simple scenes. He had to
have it for himself. He traded his own toys to get it and once it was in his
possession, he hurried into a large closet and watched the flickering images
it projected on the wall. It seemed like something had magically come to
life each time he turned it on. To produce such magic would become his
lifelong obsession.
Sometimes this inclination becomes clear through a particular activity that
brings with it a feeling of heightened power. As a child, Martha Graham
(1894–1991) felt intensely frustrated by her inability to make others
understand her in a deep way; words seemed inadequate. Then one day, she
saw her first dance performance. The lead dancer had a way of expressing
certain emotions through movement; it was visceral, not verbal. She started
dance lessons soon thereafter and immediately understood her vocation.
Only when dancing could she feel alive and expressive. Years later she
would go on to invent a whole new form of dance and revolutionize the
genre.
Sometimes it is not an object or activity but rather something in culture that
sparks a deep connection. The contemporary anthropologist-linguist Daniel
Everett (b. 1951) grew up on the California-Mexico border, in a cowboy
town. From a very early age, he found himself drawn to the Mexican
culture around him. Everything about it fascinated him—the sound of the
words spoken by the migrant workers, the food, the manners that were so
different from the Anglo world. He immersed himself as much as he could
in their language and culture. This would transform into a lifelong interest
in the Other—the diversity of cultures on the planet and what that means
about our evolution.
And sometimes one’s true inclinations can be revealed through an
encounter with an actual Master. As a young boy growing up in North
Carolina, John Coltrane (1926–67) felt different and strange. He was much
more serious than his schoolmates; he experienced emotional and spiritual
longings he did not know how to verbalize. He drifted into music more as a
hobby, taking up the saxophone and playing in his high school band. Then a
few years later he saw the great jazz saxophonist Charlie “Bird” Parker
perform live, and the sounds Parker produced touched Coltrane to the core.
Something primal and personal came through Parker’s saxophone, a voice
from deep within. Coltrane suddenly saw the means for expressing his
uniqueness and giving a voice to his own spiritual longings. He began to
practice the instrument with such intensity that within a decade he
transformed himself into perhaps the greatest jazz artist of his era.
You must understand the following: In order to master a field, you must
love the subject and feel a profound connection to it. Your interest must
transcend the field itself and border on the religious. For Einstein, it was not
physics but a fascination with invisible forces that governed the universe;
for Bergman, it was not film but the sensation of creating and animating
life; for Coltrane, it was not music but giving voice to powerful emotions.
These childhood attractions are hard to put into words and are more like
sensations—that of deep wonder, sensual pleasure, power, and heightened
awareness. The importance of recognizing these preverbal inclinations is
that they are clear indications of an attraction that is not infected by the
desires of other people. They are not something embedded in you by your
parents, which come with a more superficial connection, something more
verbal and conscious. Coming instead from somewhere deeper, they can
only be your own, reflections of your unique chemistry.
As you become more sophisticated, you often lose touch with these
signals from your primal core. They can be buried beneath all of the other
subjects you have studied. Your power and future can depend on
reconnecting with this core and returning to your origins. You must dig for
signs of such inclinations in your earliest years. Look for its traces in
visceral reactions to something simple; a desire to repeat an activity that
you never tired of; a subject that stimulated an unusual degree of curiosity;
feelings of power attached to particular actions. It is already there within
you. You have nothing to create; you merely need to dig and refind what
has been buried inside of you all along. If you reconnect with this core at
any age, some element of that primitive attraction will spark back to life,
indicating a path that can ultimately become your Life’s Task.
2. Occupy the perfect niche—The Darwinian strategy
A. As a child growing up in Madras, India, in the late 1950s, V. S.
Ramachandran knew he was different. He was not interested in sports or the
other usual pursuits of boys his age; he loved to read about science. In his
loneliness he would often wander along the beach, and soon he became
fascinated by the incredible variety of seashells that washed up on shore. He
began to collect them and study the subject in detail. It gave him a feeling
of power—here was a field he had all to himself; nobody in school could
ever know as much as he did about shells. Soon he was drawn to the
strangest varieties of seashells, such as the Xenophora, an organism that
collects discarded shells and uses them for camouflage. In a way, he was
like the Xenophora—an anomaly. In nature, these anomalies often serve a
larger evolutionary purpose—they can lead to the occupation of new
ecological niches, offering a greater chance of survival. Could
Ramachandran say the same about his own strangeness?
Over the years, he transferred this boyhood interest into other subjects
—human anatomical abnormalities, peculiar phenomena in chemistry, and
so on. His father, fearing that the young man would end up in some esoteric
field of research, convinced him to enroll in medical school. There he
would be exposed to all sides of science and he would come out of it with a
practical skill. Ramachandran complied.
Although the studies in medical school interested him, after a while he
grew restless. He disliked all of the rote learning. He wanted to experiment
and discover, not memorize. He began to read all kinds of science journals
and books that were not on the reading list. One such book was Eye and
Brain, by the visual neuroscientist Richard Gregory. What particularly
intrigued him were experiments on optical illusions and blind spots—
anomalies in the visual system that could explain something about how the
brain itself functioned.
Stimulated by this book, he conducted his own experiments, the results
of which he managed to get published in a prestigious journal, which in turn
led to an invitation to study visual neuroscience in the graduate department
at Cambridge University. Excited by this chance to pursue something more
suited to his interests, Ramachandran accepted the invitation. After a few
months at Cambridge, however, he realized that he did not fit in this
environment. In his boyhood dreams, science was a great romantic
adventure, an almost religious-like quest for the truth. But at Cambridge,
for the students and faculty, it seemed to be more like a job; you put in your
hours, you contributed some small piece to a statistical analysis, and that
was that.
He soldiered on, finding his own interests within the department, and
completed his degree. A few years later he was hired as an assistant
professor in visual psychology at the University of California at San Diego.
As had happened so many times before, after a few years his mind began to
drift to yet another subject—this time to the study of the brain itself. He
became intrigued by the phenomenon of phantom limbs—people who have
had an arm or leg amputated and yet still feel a paralyzing pain in the
missing limb. He proceeded to conduct experiments on phantom limb
subjects. These experiments led to some exciting discoveries about the
brain itself, as well as a novel way to relieve such patients of their pain.
Suddenly the feeling of not fitting in, of restlessness, was gone.
Studying anomalous neurological disorders would be the subject to which
he could devote the rest of his life. It opened up questions that fascinated
him about the evolution of consciousness, the origin of language, and so on.
It was as if he had come full circle to the days of collecting the rarest forms
of seashells. This was a niche he had all to himself, one he could command
for years to come, that corresponded to his deepest inclinations and would
serve best the cause of scientific advancement.
B. For Yoky Matsuoka, childhood was a period of confusion and blur.
Growing up in Japan in the 1970s, everything seemed laid out for her in
advance. The school system would funnel her into a field that was
appropriate for girls, and the possibilities were rather narrow. Her parents,
believing in the importance of sports in her development, pushed her into
competitive swimming at a very early age. They also had her take up the
piano. For other children in Japan it may have been comforting to have their
lives directed in such a fashion, but for Yoky it was painful. She was
interested in all kinds of subjects—particularly math and science. She liked
sports but not swimming. She had no idea what she wanted to become or
how she could possibly fit into such a regimented world.
At the age of eleven she finally asserted herself. She had had enough
of swimming and wanted to take up tennis. Her parents agreed to her
wishes. Being intensely competitive, she had great dreams for herself as a
tennis player, but she was starting out in the sport rather late in life. To
make up for lost time she would have to undergo an almost impossibly
rigorous practice schedule. She traveled outside Tokyo for training and so
would do her homework on the ride back at night. Often having to stand up
in the crowded car, she would crack open her math and physics books and
work out the equations. She loved solving puzzles, and in doing this
homework her mind would become so completely absorbed in the problems
that she was barely aware of the time passing. In a strange way, it was
similar to the sensation she felt on the tennis court—a deep focus where
nothing could distract her.
In the few free moments on the train Yoky would think about her
future. Science and sports were the two great interests in her life. In them
she could express all of the different sides of her character—her love of
competing, working with her hands, moving gracefully, analyzing and
solving problems. In Japan you had to choose a career that was generally
quite specialized. Whatever she chose would require sacrificing her other
interests, which depressed her to no end. One day she daydreamed about
inventing a robot that could play tennis with her. Inventing and playing
against such a robot would satisfy all of the different sides of her character,
but it was only a dream.
Although she had risen through the ranks to become one of the top
tennis prospects in Japan, she quickly realized that this was not to be her
future. In practice, no one could beat her, but in competition she would
often freeze up, overthink the situation, and lose to inferior players. She
also suffered some debilitating injuries. She would have to focus on
academics and not on sports. After attending a tennis academy in Florida,
she convinced her parents to let her stay in the States and apply to the
University of California at Berkeley.
At Berkeley she could not decide on a major—nothing seemed to quite
fit her wide-ranging interests. For lack of anything better, she settled on
electrical engineering. One day she confided to a professor in her
department about her youthful dream to build a robot to play tennis with
her. Much to her surprise the professor did not laugh, but instead invited her
to join his graduate lab for robotics. Her work there showed so much
promise that she was later admitted to graduate school at MIT, where she
joined the artificial-intelligence lab of robotics pioneer Rodney Brooks.
They were developing a robot with artificial intelligence, and Matsuoka
volunteered to design the hand and arms.
Ever since she was a child she had pondered her own hands while she
was playing tennis or the piano or while scribbling out math equations. The
human hand was a miracle of design. Although this was not exactly sports,
she would be working with her hands to construct the hand. Finding at last
something that suited a larger range of her interests, she worked night and
day on building a new kind of robotic limb, one that possessed as much as
possible the delicate grasping power of the human hand. Her design dazzled
Brooks—it was years ahead of anything anyone had ever developed.
Feeling that there was a critical lack in her knowledge, she decided to
gain an additional degree in neuroscience. If she could better understand the
connection between the hand and the brain, she could design a prosthetic
limb that would feel and respond like a human hand. She continued this
process, adding new fields of science to her résumé, culminating in the
creation of a completely new field, one that she would dub neurobotics—
the design of robots that possessed simulated versions of human neurology,
bringing them closer to life itself. Forging this field would bring her great
success in science and put her in the ultimate position of power—the ability
to freely combine all of her interests.
The career world is like an ecological system: People occupy particular
fields within which they must compete for resources and survival. The more
people there are crowded into a space, the harder it becomes to thrive there.
Working in such a field will tend to wear you out as you struggle to get
attention, to play the political games, to win scarce resources for yourself.
You spend so much time at these games that you have little time left over
for true mastery. You are seduced into such fields because you see others
there making a living, treading the familiar path. You are not aware of how
difficult such a life can be.
The game you want to play is different: to instead find a niche in the
ecology that you can dominate. It is never a simple process to find such a
niche. It requires patience and a particular strategy. In the beginning you
choose a field that roughly corresponds to your interests (medicine,
electrical engineering). From there you can go in one of two directions. The
first is the Ramachandran path. From within your chosen field, you look for
side paths that particularly attract you (in his case the science of perception
and optics). When it is possible, you make a move to this narrower field.
You continue this process until you eventually hit upon a totally unoccupied
niche, the narrower the better. In some ways, this niche corresponds to your
uniqueness, much as Ramachandran’s particular form of neurology
corresponds to his own primal sense of feeling like an exception.
The second is the Matsuoka path. Once you have mastered your first
field (robotics), you look for other subjects or skills that you can conquer
(neuroscience), on your own time if necessary. You can now combine this
added field of knowledge to the original one, perhaps creating a new field,
or at least making novel connections between them. You continue this
process as long as you wish—in Matsuoka’s case, she never stops
expanding. Ultimately you create a field that is uniquely your own. This
second version fits in well with a culture where information is so widely
available, and in which connecting ideas is a form of power.
In either direction, you have found a niche that is not crowded with
competitors. You have freedom to roam, to pursue particular questions that
interest you. You set your own agenda and command the resources
available to this niche. Unburdened by overwhelming competition and
politicking, you have time and space to bring to flower your Life’s Task.
3. Avoid the false path—The rebellion strategy
In 1760, at the age of four, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart took up the piano
under his father’s instruction. It was Wolfgang who asked to start lessons at
this precocious age; his sister, age seven, had already started on the
instrument. Perhaps it was partly out of sibling rivalry that he had taken
such initiative, seeing the attention and love that his sister received for her
playing and wanting it for himself.
After the first few months of practice, his father, Leopold—a talented
player, composer, and teacher himself—could see that Wolfgang was
exceptional. Most strange for his age, the boy loved to practice; at night his
parents had to drag him away from the piano. He began to compose his own
pieces at the age of five. Soon, Leopold took this prodigy and his sister on
the road to perform in all the capitals of Europe. Wolfgang dazzled the royal
audiences for whom he performed. He played with assurance and could
improvise all kinds of clever melodies. He was like a precious toy. The
father was now earning a nice income for the family, as more and more
courts wanted to see the child genius in action.
As the patriarch of the family, Leopold demanded total obedience from
his children, even though it was now young Wolfgang who was essentially
supporting them all. Wolfgang willingly submitted—he owed everything to
his father. But as he entered adolescence something else stirred within him.
Was it playing the piano that he enjoyed, or simply attracting all of this
attention? He felt confused. After so many years composing music he was
finally developing his own style, and yet his father insisted that he focus on
writing the more conventional pieces that pleased the royal audiences and
brought the family money. The city of Salzburg, where they lived, was
provincial and bourgeois. In general, he yearned for something else, to be
on his own. With each passing year, Wolfgang felt increasingly stifled.
Finally, in 1777, the father allowed Wolfgang—now twenty-one—to
leave for Paris, accompanied by his mother. There he must try to gain a
prominent position as conductor, so that he could continue supporting his
family. But Wolfgang did not find Paris to his liking. The jobs he was
offered seemed beneath his talents. And then his mother fell ill while there
and died on the way back home. The trip was a disaster in all possible ways.
Wolfgang returned to Salzburg, chastened and prepared to submit to his
father’s will. He accepted a rather uninteresting position as the court
organist, but he could not completely suppress his unease. He despaired of
spending his life in this mediocre position, writing music to please these
petty provincials. At one point, he wrote his father: “I am a composer…. I
neither can nor ought to bury the talent for composition with which God in
his goodness has so richly endowed me.”
Leopold reacted to these increasingly frequent complaints of his son
with anger, reminding him of the debt he owed him for all of the training he
had received and the expenses the father had incurred in their endless
travels. Finally, in a flash, it came to Wolfgang: it was never really the
piano that was his love, nor even music per se. He did not enjoy performing
before others like a puppet. It was composing that he was destined for; but
more than that, he had an intense love for the theater. He wanted to
compose operas—that was his true voice. He would never realize this if he
remained in Salzburg. It was his father who represented more than an
obstacle; he was in fact ruining his life, his health, his confidence. It was
not just about money; his father was actually jealous of his son’s talents,
and whether consciously or not, he was trying to stifle his progress.
Wolfgang had to take a step, however painful, before it was too late.
On a trip to Vienna in 1781, Wolfgang made the fateful decision to
stay. He would never return to Salzburg. As if Wolfgang had broken some
great taboo, his father could never forgive him for this; his son had
abandoned the family. The rift between them would never be repaired.
Feeling that he had lost so much time under his father’s thumb, Wolfgang
composed at a furious pace, his most famous operas and compositions
pouring out of him as if he were possessed.
A false path in life is generally something we are attracted to for the wrong
reasons—money, fame, attention, and so on. If it is attention we need, we
often experience a kind of emptiness inside that we are hoping to fill with
the false love of public approval. Because the field we choose does not
correspond with our deepest inclinations, we rarely find the fulfillment that
we crave. Our work suffers for this, and the attention we may have gotten in
the beginning starts to fade—a painful process. If it is money and comfort
that dominate our decision, we are most often acting out of anxiety and the
need to please our parents. They may steer us toward something lucrative
out of care and concern, but lurking underneath this can be something else
—perhaps a bit of envy that we have more freedom than they had when
they were young.
Your strategy must be twofold: first, to realize as early as possible that
you have chosen your career for the wrong reasons, before your confidence
takes a hit. And second, to actively rebel against those forces that have
pushed you away from your true path. Scoff at the need for attention and
approval—they will lead you astray. Feel some anger and resentment at the
parental forces that want to foist upon you an alien vocation. It is a healthy
part of your development to follow a path independent of your parents and
to establish your own identity. Let your sense of rebellion fill you with
energy and purpose. If it is the father figure, the Leopold Mozart, that is
blocking your path, you must slay him and clear the way.
4. Let go of the past—The adaptation strategy
From the time he was born in 1960, Freddie Roach was groomed to be a
boxing champion. His father had been a professional fighter himself, and
his mother a boxing judge. Freddie’s older brother began learning the sport
at an early age, and when Freddie was six he was promptly taken to the
local gym in south Boston to begin a rigorous apprenticeship in the sport.
He trained with a coach several hours a day, six days a week.
By the age of fifteen he felt like he was burned out. He made more and
more excuses to avoid going to the gym. One day his mother sensed this
and said to him, “Why do you fight anyway? You just get hit all the time.
You can’t fight.” He was used to the constant criticism from his father and
brothers, but to hear such a frank assessment from his mother had a bracing
effect. Clearly, she saw his older brother as the one destined for greatness.
Now Freddie determined that he would somehow prove her wrong. He
returned to his training regimen with a vengeance. He discovered within
himself a passion for practice and discipline. He enjoyed the sensation of
getting better, the trophies that began to pile up, and, more than anything,
the fact that he could now actually beat his brother. His love for the sport
was rekindled.
As Freddie now showed the most promise of the brothers, his father
took him to Las Vegas to help further his career. There, at the age of
eighteen, he met the legendary coach Eddie Futch and began to train under
him. It all looked very promising—he was chosen for the United States
boxing team and began to climb up the ranks. Before long, however, he hit
another wall. He would learn the most effective maneuvers from Futch and
practice them to perfection, but in an actual bout it was another story. As
soon as he got hit in the ring, he would revert to fighting instinctually; his
emotions would get the better of him. His fights would turn into brawls
over many rounds, and he would often lose.
After a few years, Futch told Roach it was time to retire. But boxing
had been his whole life; retire and do what? He continued to fight and to
lose, until finally he could see the writing on the wall and retired. He took a
job in telemarketing and began to drink heavily. Now he hated the sport—
he had given it so much and had nothing to show for his efforts. Almost in
spite of himself, one day he returned to Futch’s gym to watch his friend
Virgil Hill spar with a boxer about to fight for a title. Both fighters trained
under Futch, but there was nobody in Hill’s corner helping him, so Freddie
brought him water and gave him advice. He showed up the following day to
help Hill again, and soon became a regular at Futch’s gym. He was not
being paid, so he kept his telemarketing job, but something in him smelled
opportunity—and he was desperate. He showed up on time and stayed later
than anyone else. Knowing Futch’s techniques so well, he could teach them
to all of the fighters. His responsibilities began to grow.
In the back of his mind he could not shake his resentment of boxing,
and he questioned how long he could keep this up. It was a dog-eat-dog
career and trainers rarely lasted very long in the business. Would this turn
into yet another routine in which he would endlessly repeat the same
exercises he had learned from Futch? A part of him yearned to return to
fighting—at least fighting was not so predictable.
One day Virgil Hill showed him a technique he had picked up from
some Cuban fighters: Instead of working with a punching bag, they mostly
trained with the coach, who wore large padded mitts. Standing in the ring,
the fighters half-sparred with the coach and practiced their punches. Roach
tried it with Hill and his eyes lit up. It brought him back into the ring, but
there was something else. Boxing, he felt, had become stale, as had its
training methods. In his mind, he saw a way to adapt the mitt work for more
than just punching practice. It could be a way for a trainer to devise an
entire strategy in the ring and demonstrate it to his fighter in real time. It
could revolutionize and revitalize the sport itself. Roach began to develop
this with the stable of fighters that he now trained. He instructed them in
maneuvers that were much more fluid and strategic.
Soon he left Futch to work on his own. He quickly established a
reputation for preparing his boxers better than anyone else, and within a few
years he rose to become the most successful trainer of his generation.
In dealing with your career and its inevitable changes, you must think in the
following way: You are not tied to a particular position; your loyalty is not
to a career or a company. You are committed to your Life’s Task, to giving
it full expression. It is up to you to find it and guide it correctly. It is not up
to others to protect or help you. You are on your own. Change is inevitable,
particularly in such a revolutionary moment as ours. Since you are on your
own, it is up to you to foresee the changes going on right now in your
profession. You must adapt your Life’s Task to these circumstances. You do
not hold on to past ways of doing things, because that will ensure you will
fall behind and suffer for it. You are flexible and always looking to adapt.
If change is forced upon you, as it was for Freddie Roach, you must
resist the temptation to overreact or feel sorry for yourself. Roach
instinctively found his way back to the ring because he understood that
what he loved was not boxing per se, but competitive sports and
strategizing. Thinking in this way, he could adapt his inclinations to a new
direction within boxing. Like Roach, you don’t want to abandon the skills
and experience you have gained, but to find a new way to apply them. Your
eye is on the future, not the past. Often such creative readjustments lead to a
superior path for us—we are shaken out of our complacency and forced to
reassess where we are headed. Remember: your Life’s Task is a living,
breathing organism. The moment you rigidly follow a plan set in your
youth, you lock yourself into a position, and the times will ruthlessly pass
you by.
5. Find your way back—The life-or-death strategy
As a very young child Buckminster Fuller (1895–1983) knew that he
experienced the world differently than others. He was born with extreme
nearsightedness. Everything around him was a blur, and so his other senses
developed to compensate for this—particularly touch and smell. Even after
he was prescribed glasses at the age of five, he continued to perceive the
world around him with more than just his eyes. He had a tactile form of
intelligence.
Fuller was an extremely resourceful child. He once invented a new
kind of oar to help propel him across the lakes in Maine where he spent his
summers delivering mail. Its design was modeled after the motion of
jellyfish, which he had observed and studied. He could envision the
dynamics of their movement with more than his eyes—he felt the
movement. He reproduced this motion in his newfangled oar and it
functioned beautifully. During such summers he would dream of other
interesting inventions—these would be his life’s work, his destiny.
Being different, however, had its painful side. He had no patience for
the usual forms of education. Although he was very bright and had been
admitted to Harvard University, he could not adapt to its strict style of
learning. He skipped classes, began to drink, and led a rather bohemian
lifestyle. The officials at Harvard expelled him twice—the second time for
good.
After that he bounced from job to job. He worked at a meatpacking
plant and then, during World War I, he secured a good position in the navy.
He had an incredible feel for machines and how their parts worked in
concert. But he was restless, and could not stay too long in one place. After
the war he had a wife and child to support, and despairing of ever being
able to care for them properly, he decided to take a high-paying position as
a sales manager. He worked hard, did a decent job, but after three months
the company folded. He had found the work extremely unsatisfying, but it
seemed that such jobs were all he could expect from life.
Finally, a few months later, a chance appeared out of nowhere. His
father-in-law had invented a way of producing materials for houses that
would end up making them more durable and better insulated, and at a
much lower cost. But the father could not find investors or anyone willing
to help him set up a business. Fuller thought his idea brilliant. He had
always been interested in housing and architecture, and so he offered to take
charge of implementing this new technology. He put everything he could
into the effort and was even able to improve on the materials to be used.
Fuller’s father-in-law supported his work, and together they formed the
Stockade Building System. Money from investors, mostly family members,
allowed them to open factories. The company struggled—the technology
was too new and radical, and Fuller was too much of a purist to
compromise his desire to revolutionize the construction industry. After five
years the company was sold and Fuller was fired as president.
Now the situation looked bleaker than ever. The family had been living
well in Chicago on his salary, beyond its means. In those five years he had
not managed to save anything. Winter was approaching and his prospects
for work seemed very slim—his reputation was in tatters. One evening he
walked along Lake Michigan and thought of his life up until then. He had
disappointed his wife, and he had lost money for his father-in-law and his
friends who had invested in the enterprise. He was useless at business and a
burden to everyone. Finally he decided upon suicide as the best option. He
would drown himself in the lake. He had a good insurance policy, and his
wife’s family would take better care of her than he had been able to. As he
walked toward the water, he mentally prepared himself for death.
Suddenly something stopped him in his tracks—what he would
describe later as a voice, coming from nearby or perhaps from within him.
It said, “From now on you need never await temporal attestation to your
thought. You think the truth. You do not have the right to eliminate yourself.
You do not belong to you. You belong to Universe. Your significance will
remain forever obscure to you, but you may assume that you are fulfilling
your role if you apply yourself to converting your experiences to the highest
advantage of others.” Never having heard voices before, Fuller could only
imagine it as something real. Stunned by these words, he turned away from
the water and headed home.
On the way there he began to ponder the words and to reassess his life,
now in a different light. Perhaps what he had perceived moments earlier as
his mistakes were not mistakes at all. He had tried to fit into a world
(business) in which he did not belong. The world was telling him this if he
only listened. The Stockade experience was not all a waste—he had learned
some invaluable lessons about human nature. He should have no regrets.
The truth was that he was different. In his mind he imagined all kinds of
inventions—new kinds of cars, houses, building structures—that reflected
his unusual perceptual skills. It struck him, as he looked around at row after
row of apartment housing on his way back, that people suffered more from
sameness, from the inability to think of doing things differently, than from
nonconformity.
He swore that from that moment on he would listen to nothing except
his own experience, his own voice. He would create an alternative way of
making things that would open people’s eyes to new possibilities. The
money would eventually come. Whenever he thought of money first,
disaster followed. He would take care of his family, but they would have to
live frugally for the moment.
Over the years, Fuller kept to this promise. The pursuit of his peculiar
ideas led to the design of inexpensive and energy-efficient forms of
transportation and shelter (the Dymaxion car and Dymaxion house), and to
the invention of the geodesic dome—a whole new form of architectural
structure. Fame and money soon followed.
No good can ever come from deviating from the path that you were
destined to follow. You will be assailed by varieties of hidden pain. Most
often you deviate because of the lure of money, of more immediate
prospects of prosperity. Because this does not comply with something deep
within you, your interest will lag and eventually the money will not come
so easily. You will search for other easy sources of money, moving further
and further away from your path. Not seeing clearly ahead of you, you will
end up in a dead-end career. Even if your material needs are met, you will
feel an emptiness inside that you will need to fill with any kind of belief
system, drugs, or diversions. There is no compromise here, no way of
escaping the dynamic. You will recognize how far you have deviated by the
depth of your pain and frustration. You must listen to the message of this
frustration, this pain, and let it guide you as clearly as Fuller’s voice guided
him. It is a matter of life and death.
The way back requires a sacrifice. You cannot have everything in the
present. The road to mastery requires patience. You will have to keep your
focus on five or ten years down the road, when you will reap the rewards of
your efforts. The process of getting there, however, is full of challenges and
pleasures. Make your return to the path a resolution you set for yourself,
and then tell others about it. It becomes a matter of shame and
embarrassment to deviate from this path. In the end, the money and success
that truly last come not to those who focus on such things as goals, but
rather to those who focus on mastery and fulfilling their Life’s Task.
REVERSAL
Some people do not become aware of inclinations or future career paths in
their childhood, but instead are made painfully aware of their limitations.
They are not good at what others seem to find easy or manageable. The idea
of a calling in life is alien to them. In some cases they internalize the
judgments and criticisms of others, and come to see themselves as
essentially deficient. If they are not careful, this can become a self-fulfilling
prophecy.
Nobody faced this fate more powerfully than Temple Grandin. In
1950, at the age of three, she was diagnosed with autism. She had yet to
make any progress in learning language, and it was thought that this would
remain her condition—and that she would need to be institutionalized her
entire life. But her mother wanted to try one last option before giving up:
she sent Temple to a speech therapist, who miraculously, slowly managed to
teach her language, which allowed her to attend school and begin to learn
what other children were learning.
Despite this improvement, Temple’s future appeared limited at best.
Her mind functioned in a different way—she thought in terms of images,
not words. In order to learn a word she had to be able to picture it in her
mind. This made it hard to understand abstract words or learn mathematics.
She was also not good at socializing with other children, who often made
fun of her for her differences. With such learning disabilities, what could
she hope to do in life beyond some kind of menial job? To make matters
worse, she had an extremely active mind, and without something to
concentrate on, she would give in to feelings of intense anxiety.
Whenever she felt troubled, Temple instinctively retreated to two
activities that were comfortable to her: interacting with animals and
building things with her hands. With animals, particularly horses, she had
an uncanny ability to sense their feelings and thoughts. She became an
expert horseback rider. Because she tended to think first in images, when it
came to making things with her hands (like sewing or woodwork), she
could envision the finished product in her mind and then easily put it
together.
At the age of eleven, Temple went to visit an aunt who had a ranch in
Arizona. There she realized that she had an even greater sense of empathy
for cattle than she did for horses. One day she watched with particular
interest as some of the cattle were placed in a squeeze chute that pressed
them on their sides to relax them before their vaccination shots. Throughout
her childhood Temple had had the desire to be held tightly, but could not
stand being held by an adult—she felt like she had no control in such a
situation, and would panic. She pleaded with her aunt to allow her to be put
into the squeeze device herself. The aunt agreed, and for thirty minutes
Temple gave in to the feeling of pressure she had always dreamed of. Once
it was over, she felt an enormous sense of calmness. After that experience
she became obsessed with the machine, and several years later managed to
build her own primitive version of it that she could use at home.
Now she was obsessed with the subject of cattle, squeeze chutes, and
the effect of touch and pressure on autistic children. In order to satisfy her
curiosity, she had to develop reading and researching skills. Once she did,
she found she had unusually high powers of concentration—she could read
for hours on one subject without getting the slightest bit bored. Her research
slowly expanded into books on psychology, biology, and science in general.
Because of the intellectual skills she had developed, she was admitted into a
university. Her horizons were slowly expanding.
Several years later, she found herself pursuing a master’s degree in
Animal Sciences at Arizona State University. There, her obsession with
cattle resurfaced—she wanted to do a detailed analysis of feedlots and cattle
chutes in particular, to help understand the behavioral responses of the
animals. Her professors there could not understand such an interest, and
told her it was not possible. Never being one to take no for an answer, she
found professors in another department who would sponsor her. She did her
study, and in the process finally caught a glimpse of her Life’s Task.
She was not destined for a life in the university. She was a practical
person who liked to build things and yet needed constant mental
stimulation. She decided she would carve out her own peculiar career path.
Starting off freelance, she offered her services to various ranches and
feedlots, designing cattle chutes that were much more suited to the animals
and more efficient. Slowly, with her visual sense of design and engineering,
she taught herself the rudiments of the business. She expanded her services
to designing more humane slaughterhouses and systems for managing farm
animals.
With this career solidly in place, she proceeded to go further: she
became a writer; she returned to the university as a professor; she
transformed herself into a gifted lecturer on animals and autism. Somehow
she had managed to overcome all of the seemingly insurmountable
obstructions in her path and find her way to the Life’s Task that suited her
to perfection.
When you are faced with deficiencies instead of strengths and inclinations,
this is the strategy you must assume: ignore your weaknesses and resist the
temptation to be more like others. Instead, like Temple Grandin, direct
yourself toward the small things you are good at. Do not dream or make
grand plans for the future, but instead concentrate on becoming proficient at
these simple and immediate skills. This will bring you confidence and
become a base from which you can expand to other pursuits. Proceeding in
this way, step by step, you will hit upon your Life’s Task.
Understand: Your Life’s Task does not always appear to you through
some grand or promising inclination. It can appear in the guise of your
deficiencies, making you focus on the one or two things that you are
inevitably good at. Working at these skills, you learn the value of discipline
and see the rewards you get from your efforts. Like a lotus flower, your
skills will expand outward from a center of strength and confidence. Do not
envy those who seem to be naturally gifted; it is often a curse, as such types
rarely learn the value of diligence and focus, and they pay for this later in
life. This strategy applies as well to any setbacks and difficulties we may
experience. In such moments, it is generally wise to stick to the few things
we know and do well, and to reestablish our confidence.
If someone like Temple Grandin, with so much against her at birth, can
find her way to her Life’s Task and to mastery, it means it must be a power
accessible to us all.
Sooner or later something seems to call us onto a particular path. You may remember this
“something” as a signal calling in childhood when an urge out of nowhere, a fascination, a
peculiar turn of events struck like an annunciation: This is what I must do, this is what I’ve got
to have. This is who I am…If not this vivid and sure, the call may have been more like gentle
pushings in the stream in which you drifted unknowingly to a particular spot on the bank.
Looking back, you sense that fate had a hand in it…. A calling may be postponed, avoided,
intermittently missed. It may also possess you completely. Whatever; eventually it will out. It
makes its claim…. Extraordinary people display calling most evidently. Perhaps that’s why
they fascinate. Perhaps, too, they are extraordinary because their calling comes through so
clearly and they are so loyal to it…. Extraordinary people bear the better witness because they
show what ordinary mortals simply can’t. We seem to have less motivation and more
distraction. Yet our destiny is driven by the same universal engine. Extraordinary people are
not a different category; the workings of this engine in them are simply more transparent….
—JAMES HILLMAN
II
SUBMIT TO
REALITY: THE IDEAL
APPRENTICESHIP
After your formal education, you enter the most critical phase in your life—
a second, practical education known as The Apprenticeship. Every time you
change careers or acquire new skills, you reenter this phase of life. The
dangers are many. If you are not careful, you will succumb to insecurities,
become embroiled in emotional issues and conflicts that will dominate your
thoughts; you will develop fears and learning disabilities that you will carry
with you throughout your life. Before it is too late you must learn the
lessons and follow the path established by the greatest Masters, past and
present—a kind of Ideal Apprenticeship that transcends all fields. In the
process you will master the necessary skills, discipline your mind, and
transform yourself into an independent thinker, prepared for the creative
challenges on the way to mastery.
THE FIRST TRANSFORMATION
From early in his life, Charles Darwin (1809–82) felt the presence of his
father bearing down on him. The father was a successful and wealthy
country doctor who had high hopes for his two sons. But Charles, the
youngest, seemed to be the one who was less likely to meet his
expectations. He was not good at Greek and Latin, or algebra, or really
anything in school. It wasn’t that he lacked ambition. It was just that
learning about the world through books did not interest him. He loved the
outdoors—hunting, scouring the countryside for rare breeds of beetles,
collecting flower and mineral specimens. He could spend hours observing
the behavior of birds and taking elaborate notes on their various differences.
He had an eye for such things. But these hobbies did not add up to a career,
and as he got older he could sense his father’s growing impatience. One
day, his father rebuked him with words Charles would never forget: “You
care for nothing but shooting, dogs, and rat-catching, and you will be a
disgrace to yourself and all your family.”
When Charles turned fifteen, his father decided to become more
actively involved in his life. He sent him off to medical school in
Edinburgh, but Charles could not stand the sight of blood and so had to
drop out. Determined to find some career for him, the father then secured
for his son a future position in the church as a country parson. For this
Charles would be well paid, and he would have plenty of spare time to
pursue his mania for collecting specimens. The only requirement for such a
position was a degree from an eminent university, and so Charles was
enrolled at Cambridge. Once again, he had to confront his disinterest in
formal schooling. He tried his best. He developed an interest in botany and
became good friends with his instructor, Professor Henslow. He worked as
hard as he could, and to his father’s relief he managed, barely, to earn his
Bachelor of Arts in May 1831.
Hoping that his schooling was forever over, Charles left on a tour of
the English countryside where he could indulge in all of his passions for the
outdoors and forget about the future, for the time being.
When he returned home in late August, he was surprised to see a letter
waiting for him from Professor Henslow. The professor was recommending
Charles for a position as an unpaid naturalist on the HMS Beagle, which
was to leave in a few months on a several-year journey around the globe,
surveying various coastlines. As part of his job, Charles would be in charge
of collecting life and mineral specimens along the way and sending them
back to England for examination. Evidently, Henslow had been impressed
by the young man’s remarkable skill in collecting and identifying plant
specimens.
This offer confused Charles. He had never thought of traveling that far,
let alone pursuing a career as a naturalist. Before he really had time to
consider it, his father weighed in—he was dead set against his accepting the
offer. Charles had never been to sea and would not take to it well. He was
not a trained scientist, and lacked the discipline. Moreover, taking several
years on this voyage would jeopardize the position his father had secured
for him in the church.
His father was so forceful and persuasive that Charles could not help
but agree, and he decided to turn the offer down. But over the next few days
he thought about this voyage and what it could be like. And the more he
imagined it, the more it appealed to him. Perhaps it was the lure of
adventure after leading such a sheltered childhood, or the chance to explore
a possible career as a naturalist, seeing along the way almost every possible
life form the planet could offer. Or maybe he needed to get away from his
overbearing father and find his own way. Whatever the reason, he soon
decided that he had changed his mind and wanted to accept the offer.
Recruiting an uncle to his cause, he managed to get his father to give his
very reluctant consent. On the eve of the ship’s departure, Charles wrote to
the captain of the Beagle, Robert FitzRoy: “My second life will then
commence, and it shall be as a birthday for the rest of my life.”
The ship set sail in December of that year and almost instantly young
Darwin regretted his decision. The boat was rather small and strongly
buffeted by the waves. He was continually seasick and could not hold his
food. His heart ached at the thought that he would not see his family for so
long, and that he would have to spend so many years cooped up with all of
these strangers. He developed heart palpitations and felt like he was
dangerously ill. The sailors sensed his lack of seaworthiness and eyed him
strangely. Captain FitzRoy proved to be a man of wildly swinging moods,
suddenly turning furious over the most seemingly trivial events. He was
also a religious fanatic who believed in the literal truth of the Bible; it was
Darwin’s duty, FitzRoy told him, to find in South America evidence of the
Flood and the creation of life as described in Genesis. Darwin felt like a
fool for going against his father, and his sense of loneliness was crushing.
How could he endure this cramped existence for months on end, living in
close quarters with a captain who seemed half-insane?
A few weeks into the journey, feeling somewhat desperate, he decided
upon a strategy. Whenever he experienced such inner turmoil at home, what
always calmed him down was to head outdoors and observe the life around
him. In that way he could forget himself. This now was his world. He
would observe life on board this ship, the characters of the various sailors
and the captain himself, as if he were taking note of the markings of
butterflies. For instance, he noticed that no one grumbled about the food or
the weather or the tasks at hand. They valued stoicism. He would try to
adopt such an attitude. It seemed that FitzRoy was slightly insecure and
needed constant validation about his authority and high position within the
navy. Darwin would supply that to no end. Slowly, he began to fit into the
daily scheme of life. He even picked up some of the mannerisms of the
sailors. All of this distracted him from his loneliness.
Several months later the Beagle arrived in Brazil, and now Darwin
understood why he had wanted so badly to go on this voyage. He was
completely mesmerized by the intense variety of the vegetation and wildlife
—this was a naturalist’s paradise. It was not like anything he had observed
or collected in England. One day on a walk through a forest, he stood to the
side and witnessed the most bizarre and cruel spectacle he had ever seen: a
march of tiny black ants, their columns over a hundred yards long,
devouring every living thing in their path. Everywhere he turned he saw
some example of the fierce struggle for survival in forests with
overabundant life. In attending to his work, he quickly realized that he also
faced a problem: All of the birds, the butterflies, the crabs, and the spiders
he caught were so unusual. Part of his job was to choose judiciously what to
send back, but how could he possibly distinguish what was worth
collecting?
He would have to expand his knowledge. Not only would he have to
spend endless hours studying everything in his sight on his walks, and take
copious notes, but he would have to find a way to organize all of this
information, catalog all of these specimens, bring some order to his
observations. It would be a herculean task, but unlike schoolwork, it excited
him. These were living creatures, not vague notions in books.
As the ship headed south along the coast, Darwin realized that there
were interior parts of South America that no naturalist had yet explored.
Determined to see every form of life that he could possibly find, he began a
series of treks into the Pampas of Argentina, accompanied only by gauchos,
collecting all kinds of unusual animal and insect specimens. Adopting the
same strategy as on the ship, he observed the gauchos and their ways, fitting
into their culture as if one of them. On these and other jaunts, he would
brave marauding Indians, poisonous insects, and jaguars lurking in the
forests. Without thinking of it, he had developed a taste for adventure that
would have shocked his family and friends.
A year into the voyage, on a beach some 400 miles south of Buenos
Aires, Darwin discovered something that would set his mind to thinking for
many years to come. He came upon a cliff with streaks of white amid the
rock. Seeing that they were enormous bones of some sort, he began to chip
away at the rock, extracting as many of these remains as possible. They
were of a size and kind he had never seen before—the horns and armor of
what seemed to be a giant armadillo, the huge teeth of a mastodon, and
then, most surprisingly, the tooth of a horse. When the Spaniards and
Portuguese had first arrived in South America there were no horses to be
found, and yet this tooth was quite old and predated their arrival. He began
to wonder—if such species had died off long ago, the idea of all of life
being created at once and for good seemed illogical. More important, how
could so many species become extinct? Could life on the planet be in a state
of constant flux and development?
Months later he was trekking through the high Andes, looking for rare
geological specimens to send back. At an elevation of about 12,000 feet he
discovered some fossilized seashells and deposits of marine rocks—a rather
surprising find at such an altitude. As he examined them and the
surrounding flora, he speculated that these mountains had once stood in the
Atlantic Ocean. A series of volcanoes, thousands of years ago, must have
raised them higher and higher. Instead of relics to support the stories in the
Bible, he was finding evidence for something shockingly different.
As the journey progressed, Darwin noted some obvious changes in
himself. He used to find almost any kind of work boring, but now he could
labor all hours of the day; in fact, with so much to explore and learn, he
hated wasting a single minute of the voyage. He had cultivated an
incredible eye for the flora and fauna of South America. He could identify
local birds by their songs, the markings on their eggs, their manner of
taking flight. All of this information he could catalog and organize in an
efficient manner. More important, his whole way of thinking had changed.
He would observe something, read and write about it, then develop a theory
after even more observation, the theories and observations feeding off one
another. Full of details about so many facets of the world he was exploring,
ideas were sprouting up out of nowhere.
In September 1835, the Beagle left the Pacific Coast of South America
and headed west for the journey home. Their first stop along the way was a
series of virtually unoccupied islands known as the Galápagos. The islands
were famous for their wildlife, but nothing could prepare Darwin for what
he would find there. Captain FitzRoy gave him one week to explore one of
the islands, and then they would be on their way. From the moment he
stepped on the island, Darwin realized something was different: this small
speck of land was crammed with life that was not like anywhere else—
thousands of black marine iguanas swarming around him, on the beach and
in the shallow water; 500-pound tortoises lumbering about the shore; seals,
penguins, and flightless cormorants, all cold-water creatures, inhabiting a
tropical island.
By the end of the week, he had counted twenty-six unique species of
land birds on this one island alone. His jars began to fill up with the most
bizarre plants, snakes, lizards, fish, and insects. Back on board the Beagle,
he began to catalog and categorize the remarkable number of specimens he
had collected. He was struck by the fact that almost all of them represented
completely new species. He then made an even more remarkable discovery:
the species differed from island to island, even though they were only some
fifty miles apart. The tortoise shells had different markings, and the finches
had developed different types of beaks, each designed for a specific kind of
food on their particular island.
Suddenly, as if the four years of this voyage and all of his observations
had distilled in him a deeper way of thinking, a radical theory took shape in
his mind: These islands, he speculated, had first been pushed up out of the
water by volcanic eruptions, much like the Andes. In the beginning, there
was no life to be found on them. Slowly, birds visited and deposited seeds.
Various animals arrived by sea—lizards or insects floating on logs;
tortoises, originally of a marine variety, swam over. Over thousands of
years, each creature adapted to the food and predators that were found
there, changing their shape and appearance in the process. Animals that
failed to adapt died out, like the fossils of those giant creatures Darwin had
unearthed in Argentina. It was a ruthless struggle for survival. Life was not
created on these islands at one time and for good by some divine being. The
creatures here had ever so slowly evolved to their present form. And these
islands represented a microcosm of the planet itself.
On the journey home Darwin began to develop this theory further, so
revolutionary in its implications. To prove his theory would now be his
life’s work.
Finally, in October 1836, the Beagle returned to England after nearly
five years at sea. Darwin hurried home, and when his father first saw him
he was astonished. Physically, he had changed. His head seemed larger. His
whole manner was different—a seriousness of purpose and sharpness could
be read in his eyes, almost the opposite look of the lost young man who had
gone to sea years before. Clearly, the voyage had transformed his son in
body and spirit.
KEYS TO MASTERY
One can have no smaller or greater mastery than mastery of oneself.
—LEONARDO DA VINCI
In the stories of the greatest Masters, past and present, we can inevitably
detect a phase in their lives in which all of their future powers were in
development, like the chrysalis of a butterfly. This part of their lives—a
largely self-directed apprenticeship that lasts some five to ten years—
receives little attention because it does not contain stories of great
achievement or discovery. Often in their Apprenticeship Phase, these types
are not yet much different from anyone else. Under the surface, however,
their minds are transforming in ways we cannot see but contain all of the
seeds of their future success.
Much of how such Masters navigate this phase comes from an intuitive
grasp of what is most important and essential for their development, but in
studying what they did right we can learn some invaluable lessons for
ourselves. In fact, a close examination of their lives reveals a pattern that
transcends their various fields, indicating a kind of Ideal Apprenticeship for
mastery. And to grasp this pattern, to follow it in our own ways, we must
understand something about the very idea and necessity for passing through
an apprenticeship.
In childhood we are inculcated in culture through a long period of
dependency—far longer than any other animal. During this period we learn
language, writing, math, and reasoning skills, along with a few others.
Much of this happens under the watchful and loving guidance of parents
and teachers. As we get older, greater emphasis is placed on book learning
—absorbing as much information as possible about various subjects. Such
knowledge of history, science, or literature is abstract, and the process of
learning largely involves passive absorption. At the end of this process
(usually somewhere between the ages of eighteen and twenty-five) we are
then thrust into the cold, harsh work world to fend for ourselves.
When we emerge from the youthful state of dependency, we are not
really ready to handle the transition to an entirely independent phase. We
carry with us the habit of learning from books or teachers, which is largely
unsuited for the practical, self-directed phase of life that comes next. We
tend to be somewhat socially naïve and unprepared for the political games
people play. Still uncertain as to our identity, we think that what matters in
the work world is gaining attention and making friends. And these
misconceptions and naïveté are brutally exposed in the light of the real
world.
If we adjust over time, we might eventually find our way; but if we
make too many mistakes, we create endless problems for ourselves. We
spend too much time entangled in emotional issues, and we never quite
have enough detachment to reflect and learn from our experiences. The
apprenticeship, by its very nature, must be conducted by each individual in
his or her own way. To follow precisely the lead of others or advice from a
book is self-defeating. This is the phase in life in which we finally declare
our independence and establish who we are. But for this second education
in our lives, so critical to our future success, there are some powerful and
essential lessons that we all can benefit from, that can guide us away from
common mistakes and save us valuable time.
These lessons transcend all fields and historical periods because they
are connected to something essential about human psychology and how the
brain itself functions. They can be distilled into one overarching principle
for the Apprenticeship Phase, and a process that loosely follows three steps.
The principle is simple and must be engraved deeply in your mind: the
goal of an apprenticeship is not money, a good position, a title, or a
diploma, but rather the transformation of your mind and character—the first
transformation on the way to mastery. You enter a career as an outsider. You
are naïve and full of misconceptions about this new world. Your head is full
of dreams and fantasies about the future. Your knowledge of the world is
subjective, based on emotions, insecurities, and limited experience. Slowly,
you will ground yourself in reality, in the objective world represented by the
knowledge and skills that make people successful in it. You will learn how
to work with others and handle criticism. In the process you will transform
yourself from someone who is impatient and scattered into someone who is
disciplined and focused, with a mind that can handle complexity. In the end,
you will master yourself and all of your weaknesses.
This has a simple consequence: you must choose places of work and
positions that offer the greatest possibilities for learning. Practical
knowledge is the ultimate commodity, and is what will pay you dividends
for decades to come—far more than the paltry increase in pay you might
receive at some seemingly lucrative position that offers fewer learning
opportunities. This means that you move toward challenges that will
toughen and improve you, where you will get the most objective feedback
on your performance and progress. You do not choose apprenticeships that
seem easy and comfortable.
In this sense you must see yourself as following in the footsteps of
Charles Darwin. You are finally on your own, on a voyage in which you
will craft your own future. It is the time of youth and adventure—of
exploring the world with an open mind and spirit. In fact, whenever you
must learn a new skill or alter your career path later in life, you reconnect
with that youthful, adventurous part of yourself. Darwin could have played
it safe, collecting what was necessary, and spending more time on board
studying instead of actively exploring. In that case, he would not have
become an illustrious scientist, but just another collector. He constantly
looked for challenges, pushing himself past his comfort zone. He used
danger and difficulties as a way to measure his progress. You must adopt
such a spirit and see your apprenticeship as a kind of journey in which you
will transform yourself, rather than as a drab indoctrination into the work
world.
The Apprenticeship Phase—The Three Steps or Modes
With the principle outlined above guiding you in your choices, you must
think of three essential steps in your apprenticeship, each one overlapping
the other. These steps are: Deep Observation (The Passive Mode), Skills
Acquisition (The Practice Mode), and Experimentation (The Active Mode).
Keep in mind that an apprenticeship can come in many different forms. It
can happen at one place over several years, or it can consist of several
different positions in different places, a kind of compound apprenticeship
involving many different skills. It can include a mix of graduate school and
practical experience. In all of these cases, it will help you to think in terms
of these steps, although you may need to give added weight to a particular
one depending on the nature of your field.
Step One: Deep Observation—The Passive Mode
When you enter a career or new environment, you move into a world with
its own rules, procedures, and social dynamic. For decades or even
centuries, people have compiled knowledge of how to get things done in a
particular field, each generation improving on the past. In addition, every
workplace has its own conventions, rules of behavior, and work standards.
There are also all kinds of power relationships that exist between
individuals. All of this represents a reality that transcends your individual
needs and desires. And so your task upon entering this world is to observe
and absorb its reality as deeply as possible.
The greatest mistake you can make in the initial months of your
apprenticeship is to imagine that you have to get attention, impress people,
and prove yourself. These thoughts will dominate your mind and close it off
from the reality around you. Any positive attention you receive is
deceptive; it is not based on your skills or anything real, and it will turn
against you. Instead, you will want to acknowledge the reality and submit to
it, muting your colors and keeping in the background as much as possible,
remaining passive and giving yourself the space to observe. You will also
want to drop any preconceptions you might have about this world you are
entering. If you impress people in these first months, it should be because of
the seriousness of your desire to learn, not because you are trying to rise to
the top before you are ready.
You will be observing two essential realities in this new world. First,
you will observe the rules and procedures that govern success in this
environment—in other words, “this is how we do things here.” Some of
these rules will be communicated to you directly—generally the ones that
are superficial and largely a matter of common sense. You must pay
attention to these and observe them, but what is of more interest are the
rules that are unstated and are part of the underlying work culture. These
concern style and values that are considered important. They are often a
reflection of the character of the man or woman on top.
You can observe such rules by looking at those who are on their way
up in the hierarchy, who have a golden touch. More tellingly, you can
observe those who are more awkward, who have been chastised for
particular mistakes or even been fired. Such examples serve as negative trip
wires: do things this way and you will suffer.
The second reality you will observe is the power relationships that
exist within the group: who has real control; through whom do all
communications flow; who is on the rise and who is on the decline. (For
more on this element of social intelligence, please see chapter 4.) These
procedural and political rules may be dysfunctional or counterproductive,
but your job is not to moralize about this or complain, but merely to
understand them, to get a complete lay of the land. You are like an
anthropologist studying an alien culture, attuned to all of its nuances and
conventions. You are not there to change that culture; you will only end up
being killed, or in the case of work, fired. Later, when you have attained
power and mastery, you will be the one to rewrite or destroy these same
rules.
Every task you are given, no matter how menial, offers opportunities
to observe this world at work. No detail about the people within it is too
trivial. Everything you see or hear is a sign for you to decode. Over time,
you will begin to see and understand more of the reality that eluded you at
first. For instance, a person whom you initially thought had great power
ended up being someone with more bark than bite. Slowly, you begin to see
behind the appearances. As you amass more information about the rules and
power dynamics of your new environment, you can begin to analyze why
they exist, and how they relate to larger trends in the field. You move from
observation to analysis, honing your reasoning skills, but only after months
of careful attention.
We can see how Charles Darwin followed this step quite clearly. By
spending the first few months studying life on board the ship and perceiving
the unwritten rules, he made his time for science much more productive. By
enabling himself to fit in, he was able to avoid needless battles that would
have later disrupted his scientific work, not to mention the emotional
turmoil these would have presented to him. He later practiced the same
technique with gauchos and other local communities he came in contact
with. This allowed him to extend the regions he could explore and the
specimens he could collect. On another level, he slowly transformed
himself into perhaps the most astute observer of nature the world has ever
known. Emptying himself of any preconceptions about life and its origins,
Darwin trained himself to see things as they are. He did not theorize or
generalize about what he was seeing until he had amassed enough
information. Submitting to and absorbing the reality of all aspects of this
voyage, he ended up piercing one of the most fundamental realities of all—
the evolution of all living forms.
Understand: there are several critical reasons why you must follow this
step. First, knowing your environment inside and out will help you in
navigating it and avoiding costly mistakes. You are like a hunter: your
knowledge of every detail of the forest and of the ecosystem as a whole will
give you many more options for survival and success. Second, the ability to
observe any unfamiliar environment will become a critical lifelong skill.
You will develop the habit of stilling your ego and looking outward instead
of inward. You will see in any encounter what most people miss because
they are thinking of themselves. You will cultivate a keen eye for human
psychology, and strengthen your ability to focus. Finally, you will become
accustomed to observing first, basing your ideas and theories on what you
have seen with your eyes, and then analyzing what you find. This will be a
very important skill for the next, creative phase in life.
Step Two: Skills Acquisition—The Practice Mode
At some point, as you progress through these initial months of observation,
you will enter the most critical part of the apprenticeship: practice toward
the acquisition of skills. Every human activity, endeavor, or career path
involves the mastering of skills. In some fields, it is direct and obvious, like
operating a tool or machine or creating something physical. In others, it is
more of a mix of the physical and mental, such as the observing and
collecting of specimens for Charles Darwin. In still others, the skills are
more nebulous, such as handling people or researching and organizing
information. As much as possible, you want to reduce these skills to
something simple and essential—the core of what you need to get good at,
skills that can be practiced.
In acquiring any kind of skill, there exists a natural learning process
that coincides with the functioning of our brains. This learning process
leads to what we shall call tacit knowledge—a feeling for what you are
doing that is hard to put into words but easy to demonstrate in action. And
to understand how this learning process operates, it is useful to look at the
greatest system ever invented for the training of skills and the achievement
of tacit knowledge—the apprenticeship system of the Middle Ages.
This system arose as a solution to a problem: As business expanded in
the Middle Ages, Masters of various crafts could no longer depend on
family members to work in the shop. They needed more hands. But it was
not worth it for them to bring in people who would come and go—they
needed stability and time to build up skills in their workers. And so they
developed the apprenticeship system, in which young people from
approximately the ages of twelve to seventeen would enter work in a shop,
signing a contract that would commit them for the term of seven years. At
the end of this term, apprentices would have to pass a master test, or
produce a master work, to prove their level of skill. Once passed, they were
now elevated to the rank of journeymen and could travel wherever there
was work, practicing the craft.
Because few books or drawings existed at the time, apprentices would
learn the trade by watching Masters and imitating them as closely as
possible. They learned through endless repetition and hands-on work, with
very little verbal instruction (the word “apprentice” itself comes from the
Latin prehendere, meaning to grasp with the hand). Because resources such
as textiles, wood, and metals were expensive and could not be wasted on
practice runs, apprentices would spend most of their time working directly
on materials that would be used for the final product. They had to learn how
to focus deeply on their work and not make mistakes.
If one added up the time that apprentices ended up working directly on
materials in those years, it would amount to more than 10,000 hours,
enough to establish exceptional skill level at a craft. The power of this form
of tacit knowledge is embodied in the great Gothic cathedrals of Europe—
masterpieces of beauty, craftsmanship, and stability, all erected without
blueprints or books. These cathedrals represented the accumulated skills of
numerous craftsmen and engineers.
What this means is simple: language, oral and written, is a relatively
recent invention. Well before that time, our ancestors had to learn various
skills—toolmaking, hunting, and so forth. The natural model for learning,
largely based on the power of mirror neurons, came from watching and
imitating others, then repeating the action over and over. Our brains are
highly suited for this form of learning.
In an activity such as riding a bicycle, we all know that it is easier to
watch someone and follow their lead than to listen to or read instructions.
The more we do it, the easier it becomes. Even with skills that are primarily
mental, such as computer programming or speaking a foreign language, it
remains the case that we learn best through practice and repetition—the
natural learning process. We learn a foreign language by actually speaking
it as much as possible, not by reading books and absorbing theories. The
more we speak and practice, the more fluent we become.
Once you take this far enough, you enter a cycle of accelerated returns
in which the practice becomes easier and more interesting, leading to the
ability to practice for longer hours, which increases your skill level, which
in turn makes practice even more interesting. Reaching this cycle is the goal
you must set for yourself, and to get there you must understand some basic
principles about skills themselves.
First, it is essential that you begin with one skill that you can master,
and that serves as a foundation for acquiring others. You must avoid at all
cost the idea that you can manage learning several skills at a time. You need
to develop your powers of concentration, and understand that trying to
multitask will be the death of the process.
Second, the initial stages of learning a skill invariably involve tedium.
Yet rather than avoiding this inevitable tedium, you must accept and
embrace it. The pain and boredom we experience in the initial stage of
learning a skill toughens our minds, much like physical exercise. Too many
people believe that everything must be pleasurable in life, which makes
them constantly search for distractions and short-circuits the learning
process. The pain is a kind of challenge your mind presents—will you learn
how to focus and move past the boredom, or like a child will you succumb
to the need for immediate pleasure and distraction? Much as with physical
exercise, you can even get a kind of perverse pleasure out of this pain,
knowing the benefits it will bring you. In any event, you must meet any
boredom head-on and not try to avoid or repress it. Throughout your life
you will encounter tedious situations, and you must cultivate the ability to
handle them with discipline.
In practicing a skill in the initial stages, something happens
neurologically to the brain that is important for you to understand. When
you start something new, a large number of neurons in the frontal cortex
(the higher, more conscious command area of the brain) are recruited and
become active, helping you in the learning process. The brain has to deal
with a large amount of new information, and this would be stressful and
overwhelming if only a limited part of the brain were used to handle it. The
frontal cortex even expands in size in this initial phase, as we focus hard on
the task. But once something is repeated often enough, it becomes
hardwired and automatic, and the neural pathways for this skill are
delegated to other parts of the brain, farther down the cortex. Those neurons
in the frontal cortex that we needed in the initial stages are now freed up to
help in learning something else, and the area goes back to its normal size.
In the end, an entire network of neurons is developed to remember this
single task, which accounts for the fact that we can still ride a bicycle years
after we first learned how to do so. If we were to take a look at the frontal
cortex of those who have mastered something through repetition, it would
be remarkably still and inactive as they performed the skill. All of their
brain activity is occurring in areas that are lower down and require much
less conscious control.
This process of hardwiring cannot occur if you are constantly
distracted, moving from one task to another. In such a case, the neural
pathways dedicated to this skill never get established; what you learn is too
tenuous to remain rooted in the brain. It is better to dedicate two or three
hours of intense focus to a skill than to spend eight hours of diffused
concentration on it. You want to be as immediately present to what you are
doing as possible.
Once an action becomes automatic, you now have the mental space to
observe yourself as you practice. You must use this distance to take note of
your weaknesses or flaws that need correction—to analyze yourself. It helps
also to gain as much feedback as possible from others, to have standards
against which you can measure your progress so that you are aware of how
far you have to go. People who do not practice and learn new skills never
gain a proper sense of proportion or self-criticism. They think they can
achieve anything without effort and have little contact with reality. Trying
something over and over again grounds you in reality, making you deeply
aware of your inadequacies and of what you can accomplish with more
work and effort.
If you take this far enough, you will naturally enter the cycle of
accelerated returns: As you learn and gain skills you can begin to vary what
you do, finding nuances that you can develop in the work, so that it
becomes more interesting. As elements become more automatic your mind
is not exhausted by the effort and you can practice harder, which in turn
brings greater skill and more pleasure. You can look for challenges, new
areas to conquer, keeping your interest at a high level. As the cycle
accelerates, you can reach a point where your mind is totally absorbed in
the practice, entering a kind of flow in which everything else is blocked out.
You become one with the tool or instrument or thing you are studying. Your
skill is not something that can be put into words; it is embedded in your
body and nervous system—it becomes tacit knowledge. Learning any kind
of skill deeply prepares you for mastery. The sensation of flow and of being
a part of the instrument is a precursor to the great pleasures that mastery can
bring.
In essence, when you practice and develop any skill you transform
yourself in the process. You reveal to yourself new capabilities that were
previously latent, that are exposed as you progress. You develop
emotionally. Your sense of pleasure becomes redefined. What offers
immediate pleasure comes to seem like a distraction, an empty
entertainment to help pass the time. Real pleasure comes from overcoming
challenges, feeling confidence in your abilities, gaining fluency in skills,
and experiencing the power this brings. You develop patience. Boredom no
longer signals the need for distraction, but rather the need for new
challenges to conquer.
Although it might seem that the time necessary to master the requisite
skills and attain a level of expertise would depend on the field and your
own talent level, those who have researched the subject repeatedly come up
with the number of 10,000 hours. This seems to be the amount of quality
practice time that is needed for someone to reach a high level of skill and it
applies to composers, chess players, writers, and athletes, among others.
This number has an almost magical or mystical resonance to it. It means
that so much practice time—no matter the person or the field—leads to a
qualitative change in the human brain. The mind has learned to organize
and structure large amounts of information. With all of this tacit knowledge,
it can now become creative and playful with it. Although the number of
hours might seem high, it generally adds up to seven to ten years of
sustained, solid practice—roughly the period of a traditional apprenticeship.
In other words, concentrated practice over time cannot fail but produce
results.
Step Three: Experimentation—The Active Mode
This is the shortest part of the process, but a critical component nonetheless.
As you gain in skill and confidence, you must make the move to a more
active mode of experimentation. This could mean taking on more
responsibility, initiating a project of some sort, doing work that exposes you
to the criticisms of peers or even the public. The point of this is to gauge
your progress and whether there are still gaps in your knowledge. You are
observing yourself in action and seeing how you respond to the judgments
of others. Can you take criticism and use it constructively?
With Charles Darwin, as the voyage progressed and he began to
entertain the notions that would lead to his theory of evolution, he decided
to expose his ideas to others. First, on the Beagle, he discussed them with
the captain and patiently absorbed his vehement criticisms of the idea. This,
Darwin told himself, would be more or less the reaction of the public, and
he would have to prepare himself for that. He also began to write letters to
various scientists and scientific societies back in England. The responses he
received indicated he was on to something, but that he would need some
more research. For Leonardo da Vinci, as he progressed in his studio work
for Verrocchio, he began to experiment and to assert his own style. He
found to his surprise that the Master was impressed with his inventiveness.
For Leonardo, this indicated that he was near the end of his apprenticeship.
Most people wait too long to take this step, generally out of fear. It is
always easier to learn the rules and stay within your comfort zone. Often
you must force yourself to initiate such actions or experiments before you
think you are ready. You are testing your character, moving past your fears,
and developing a sense of detachment to your work—looking at it through
the eyes of others. You are getting a taste for the next phase in which what
you produce will be under constant scrutiny.
You will know when your apprenticeship is over by the feeling that
you have nothing left to learn in this environment. It is time to declare your
independence or move to another place to continue your apprenticeship and
expand your skill base. Later in life, when you are confronted with a career
change or the need to learn new skills, having gone through this process
before, it will become second nature. You have learned how to learn.
Many people might find the notion of an apprenticeship and skill
acquisition as quaint relics of bygone eras when work meant making things.
After all, we have entered the information and computer age, in which
technology makes it so we can do without the kinds of menial tasks that
require practice and repetition; so many things have become virtual in our
lives, making the craftsman model obsolete. Or so the argument goes.
In truth, however, this idea of the nature of the times we are living in is
completely incorrect, even dangerous. The era we have entered is not one in
which technology will make everything easier, but rather a time of
increased complexity that affects every field. In business, competition has
become globalized and more intense. A businessperson must have a
command of a much larger picture than in the past, which means more
knowledge and skills. The future in science does not lie in increased
specialization, but rather in the combining and cross-fertilization of
knowledge in various fields. In the arts, tastes and styles are changing at an
accelerated rate. An artist must be on top of this and be capable of creating
new forms, always remaining ahead of the curve. This often requires having
more than just a specialized knowledge of that particular art form—it
requires knowing other arts, even the sciences, and what is happening in the
world.
In all of these areas, the human brain is asked to do and handle more
than ever before. We are dealing with several fields of knowledge
constantly intersecting with our own, and all of this chaos is exponentially
increased by the information available through technology. What this means
is that all of us must possess different forms of knowledge and an array of
skills in different fields, and have minds that are capable of organizing large
amounts of information. The future belongs to those who learn more skills
and combine them in creative ways. And the process of learning skills, no
matter how virtual, remains the same.
In the future, the great division will be between those who have trained
themselves to handle these complexities and those who are overwhelmed by
them—those who can acquire skills and discipline their minds and those
who are irrevocably distracted by all the media around them and can never
focus enough to learn. The Apprenticeship Phase is more relevant and
important than ever, and those who discount this notion will almost
certainly be left behind.
Finally, we live in a culture that generally values intellect and
reasoning with words. We tend to think of working with the hands, of
building something physical, as degraded skills for those who are less
intelligent. This is an extremely counterproductive cultural value. The
human brain evolved in intimate conjunction with the hand. Many of our
earliest survival skills depended on elaborate hand-eye coordination. To this
day, a large portion of our brain is devoted to this relationship. When we
work with our hands and build something, we learn how to sequence our
actions and how to organize our thoughts. In taking anything apart in order
to fix it, we learn problem-solving skills that have wider applications. Even
if it is only as a side activity, you should find a way to work with your
hands, or to learn more about the inner workings of the machines and pieces
of technology around you.
Many Masters in history intuited this connection. Thomas Jefferson,
who himself was an avid tinkerer and inventor, believed that craftspeople
made better citizens because they understood how things functioned and
had practical common sense—all of which would serve them well in
handling civic needs. Albert Einstein was an avid violinist. He believed that
working with his hands in this way and playing music helped his thinking
process as well.
In general, no matter your field, you must think of yourself as a
builder, using actual materials and ideas. You are producing something
tangible in your work, something that affects people in some direct,
concrete way. To build anything well—a house, a political organization, a
business, or a film—you must understand the building process and possess
the necessary skills. You are a craftsman learning to adhere to the highest
standards. For all of this, you must go through a careful apprenticeship. You
cannot make anything worthwhile in this world unless you have first
developed and transformed yourself.
STRATEGIES FOR COMPLETING
THE IDEAL APPRENTICESHIP
Do not think that what is hard for you to master is humanly impossible; and if it is humanly
possible, consider it to be within your reach.
—MARCUS AURELIUS
Throughout history, Masters in all fields have devised for themselves
various strategies to help them pursue and complete an Ideal
Apprenticeship. The following are eight classic strategies, distilled from the
stories of their lives and illustrated with examples. Although some might
seem more relevant than others to your circumstances, each of them relates
fundamental truths about the learning process itself that you would be wise
to internalize.
1. Value learning over money
In 1718, Josiah Franklin decided to bring his twelve-year-old son Benjamin
into his lucrative, family-run candle-making business in Boston as an
apprentice. His idea was that after a seven-year apprenticeship and a little
experience, Benjamin would take over the business. But Benjamin had
other ideas. He threatened to run away to sea if his father did not give him
the choice of where he could apprentice. The father had already lost another
son who had run away, and so he relented. To the father’s surprise, his son
chose to work in an older brother’s recently opened printing business. Such
a business would mean harder work and the apprenticeship would last nine
instead of seven years. Also, the printing business was notoriously fickle,
and it was quite a risk to bank one’s future on it. But that was his choice, his
father decided. Let him learn the hard way.
What young Benjamin had not told his father was that he was
determined to become a writer. Most of the work in the shop would involve
manual labor and operating machines, but every now and then he would be
asked to proofread and copyedit a pamphlet or text. And there would
always be new books around. Several years into the process, he discovered
that some of his favorite writing came from the English newspapers the
shop would reprint. He asked to be the one to oversee the printing of such
articles, giving him the chance to study these texts in detail and teach
himself how to imitate their style in his own work. Over the years he
managed to turn this into a most efficient apprenticeship for writing, with
the added benefit of having learned the printing business well.
After graduating from the Zurich Polytechnic in 1900, the twenty-one-year-
old Albert Einstein found his job prospects extremely meager. He had
graduated near the bottom of the class, almost certainly nullifying any
chance to obtain a teaching position. Happy to be away from the university,
he now planned to investigate, on his own, certain problems in physics that
had haunted him for several years. It would be a self-apprenticeship in
theorizing and thought experiments. But in the meantime, he would have to
make a living. He had been offered a job in his father’s dynamo business in
Milan as an engineer, but such work would not leave him any free time. A
friend could land him a well-paid position in an insurance company, but that
would stultify his brain and sap his energy for thinking.
Then, a year later, another friend mentioned a job opening up in the
Swiss Patent Office in Bern. The pay was not great, the position was at the
bottom, the hours were long, and the work consisted of the rather mundane
task of looking over patent applications, but Einstein leaped at the chance.
It was everything he wanted. His task would be to analyze the validity of
patent applications, many of which involved aspects of science that
interested him. The applications would be like little puzzles or thought
experiments; he could try to visualize how the ideas would actually
translate into inventions. Working on them would sharpen his reasoning
powers. After several months on the job, he became so good at this mental
game that he could finish his work in two or three hours, leaving him the
rest of the day to engage in his own thought experiments. In 1905 he
published his first theory of relativity, much of the work having been done
while he was at his desk in the Patent Office.
Martha Graham (see here for more on her early years) first trained as a
dancer at the Denishawn School in Los Angeles, but after several years she
determined she had learned enough and needed to go elsewhere to sharpen
her skills. She ended up in New York, and in 1924 was offered a two-year
stint as a dancer in a follies’ show; it was well paid, and so she accepted.
Dancing is dancing, she thought, and she could always work on her own
ideas in her free time. But near the end of the term, she decided she would
never again accept commercial work. It drained her of all of her creative
energy and destroyed her desire to work on her own time. It also made her
feel dependent on a paycheck.
What is important when you are young, she decided, is to train
yourself to get by with little money and make the most of your youthful
energy. For the next few years she would work as a dance teacher, keeping
her hours to the minimum for survival. The rest of the time she would train
herself in the new style of dancing she wanted to create. Knowing the
alternative was slavery to some commercial job, she made the most of every
free minute, creating in these few years the groundwork for the most radical
revolution in modern dance.
As previously narrated in chapter 1 (see here), when Freddie Roach’s career
as a boxer came to an end in 1986, he took a job as a telemarketer in Las
Vegas. One day, he entered the gym where he himself had trained under the
legendary coach Eddie Futch. He found many boxers there who were not
receiving any personalized attention from Futch. Even though he was not
asked, he began to hang around the gym every afternoon and help out. It
turned into a job for which he was not paid, so he held on to his
telemarketing position. Working the two jobs left just enough time to sleep.
It was almost unbearable, but he could withstand it because he was learning
the trade for which he knew was destined. Within a few years he had
impressed enough young boxers with his knowledge to set up his own
business, and was soon to become the most successful boxing trainer of his
generation.
It is a simple law of human psychology that your thoughts will tend to
revolve around what you value most. If it is money, you will choose a place
for your apprenticeship that offers the biggest paycheck. Inevitably, in such
a place you will feel greater pressures to prove yourself worthy of such pay,
often before you are really ready. You will be focused on yourself, your
insecurities, the need to please and impress the right people, and not on
acquiring skills. It will be too costly for you to make mistakes and learn
from them, so you will develop a cautious, conservative approach. As you
progress in life, you will become addicted to the fat paycheck and it will
determine where you go, how you think, and what you do. Eventually, the
time that was not spent on learning skills will catch up with you, and the
fall will be painful.
Instead, you must value learning above everything else. This will lead
you to all of the right choices. You will opt for the situation that will give
you the most opportunities to learn, particularly with hands-on work. You
will choose a place that has people and mentors who can inspire and teach
you. A job with mediocre pay has the added benefit of training you to get
by with less—a valuable life skill. If your apprenticeship is to be mostly on
your own time, you will choose a place that pays the bills—perhaps one
that keeps your mind sharp, but that also leaves you the time and mental
space to do valuable work on your own. You must never disdain an
apprenticeship with no pay. In fact, it is often the height of wisdom to find
the perfect mentor and offer your services as an assistant for free. Happy to
exploit your cheap and eager spirit, such mentors will often divulge more
than the usual trade secrets. In the end, by valuing learning above all else,
you will set the stage for your creative expansion, and the money will soon
come to you.
2. Keep expanding your horizons
For the writer Zora Neale Hurston (1891–1960), her childhood represented
a kind of Golden Age. She grew up in Eatonville, Florida, a town that was
something of an anomaly in the South. It had been founded as an all-black
township in the 1880s, governed and managed by its citizens. Its only
struggles and sufferings came at the hands of its own inhabitants. For Zora,
racism had no meaning. A spirited and strong-willed girl, she spent a lot of
her time alone, wandering through the town.
She had two great passions in those years. First, she loved books and
reading. She read everything she could get her hands on, but she was
particularly drawn to books on mythology—Greek, Roman, and Norse. She
identified with the strongest characters—Hercules, Odysseus, Odin.
Second, she would spend much of her time listening to the stories of locals
as they gathered on porches and gossiped or related folk tales, many of
them dating back to the years of slavery. She loved their manner of telling
stories—the rich metaphors, the simple lessons. In her mind, the Greek
myths and the stories of Eatonville citizens all blended into one reality—
human nature revealed in its most naked form. Walking alone, her
imagination would take flight, and she would begin telling her own strange
tales to herself. Someday she would write all of this down and become the
Homer of Eatonville.
Then in 1904 her mother died, and the Golden Age came to an abrupt
end. It was her mother who had always protected and sheltered Zora from
her father, who thought her strange and unlikeable. Eager to have her out of
the house, he shipped her off to a school in Jacksonville. A few years later,
he stopped paying her tuition and essentially abandoned her to the world.
For five years she wandered from one relative’s house to another. She took
up all kinds of jobs to support herself, mostly housekeeping.
Thinking back to her childhood, she could remember a sense of
expansion—learning about other cultures and their history, learning about
her own culture. There seemed to be no limits to what she could explore.
Now, it was the opposite. Worn down by work and depression, everything
was tightening around her until all she could think about was her own tiny
world and how sorry it had become. Soon it would be hard to imagine
anything besides cleaning houses. But the paradox is that the mind is
essentially free. It can travel anywhere, across time and space. If she kept it
confined to her narrow circumstances, it would be her own fault. No matter
how impossible it seemed, she could not let go of her dream to become a
writer. To realize this dream, she would have to educate herself and keep
her mental horizons expanding by whatever means necessary. A writer
needs knowledge of the world. And so, thinking in this way, Zora Neale
Hurston proceeded to create for herself one of the most remarkable self-
directed apprenticeships in history.
Since the only jobs she could get at that moment were housecleaning,
she managed to land work in the homes of the wealthiest white people in
town—there she would find plenty of books. Snatching a few moments here
and there, she would read portions of these books on the sly, quickly
memorizing passages so she could have something to go over in her head in
her free time. One day, she discovered a discarded copy of Milton’s
Paradise Lost in a garbage can. It was as good as gold for her. She took it
wherever she went, and read it over and over. In this way, her mind did not
stagnate; she had created for herself a strange sort of literary education.
In 1915, she landed a job as a lady’s maid to the lead singer of an all-
white traveling troupe of performers. For most, this would mean yet another
subservient position, but for Hurston it was a godsend. Many of the
members of the troupe were well educated. There were books everywhere
to read and interesting conversations to overhear. By observing closely, she
could see what passed for sophistication in the white world, and how she
could make herself charming to them with her stories of Eatonville and her
knowledge of literature. As part of the job, they had her trained as a
manicurist. She would later use this skill to find jobs in the barbershops in
Washington D.C., near the Capitol. The clientele included the most
powerful politicians of the time, and they would often gossip as if she
weren’t even there. For her, this was almost as good as reading any book—
it taught her more about human nature, power, and the inner workings of the
white world.
Her world was slowly expanding, but still there were severe limitations
on where she could work, on the books she could find, on the people she
could meet and associate with. She was learning, but her mind was
unstructured and her thoughts unorganized. What she needed, she decided,
was formal education and the discipline this would bring her. She could try
to patch a degree together in various night schools, but what she really
wanted was to regain what had been taken away from her by her father. At
twenty-five she looked young for her age, and so chopping off ten years in
her application, she gained admittance to a free public high school in
Maryland as a freshman.
She would have to make the most of this schooling—her future
depended on it. She would read many more books than were required, and
work particularly hard on any writing assignments. She would befriend
teachers and professors with the charm she had established over the years,
making the kinds of connections that had eluded her in the past. In this way,
a few years later, she gained admittance to Howard University, the leading
institution of black higher learning, and made the acquaintance of key
figures in the black literary world. With the discipline she had gained in
school, she began to write short stories. Now, with the help of one of her
connections, she got a short story published in a prestigious Harlem literary
journal. Seizing opportunities whenever they appeared, she decided to leave
Howard and move to Harlem, where all of the leading black writers and
artists were living. This would add another dimension to the world she was
finally able to explore.
Over the years, Hurston had made a study of powerful, important
people—black and white—and how to impress them. Now in New York,
she used this skill to great effect, charming several wealthy white patrons of
the arts. Through one of these patrons she was offered the opportunity to
enroll in Barnard College, where she could finish her college education. She
would be the first and only black student there. It had been her strategy to
keep moving, keep expanding—the world could quickly close in on you if
you stayed put or stagnated. And so she accepted the offer. The white
students at Barnard were intimidated in her presence—her knowledge of so
many fields far exceeded their own. Several professors in the anthropology
department fell under her spell, and sent her on a tour through the South to
gather folk tales and stories. She used the trip to immerse herself in hoodoo,
the southern black version of voodoo, and in other ritual practices. She
wanted to deepen her knowledge of black culture in all of its richness and
variety.
In 1932, with the Depression raging in New York and her employment
opportunities drying up, she decided to return to Eatonville. There she could
live cheaply, and the atmosphere would be inspiring. Borrowing money
from friends, she proceeded to work on her first novel. From somewhere
deep inside, all of her past experiences, her lengthy and multifaceted
apprenticeship, rose to the surface—the stories from her childhood, the
books she had read here and there over the years, the various insights into
the dark side of human nature, the anthropological studies, every encounter
that she had paid attention to with so much intensity. This novel, Jonah’s
Gourd Vine, would recount the relationship of her parents, but it was really
the distillation of all of her life’s work. It spilled out of her in a few intense
months.
The novel was published the following year and became a great
success. Over the next few years she wrote more novels at a furious pace.
She soon became the most famous black writer of her time, and the first
black female writer ever to make a living from her work.
Zora Neale Hurston’s story reveals in its barest form the reality of the
Apprenticeship Phase—no one is really going to help you or give you
direction. In fact, the odds are against you. If you desire an apprenticeship,
if you want to learn and set yourself up for mastery, you have to do it
yourself, and with great energy. When you enter this phase, you generally
begin at the lowest position. Your access to knowledge and people is limited
by your status. If you are not careful, you will accept this status and become
defined by it, particularly if you come from a disadvantaged background.
Instead, like Hurston, you must struggle against any limitations and
continually work to expand your horizons. (In each learning situation you
will submit to reality, but that reality does not mean you must stay in one
place.) Reading books and materials that go beyond what is required is
always a good starting point. Being exposed to ideas in the wide world, you
will tend to develop a hunger for more and more knowledge; you will find
it harder to remain satisfied in any narrow corner, which is precisely the
point.
The people in your field, in your immediate circle, are like worlds unto
themselves—their stories and viewpoints will naturally expand your
horizons and build up your social skills. Mingle with as many different
types of people as possible. Those circles will slowly widen. Any kind of
outside schooling will add to the dynamic. Be relentless in your pursuit for
expansion. Whenever you feel like you are settling into some circle, force
yourself to shake things up and look for new challenges, as Hurston did
when she left Howard for Harlem. With your mind expanding, you will
redefine the limits of your apparent world. Soon, ideas and opportunities
will come to you and your apprenticeship will naturally complete itself.
3. Revert to a feeling of inferiority
Attending high school in the late 1960s, Daniel Everett was a bit of a lost
soul. He felt trapped in the California border town of Holtville, where he
grew up, and totally disconnected to the local cowboy way of life. As
narrated in chapter 1 (see here), Everett had always been drawn to the
Mexican culture that existed among the migrant workers on the margins of
the town. He loved their rituals and way of life, the sound of their language,
and their songs. He seemed to have a knack for learning a foreign language
and picked up Spanish rather quickly, gaining a bit of entrée into their
world. To him, their culture represented a glimpse of a more interesting
world beyond Holtville, but sometimes he despaired of ever really getting
away from his hometown. He began to take drugs—for the time being, at
least, they offered an escape.
Then, when he was seventeen, he met Keren Graham, a fellow student
at his high school, and everything seemed to change. Keren had spent much
of her childhood in northeastern Brazil, where her parents had served as
Christian missionaries. He loved to hang out with her and listen to her
stories of life in Brazil. He met her family and became a regular guest at
their dinners. He admired their sense of purpose and dedication to their
missionary work. A few months after meeting Keren he became a born-
again Christian, and a year later they were married. Their goal was to start a
family and become missionaries themselves.
Everett graduated from the Moody Bible Institute of Chicago with a
degree in Foreign Missions, and in 1976 he and his wife enrolled in the
Summer Institute of Linguistics (SIL)—a Christian organization that
instructs future missionaries in the necessary linguistic skills to translate the
Bible into indigenous languages and spread the Gospel. After going through
the course work, he and his family (which now included two children) were
sent to SIL’s jungle camp in the region of Chiapas, in southern Mexico, to
prepare them for the rigors of missionary life. For a month the family had to
live in a village and learn as best they could the indigenous language, a
Mayan dialect. Everett passed all of the tests with flying colors. Based on
his success in the program, the faculty at SIL decided to offer him and his
family the greatest challenge of them all—to live in a Pirahã village, deep
in the heart of the Amazon.
The Pirahã are among the oldest inhabitants of the Amazon. When the
Portuguese arrived in the area in the early eighteenth century, most of the
tribes learned their language and adopted many of their ways, but the Pirahã
resisted and retreated further into the jungle. They lived in deep isolation,
with little contact with outsiders. By the time missionaries arrived in their
villages in the 1950s, there were only some 350 Pirahã still alive, scattered
in the area. The missionaries who tried to learn their language found it
impossible. The Pirahã spoke no Portuguese, had no written language, and
their words, to Westerners, all sounded alike. SIL had sent a couple in 1967
to learn the language and finally translate part of the Bible into Pirahã, but
they could make little progress. After more than ten years of struggling with
the language, they were driven half-mad by the task and wanted to leave.
Hearing all of this, Everett was more than happy to accept the challenge. He
and his wife were determined to be the first ones to crack the code of
Pirahã.
He and his family arrived at a Pirahã village in December 1977. In his
first few days there, Everett used all of the strategies he had been taught—
for instance, holding up a stick and asking for their word for it, then
dropping the stick and asking for the phrase to describe the action. In the
months to come, he made good progress learning basic vocabulary. The
method he had learned at SIL worked well, and he worked assiduously.
Every time he heard a new word, he wrote it down on three-by-five note
cards. He punched holes in the corners of the cards, carried dozens of them
on the loop of his pants, and repeatedly practiced them with villagers. He
tried to apply these words and phrases in different contexts, sometimes
making the Pirahã laugh. Whenever he felt frustrated, he would look at the
Pirahã children who picked up the language with ease. If they could learn it,
so could he, he kept telling himself. But every time he felt like he was
learning more phrases, he had the equal sensation that he was really getting
nowhere. He began to understand the frustration of the couple that had
preceded him.
For instance, he kept hearing a word over and over again that seemed
to translate as “just now,” as in “the man had just now left.” But later,
hearing it in a different context, he realized that it in fact referred to the
precise moment when something appears or disappears—a person, a sound,
anything. The phrase was really about the experience of such transitory
moments, he decided, which seemed to resonate a lot with the Pirahã. “Just
now” did not begin to cover the rich meanings of it. This started to happen
with all kinds of words he thought he had understood. He also began to
discover things that were missing in their language that went against all of
the linguistic theories he had been taught. They had no words for numbers,
no concept of right and left, no simple words that designated colors. What
could this mean?
One day, after more than a year living there, he decided to accompany
some Pirahã men deep into the jungle, and to his surprise he discovered a
whole other side to their existence and language. They acted and spoke
differently; they employed a different form of communication, talking to
one another in elaborate whistles that clearly replaced spoken language,
making them stealthier in their hunting forays. Their ability to navigate this
dangerous environment was impressive.
Suddenly something became clear to Everett: his decision to confine
himself to village life and simply to learn their language was the source of
his problem. Their language could not be separated from their method of
hunting, their culture, their daily habits. He had unconsciously internalized
a sense of superiority to these people and their way of life—living among
them like a scientist studying ants. His inability to pierce the secret of their
language, however, revealed the inadequacies of his method. If he wanted
to learn Pirahã as the children did, he would have to become like a child—
dependent on these people for survival, participating in their daily activities,
entering their social circles, feeling in fact inferior and in need of their
support. (Losing any sense of superiority would later lead to a personal
crisis, in which he would lose faith in his role as a missionary and leave the
church for good.)
He began to enact this strategy on all levels, entering a realm of their
lives that had been hidden to him. Soon all kinds of ideas about their
strange language came to him. The linguistic oddities of Pirahã reflected the
unique culture that they had evolved from living in isolation for so long.
Participating in their lives as if he was one of their children, the language
came alive from within, and he began to make the kind of progress in
Pirahã that had eluded everyone else before him.
In his apprenticeship in the jungles of the Amazon that would later lead to
his career as a groundbreaking linguist, Daniel Everett came upon a truth
that has application far beyond his field of study. What prevents people
from learning, even something as difficult as Pirahã, is not the subject itself
—the human mind has limitless capabilities—but rather certain learning
disabilities that tend to fester and grow in our minds as we get older. These
include a sense of smugness and superiority whenever we encounter
something alien to our ways, as well as rigid ideas about what is real or
true, often indoctrinated in us by schooling or family. If we feel like we
know something, our minds close off to other possibilities. We see
reflections of the truth we have already assumed. Such feelings of
superiority are often unconscious and stem from a fear of what is different
or unknown. We are rarely aware of this, and often imagine ourselves to be
paragons of impartiality.
Children are generally free of these handicaps. They are dependent
upon adults for their survival and naturally feel inferior. This sense of
inferiority gives them a hunger to learn. Through learning, they can bridge
the gap and not feel so helpless. Their minds are completely open; they pay
greater attention. This is why children can learn so quickly and so deeply.
Unlike other animals, we humans retain what is known as neoteny—mental
and physical traits of immaturity—well into our adult years. We have the
remarkable capability of returning to a childlike spirit, especially in
moments in which we must learn something. Well into our fifties and
beyond, we can return to that sense of wonder and curiosity, reviving our
youth and apprenticeships.
Understand: when you enter a new environment, your task is to learn
and absorb as much as possible. For that purpose you must try to revert to a
childlike feeling of inferiority—the feeling that others know much more
than you and that you are dependent upon them to learn and safely navigate
your apprenticeship. You drop all of your preconceptions about an
environment or field, any lingering feelings of smugness. You have no
fears. You interact with people and participate in the culture as deeply as
possible. You are full of curiosity. Assuming this sensation of inferiority,
your mind will open up and you will have a hunger to learn. This position is
of course only temporary. You are reverting to a feeling of dependence, so
that within five to ten years you can learn enough to finally declare your
independence and enter full adulthood.
4. Trust the process
Cesar Rodriguez’s father was a lifelong officer in the U.S. Army, but when
Cesar (b. 1959) chose to attend the Citadel, the Military College of South
Carolina, it was not because he was determined to follow in his father’s
footsteps. He was probably heading toward a career in business. He
decided, however, that he needed some discipline in life, and there was no
more rigorous environment than the Citadel.
One morning in 1978, during his sophomore year, Rodriguez’s
roommate told him that he was going to take the exams that the army, navy,
and air force were offering for entrance into the aviation branches of their
forces. Rodriguez decided to come along and take the exams just for the
hell of it. To his surprise, a few days later he was notified that he had been
accepted by the air force for their pilot training program. The initial
training, to take place while he was still at the Citadel, meant taking flying
lessons in a Cessna. Figuring that would be fun, he entered the program, not
entirely sure how far he would take it. He passed the training exams rather
easily. He enjoyed the mental challenge, the complete focus that flying
required. Perhaps it would be interesting to take the next step. And so, after
graduating from the Citadel in 1981, he was sent to the ten-month pilot
instruction school at Vance Air Force Base in Oklahoma.
At Vance, however, he discovered that he was suddenly in over his
head. Now they were training on a subsonic jet, the T-37. He had to wear a
ten-pound helmet and a forty-pound parachute on his back. The cockpit was
unbearably small and hot. The instructor sat uncomfortably close in the seat
beside him, observing his every move. The stress of performing, the heat,
the physical pressures of flying at such speeds would make him sweat
profusely and shake. He felt as though the jet itself was pounding and
beating him as he flew. And then there were so many more variables to be
aware of in flying a jet.
Working on the simulator, he could fly with relative confidence and
feel as if he were in control. But once he was strapped into the jet itself he
could not suppress a feeling of panic and uncertainty—his mind could not
keep up with all of the information he had to process, and it was difficult to
prioritize his tasks. Much to his dismay, several months into training he
received failing marks on two consecutive flights, and was benched from
flying for an entire week.
He had never failed at anything before; it was a matter of pride that he
had conquered everything that had been presented to him so far in life. Now
he faced a possibility that would devastate him. Seventy students had
started out in the course, but almost every week one of them was cut from
the program. It was a ruthless, whittling-down process. It looked as if he
would be the next one to be cut, and such cuts were final. Once he was
allowed back into the plane, he would only have a few chances to prove
himself. He had already been trying his hardest. Where had he gone wrong?
Perhaps unconsciously, he had become intimidated and afraid of the flying
process itself. Now he was more afraid of failing.
He thought back to his days in high school. Despite his relatively short
height, he had managed to become the quarterback of his high school
football team. Back then he had also experienced moments of doubt and
even panic. He had discovered, however, that through rigorous training—
mental and physical—he could overcome his fear and almost any
deficiency in his skill level. In football practice, placing himself in
circumstances that had made him feel uncertain had helped him to become
familiar with the situation and not so afraid. What was necessary was to
trust the process and the results that would come from more practice. This
would have to be the way forward in his current situation.
He tripled his time with the simulator, habituating his mind to the
sensation of so many stimuli. He spent his off-hours visualizing himself in
the cockpit, repeating the maneuvers he was weakest at. Once he was
allowed back in the plane, he focused much harder, knowing he would have
to make the most of each precious session. Whenever there was a chance to
have more air time, for instance when another student was sick, he grabbed
it. Slowly, day by day, he found a way to calm himself in the pilot seat and
get a better handle on all of the complex operations. In the two weeks after
being allowed back into the plane, he had managed to rescue his position
for the time being; he was now ranked somewhere in the middle of the
group.
With ten weeks remaining in the program, Rodriguez took stock of the
situation. He had come too far not to succeed. He enjoyed the challenge, he
loved flying, and now what he wanted more than anything in life was to
become a fighter pilot. That would mean graduating from the program near
the very top. Among his group were several “golden boys”—young men
who had a natural flair for flying. They not only handled the intense
pressures, they fed off of them. He was the opposite of a golden boy, but
that had been the story of his life. He had succeeded through his
determination before, and now it would have to be the same. In these final
weeks he was to train on the supersonic T-38, and he asked his new
instructor, Wheels Wheeler, to work him to death—he had to move up in
the rankings and he was prepared to do whatever it took.
Wheeler obliged him. He made Rodriguez repeat the same maneuver
ten times more than the golden boys, until he was physically sick. He
homed in on all of Rodriguez’s flying weaknesses and made him practice
on the things he hated the most. His criticisms were brutal. One day,
however, as he was flying the T-38, Rodriguez had a strange and wonderful
sensation—it seemed like he could feel the plane itself at the edge of his
fingertips. This is how it must be for the golden boys, he thought, only for
him it had taken nearly ten months of intense training. His mind no longer
felt mired in all of the details. It was vague, but he could sense the
possibility of a higher way of thinking—seeing the larger picture of flying
in formation, while also commanding the complex operations in the
cockpit. This sensation would come and go, but the feeling made all of the
work worthwhile.
In the end Rodriguez graduated third in his class, and was promoted to
fighter-pilot lead-in training. The same process would now repeat itself in
an even more competitive environment. He would have to outdo the golden
boys through practice and sheer determination. In this manner, he slowly
rose through the ranks to become a colonel in the U.S. Air Force. During
the 1990s, his three air-to-air kills in active duty brought him closer to the
designation of ace than any American pilot since the Vietnam War, and
earned him the nickname the Last American Ace.
What separates Masters from others is often something surprisingly simple.
Whenever we learn a skill, we frequently reach a point of frustration—what
we are learning seems beyond our capabilities. Giving in to these feelings,
we unconsciously quit on ourselves before we actually give up. Among the
dozens of pilots in Rodriguez’s class who never made the cut, almost all of
them had the same talent level as he did. The difference is not simply a
matter of determination, but more of trust and faith. Many of those who
succeed in life have had the experience in their youth of having mastered
some skill—a sport or game, a musical instrument, a foreign language, and
so on. Buried in their minds is the sensation of overcoming their frustrations
and entering the cycle of accelerated returns. In moments of doubt in the
present, the memory of the past experience rises to the surface. Filled with
trust in the process, they trudge on well past the point at which others slow
down or mentally quit.
When it comes to mastering a skill, time is the magic ingredient.
Assuming your practice proceeds at a steady level, over days and weeks
certain elements of the skill become hardwired. Slowly, the entire skill
becomes internalized, part of your nervous system. The mind is no longer
mired in the details, but can see the larger picture. It is a miraculous
sensation and practice will lead you to that point, no matter the talent level
you are born with. The only real impediment to this is yourself and your
emotions—boredom, panic, frustration, insecurity. You cannot suppress
such emotions—they are normal to the process and are experienced by
everyone, including Masters. What you can do is have faith in the process.
The boredom will go away once you enter the cycle. The panic disappears
after repeated exposure. The frustration is a sign of progress—a signal that
your mind is processing complexity and requires more practice. The
insecurities will transform into their opposites when you gain mastery.
Trusting this will all happen, you will allow the natural learning process to
move forward, and everything else will fall into place.
5. Move toward resistance and pain
A. Bill Bradley (b. 1943) fell in love with the sport of basketball
somewhere around the age of ten. He had one advantage over his peers—he
was tall for his age. But beyond that, he had no real natural gift for the
game. He was slow and gawky, and could not jump very high. None of the
aspects of the game came easily to him. He would have to compensate for
all of his inadequacies through sheer practice. And so he proceeded to
devise one of the most rigorous and efficient training routines in the history
of sports.
Managing to get his hands on the keys to the high school gym, he
created for himself a schedule—three and a half hours of practice after
school and on Sundays, eight hours every Saturday, and three hours a day
during the summer. Over the years, he would keep rigidly to this schedule.
In the gym, he would put ten-pound weights in his shoes to strengthen his
legs and give him more spring to his jump. His greatest weaknesses, he
decided, were his dribbling and his overall slowness. He would have to
work on these and also transform himself into a superior passer to make up
for his lack of speed.
For this purpose, he devised various exercises. He wore eyeglass
frames with pieces of cardboard taped to the bottom, so he could not see the
basketball while he practiced dribbling. This would train him to always
look around him rather than at the ball—a key skill in passing. He set up
chairs on the court to act as opponents. He would dribble around them, back
and forth, for hours, until he could glide past them, quickly changing
direction. He spent hours at both of these exercises, well past any feelings
of boredom or pain.
Walking down the main street of his hometown in Missouri, he would
keep his eyes focused straight ahead and try to notice the goods in the store
windows, on either side, without turning his head. He worked on this
endlessly, developing his peripheral vision so he could see more of the
court. In his room at home, he practiced pivot moves and fakes well into the
night—such skills that would also help him compensate for his lack of
speed.
Bradley put all of his creative energy into coming up with novel and
effective ways of practicing. One time his family traveled to Europe via
transatlantic ship. Finally, they thought, he would give his training regimen
a break—there was really no place to practice on board. But below deck
and running the length of the ship were two corridors, 900 feet long and
quite narrow—just enough room for two passengers. This was the perfect
location to practice dribbling at top speed while maintaining perfect ball
control. To make it even harder, he decided to wear special eyeglasses that
narrowed his vision. For hours every day he dribbled up one side and down
the other, until the voyage was done.
Working this way over the years, Bradley slowly transformed himself
into one of the biggest stars in basketball—first as an All-American at
Princeton University and then as a professional with the New York Knicks.
Fans were in awe of his ability to make the most astounding passes, as if he
had eyes on the back and sides of his head—not to mention his dribbling
prowess, his incredible arsenal of fakes and pivots, and his complete
gracefulness on the court. Little did they know that such apparent ease was
the result of so many hours of intense practice over so many years.
B. When John Keats (1795–1821) was eight years old, his father died in a
riding accident. His mother never quite got over the loss and died seven
years later—essentially leaving John, his two brothers, and one sister
orphaned and homeless in London. John, the eldest of the children, was
taken out of school by the appointed trustee and guardian of the estate, and
enrolled as an apprentice to a surgeon and apothecary—he would have to
earn a living as quickly as possible, and this seemed the best career for that.
In his last few terms at school, Keats had developed a love for
literature and reading. To continue his education, he would return to his
school in his off-hours and read as many books as he could in the library.
Sometime later, he had the desire to try his hand at writing poetry, but
lacking any kind of instructor or literary circle he could frequent, the only
way he knew to teach himself to write was to read the works of all of the
greatest poets of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. He then wrote
his own poems, using the poetic form and style of the particular writer he
was trying to model himself after. He had a knack for imitation, and soon he
was creating verses in dozens of different styles, always tweaking them a
little with his own voice.
Several years into this process, Keats came to a fateful decision—he
would devote his life to writing poetry. That was his calling in life and he
would find a way to make a living at it. To complete the rigorous
apprenticeship he had already put himself through, he decided that what he
needed was to write a very long poem, precisely 4,000 lines. The poem
would revolve around the ancient Greek myth of Endymion. “Endymion,”
he wrote a friend, “will be a test, a trial of my Powers of Imagination and
chiefly of my invention…—by which I must make 4000 lines of some
circumstances and fill them with Poetry.” He gave himself a rather
impossible deadline—seven months—and a task of writing fifty lines a day,
until he had a rough draft.
Three-quarters of the way through, he came to thoroughly hate the
poem he was writing. He would not quit, however, willing his way to the
end, meeting the deadline he had set. What he did not like about Endymion
was the flowery language, the overwriting. But it was only by means of this
exercise that he could discover what worked for him. “In Endymion,” he
later wrote, “I leaped headlong into the Sea and thereby became better
acquainted with the Soundings, the quicksands and the rocks, than if I had
stayed upon the green shore and…took tea and comfortable advice.”
In the aftermath of writing what he considered to be a mediocre poem,
Keats took stock of all of the invaluable lessons he had learned. Never
again would he suffer from writer’s block—he had trained himself to write
past any obstacle. He had acquired now the habit of writing quickly, with
intensity and focus—concentrating his work in a few hours. He could revise
with equal speed. He had learned how to criticize himself and his overly
romantic tendencies. He could look at his own work with a cold eye. He
had learned that it was in the actual writing of the poem that the best ideas
would often come to him, and that he had to boldly keep writing or he
would miss such discoveries. Most important of all, as a counterexample to
Endymion, he had hit upon a style that suited him—language as compact
and dense with imagery as possible, with not a single wasted line.
With these lessons in hand, in the years 1818 to 1819, before he
became gravely ill, Keats would produce some of the most memorable
poems in the English language, including all of his greatest odes. This
added up to perhaps the most productive two years of writing in the history
of Western literature—all of it set up by the rigorous self-apprenticeship he
had put himself through.
By nature, we humans shrink from anything that seems possibly painful or
overtly difficult. We bring this natural tendency to our practice of any skill.
Once we grow adept at some aspect of this skill, generally one that comes
more easily to us, we prefer to practice this element over and over. Our skill
becomes lopsided as we avoid our weaknesses. Knowing that in our
practice we can let down our guard, since we are not being watched or
under pressure to perform, we bring to this a kind of dispersed attention. We
tend to also be quite conventional in our practice routines. We generally
follow what others have done, performing the accepted exercises for these
skills.
This is the path of amateurs. To attain mastery, you must adopt what
we shall call Resistance Practice. The principle is simple—you go in the
opposite direction of all of your natural tendencies when it comes to
practice. First, you resist the temptation to be nice to yourself. You become
your own worst critic; you see your work as if through the eyes of others.
You recognize your weaknesses, precisely the elements you are not good at.
Those are the aspects you give precedence to in your practice. You find a
kind of perverse pleasure in moving past the pain this might bring. Second,
you resist the lure of easing up on your focus. You train yourself to
concentrate in practice with double the intensity, as if it were the real thing
times two. In devising your own routines, you become as creative as
possible. You invent exercises that work upon your weaknesses. You give
yourself arbitrary deadlines to meet certain standards, constantly pushing
yourself past perceived limits. In this way you develop your own standards
for excellence, generally higher than those of others.
In the end, your five hours of intense, focused work are the equivalent
of ten for most people. Soon enough you will see the results of such
practice, and others will marvel at the apparent ease in which you
accomplish your deeds.
6. Apprentice yourself in failure
One day in 1885, the twenty-three-year old Henry Ford got his first look at
the gas-powered engine, and it was instant love. Ford had apprenticed as a
machinist and had worked on every conceivable device, but nothing could
compare to his fascination with this new type of engine, one that created its
own power. He envisioned a whole new kind of horseless carriage that
would revolutionize transportation. He made it his Life’s Task to be the
pioneer in developing such an automobile.
Working the night shift at the Edison Illuminating Company as an
engineer, during the day he would tinker with the new internal-combustion
engine he was developing. He built a workshop in a shed behind his home
and started constructing the engine from pieces of scrap metal he salvaged
from anywhere he could find them. By 1896, working with friends who
helped him build a carriage, he completed his first prototype, which he
called the Quadricycle, and debuted it on the streets of Detroit.
At the time there were many others working on automobiles with gas-
powered engines. It was a ruthlessly competitive environment in which new
companies died by the day. Ford’s Quadricycle looked nice and ran well,
but it was too small and incomplete for large-scale production. And so he
began work on a second automobile, thinking ahead to the production end
of the process. A year later he completed it, and it was a marvel of design.
Everything was geared toward simplicity and compactness. It was easy to
drive and maintain. All that he needed was financial backing and sufficient
capital to mass-produce it.
To manufacture automobiles in the late 1890s was a daunting venture.
It required a tremendous amount of capital and a complex business
structure, considering all of the parts that went into production. Ford
quickly found the perfect backer: William H. Murphy, one of the most
prominent businessmen in Detroit. The new company was dubbed the
Detroit Automobile Company, and all who were involved had high hopes.
But problems soon arose. The car Ford had designed as a prototype needed
to be reworked—the parts came from different places; some of them were
deficient and far too heavy for his liking. He kept trying to refine the design
to come closer to his ideal. But it was taking far too long, and Murphy and
the stockholders were getting restless. In 1901, a year and a half after it had
started operation, the board of directors dissolved the company. They had
lost faith in Henry Ford.
In analyzing this failure, Ford came to the conclusion that he had been
trying to make his automobile serve too many consumer needs. He would
try a second time, starting out with a lightweight and smaller vehicle. He
convinced Murphy to give him another chance, something rare in the
fledgling automobile business. Still believing in Ford’s genius, he agreed,
and together they formed the Henry Ford Company. Right from the start,
however, Ford felt the pressure from Murphy to get the automobile ready
for production so as to avoid the problems he’d had with the first company.
Ford resented the interference from people who knew nothing about design
or the high standards he was trying to establish for the industry.
Murphy and his men brought in an outsider to supervise the process.
This was the breaking point—less than a year after its establishment, Ford
left the company. The break with Murphy this time was final. In the car
business, everyone wrote Henry Ford off. He had blown his two chances
and nobody was ever given a third, not with the amount of money at stake.
But to friends and family, Ford himself seemed blithely unconcerned. He
told everyone that these were all invaluable lessons to him—he had paid
attention to every glitch along the way, and like a watch or an engine, he
had taken apart these failures in his mind and had identified the root cause:
no one was giving him enough time to work out the bugs. The people with
money were meddling in mechanical and design affairs. They were
injecting their mediocre ideas into the process and polluting it. He resented
the idea that having money gave them certain rights, when all that mattered
was a perfect design.
The answer was to find a way to maintain complete independence
from the financiers. This was not the usual way of doing business in
America, which was becoming increasingly bureaucratic. He would have to
invent his own form of organization, his own business model, one that
suited his temperament and needs—including an efficient team he could
trust, and the right to the final word on every decision.
Considering his reputation, it would be almost impossible to find
backing, but several months into the search he found an ideal partner—
Alexander Malcomson, an émigré from Scotland who had made his fortune
in the coal business. Like Ford, he had an unconventional streak and was a
risk taker. He agreed to finance this latest venture and to not meddle in the
manufacturing process. Ford worked at creating a new kind of assembly
plant that would give him more control over the car he wanted to design,
now known as the Model A. The Model A would be the lightest car ever
made, simple and durable. It was the culmination of all of his tinkering and
designing. It would be assembled along a line that would ensure speed of
production.
With the assembly plant ready, Ford worked hard at getting the team of
workers to churn out fifteen cars a day—a rather high number back then.
He oversaw every aspect of the production—it was his car from the inside
out. He even worked on the assembly line, endearing himself to the
workers. Orders started pouring in for the well made yet inexpensive Model
A, and by 1904 the Ford Motor Company had to expand its operations.
Soon it would be one of the few survivors from the early era of the
automobile business, and a giant in the making.
Henry Ford had one of those minds that was naturally attuned to the
mechanical. He had the power of most great inventors—the ability to
visualize the parts and how they functioned together. If he had to describe
how something worked, Ford would inevitably take a napkin and sketch out
a diagram rather than use words. With this type of intelligence, his
apprenticeships on machines were easy and fast. But when it came to mass-
producing his inventions, he had to confront the fact that he did not have the
requisite knowledge. He needed an additional apprenticeship in becoming a
businessman and entrepreneur. Fortunately, working on machines had
developed in him a kind of practical intelligence, patience, and way of
solving problems that could be applied to anything.
When a machine malfunctions you do not take it personally or grow
despondent. It is in fact a blessing in disguise. Such malfunctions generally
show you inherent flaws and means of improvement. You simply keep
tinkering until you get it right. The same should apply to an entrepreneurial
venture. Mistakes and failures are precisely your means of education. They
tell you about your own inadequacies. It is hard to find out such things from
people, as they are often political with their praise and criticisms. Your
failures also permit you to see the flaws of your ideas, which are only
revealed in the execution of them. You learn what your audience really
wants, the discrepancy between your ideas and how they affect the public.
Pay close attention to the structure of your group—how your team is
organized, the degree of independence you have from the source of capital.
These are design elements as well, and such management issues are often
hidden sources of problems.
Think of it this way: There are two kinds of failure. The first comes
from never trying out your ideas because you are afraid, or because you are
waiting for the perfect time. This kind of failure you can never learn from,
and such timidity will destroy you. The second kind comes from a bold and
venturesome spirit. If you fail in this way, the hit that you take to your
reputation is greatly outweighed by what you learn. Repeated failure will
toughen your spirit and show you with absolute clarity how things must be
done. In fact, it is a curse to have everything go right on your first attempt.
You will fail to question the element of luck, making you think that you
have the golden touch. When you do inevitably fail, it will confuse and
demoralize you past the point of learning. In any case, to apprentice as an
entrepreneur you must act on your ideas as early as possible, exposing them
to the public, a part of you even hoping that you’ll fail. You have everything
to gain.
7. Combine the “how” and the “what”
At a very early age, Santiago Calatrava (b. 1951) developed a love for
drawing. He carried his pencils wherever he went. A certain paradox in
drawing began to obsess him. In Valencia, Spain, where he grew up, the
harsh Mediterranean sunlight would place in sharp relief the things he liked
to draw—rocks, trees, buildings, people. Their outlines would slowly soften
as the day progressed. Nothing he drew was ever really static; everything is
in a state of change and motion—that is the essence of life. How could he
capture this movement on paper, in an image that was perfectly still?
He took classes and learned techniques for creating the various
illusions of something caught in the moment of movement, but it was never
quite enough. As part of this impossible quest he taught himself aspects of
mathematics, such as descriptive geometry, that could help him understand
how to represent his objects in two dimensions. His skill improved and his
interest in the subject deepened. It seemed he was destined for a career as
an artist, and so in 1969 he enrolled in art school in Valencia.
A few months into his studies, he had a seemingly minor experience
that would change the course of his life: browsing for supplies in a
stationery store, his eye was drawn to a beautifully designed booklet
describing the work of the great architect Le Corbusier. Somehow this
architect had managed to create completely distinctive shapes. He turned
even something as simple as a stairway into a dynamic piece of sculpture.
The buildings he designed seemed to defy gravity, creating a feeling of
movement in their still forms. Studying this booklet, Calatrava now
developed a new obsession—to learn the secret of how such buildings came
about. As soon as he could, he transferred to the one architecture school in
Valencia.
Graduating from the school in 1973, Calatrava had gained a solid
education in the subject. He had learned all of the most important design
rules and principles. He was more than capable of taking his place in some
architecture firm and working his way up. But he felt something elemental
was missing in his knowledge. In looking at all of the great works of
architecture that he most admired—the Pantheon in Rome, the buildings of
Gaudí in Barcelona, the bridges designed by Robert Maillart in Switzerland
—he had no solid idea about their actual construction. He knew more than
enough about their form, their aesthetics, and how they functioned as public
buildings, but he knew nothing about how they stood up, how the pieces fit
together, how the buildings of Le Corbusier managed to create that
impression of movement and dynamism.
It was like knowing how to draw a beautiful bird but not understanding
how it could fly. As with drawing, he wanted to go beyond the surface, the
design element, and touch upon the reality. He felt that the world was
changing; something was in the air. With advances in technology and new
materials, revolutionary possibilities had emerged for a new kind of
architecture, but to truly exploit that he would have to learn something
about engineering. Thinking in this direction, Calatrava made a fateful
decision—he would virtually start over and enroll at the Federal Institute of
Technology in Zurich, Switzerland, to gain a degree in civil engineering. It
would be an arduous process, but he would train himself to think and draw
like an engineer. Knowing how buildings were constructed would liberate
him and give him ideas about how to slowly expand the boundaries of what
could be made.
In the first few years he grounded himself in the rigors of engineering
—all of the mathematics and physics required for the field. But as he
progressed, he found himself returning to that paradox that he had been
obsessed with in childhood—how to express movement and change. In
architecture, the golden rule was that buildings had to be stable and
stationary. Calatrava felt the desire to break up this rigid convention. For his
PhD dissertation, he decided to explore the possibilities of bringing actual
movement into architecture. Inspired by NASA and its designs for space
travel, as well as the folding bird wings designed by Leonardo da Vinci,
Calatrava chose as his topic the foldability of structures—how through
advanced engineering structures could move and transform themselves.
Completing his dissertation in 1981, he finally entered the work world
—after fourteen years of a university apprenticeship in art, architecture, and
engineering. In the coming years he would experiment in designing new
kinds of collapsible doors, windows, and roofs that would move and open
up in new ways, altering the shape of the building. He designed a
drawbridge in Buenos Aires that moved outward instead of up. In 1996 he
took all of this a step further with his design and construction of an
extension to the Milwaukee Art Museum. It consisted of a long glass-and-
steel reception hall with an eighty-foot ceiling, all shaded by an enormous
moveable sunscreen on the roof. The screen had two ribbed panels that
opened and closed like the wings of a giant seagull, putting the entire
edifice into motion, and giving the sense of a building that could take flight.
We humans live in two worlds. First, there is the outer world of appearances
—all of the forms of things that captivate our eye. But hidden from our
view is another world—how these things actually function, their anatomy or
composition, the parts working together and forming the whole. This
second world is not so immediately captivating. It is harder to understand. It
is not something visible to the eye, but only to the mind that glimpses the
reality. But this “how” of things is just as poetic once we understand it—it
contains the secret of life, of how things move and change.
This division between the “how” and the “what” can be applied to
almost everything around us—we see the machine, not how it works; we
see a group of people producing something as a business, not how the group
is structured or how the products are manufactured and distributed. (In a
similar fashion, we tend to be mesmerized by people’s appearances, not the
psychology behind what they do or say.) As Calatrava discovered, in
overcoming this division, in combining the “how” and the “what” of
architecture, he gained a much deeper, or rather more rounded knowledge
of the field. He grasped a larger portion of the reality that goes into making
buildings. This allowed him to create something infinitely more poetic, to
stretch the boundaries, to break the conventions of architecture itself.
Understand: we live in the world of a sad separation that began some
five hundred years ago when art and science split apart. Scientists and
technicians live in their own world, focusing mostly on the “how” of things.
Others live in the world of appearances, using these things but not really
understanding how they function. Just before this split occurred, it was the
ideal of the Renaissance to combine these two forms of knowledge. This is
why the work of Leonardo da Vinci continues to fascinate us, and why the
Renaissance remains an ideal. This more rounded knowledge is in fact the
way of the future, especially now that so much more information is
available to all of us. As Calatrava intuited, this should be a part of our
apprenticeship. We must make ourselves study as deeply as possible the
technology we use, the functioning of the group we work in, the economics
of our field, its lifeblood. We must constantly ask the questions—how do
things work, how do decisions get made, how does the group interact?
Rounding our knowledge in this way will give us a deeper feel for reality
and the heightened power to alter it.
8. Advance through trial and error
Growing up in a suburb of Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, in the early 1970s,
Paul Graham (b. 1964) became fascinated with the depiction of computers
in television and film. They were like electronic brains with limitless
powers. In the near future, or so it seemed, you would be able to talk to
your computer, and it would do everything you wanted.
In junior high school he had been admitted into a program for gifted
students that provided them with the chance to work on a creative project of
their choosing. Graham decided to focus his project on the school’s
computer, an IBM mainframe that was used for printing out grade reports
and class schedules. This was the first time he had gotten his hands on a
computer, and although it was primitive and had to be programmed with
punch cards, it seemed like something magical—a portal to the future.
Over the next few years, he taught himself how to program by
consulting the few books then written on the subject, but mostly he learned
by trial and error. Like painting on a canvas, he could see the results
immediately of what he had done—and if the programming worked, it had a
certain aesthetic rightness to it. The process of learning through trial and
error was immensely satisfying. He could discover things on his own,
without having to follow a rigid path set up by others. (This is the essence
of being a “hacker.”) And the better he got at programming, the more he
could make it do.
Deciding to pursue his studies further, he chose to attend Cornell
University, which at the time had one of the best computer science
departments in the country. Here he finally received instruction in the basic
principles of programming, cleaning up many of the bad hacking habits he
had developed on his own. He became intrigued by the recently developed
field of artificial intelligence—the key to designing the kinds of computers
he had dreamed about as a child. To be on the frontier of this new field, he
applied and was accepted to the graduate school in computer science at
Harvard University.
At Harvard Graham finally had to confront something about himself—
he was not cut out for academia. He hated writing research papers. The
university way of programming took all the fun and excitement out of it—
the process of discovering through trial and error. He was a hacker at heart,
one who liked to figure things out for himself. He found a fellow hacker at
Harvard, Robert Morris, and together they began to explore the intricacies
of the programming language Lisp. It seemed like the most potentially
powerful and fluid language of them all. Understanding Lisp made you
understand something essential about programming itself. It was a language
suited for high-level hackers, a language specifically made for investigation
and discovery.
Disillusioned with the computer science department at Harvard,
Graham decided to design his own graduate school program: he would take
a wide range of classes and discover what interested him the most. To his
surprise, he found himself attracted to art—to painting, and to the subject of
art history itself. What this meant to him was that he should follow this
interest and see where it would lead. After completing his PhD at Harvard
in computer science, he enrolled in the Rhode Island School of Design, then
attended a painting program at the Accademia in Florence, Italy. He
returned to the States broke but determined to try his hand at painting. He
would pay for his lifestyle with intermittent consulting work in
programming.
As the years went by, he would occasionally reflect on the course of
his life. Artists in the Renaissance would go through clear-cut
apprenticeships, but what could he say about his own apprenticeship? There
seemed to be no real design or direction to his life. It was like the “cheesy
hacks” he did in high school, patching things together, figuring things out
through constant trial and error, finding out what worked by doing it.
Shaping his life in this haphazard way, he learned what to avoid—
academia; working for large companies; any political environment. He liked
the process of making things. What really mattered to him in the end was
having possibilities—being able to go in this or that direction, depending on
what life presented to him. If over the years he had undergone an
apprenticeship, it was almost by default.
One afternoon in 1995, he heard on the radio a story about Netscape—
the company itself was touting its future and discussing how someday most
businesses would be selling their products on the Internet itself, with
Netscape leading the way. With his bank account getting desperately low
again, yet dreading the idea of returning to another consulting job, he
recruited his old hacker friend Robert Morris to help him create software
for running an online business. Graham’s idea was to design a program that
would run directly on the web server instead of having to be downloaded.
No one had thought of this before. They would write the program in Lisp,
taking advantage of the speed with which they could make changes to it.
They called their business Viaweb, and it would be the first of its kind, the
pioneer of online commerce. Just three years later they sold it to Yahoo! for
$45 million.
In the years to come Graham would continue on the path set in his
twenties, moving to where his interests and skills converged, to wherever he
could see possibilities. In 2005 he gave a talk at Harvard about his
experiences with Viaweb. The students, excited by his advice, pleaded with
him to start up some kind of consulting firm. Intrigued by the idea, he
created Y Combinator, an apprenticeship system for young entrepreneurs in
technology, with his company taking a stake in each successful startup.
Over the years he would refine the system, learning as he went along. In the
end, Y Combinator represented his ultimate hack—something he came
upon by accident and improved through his own process of trial and error.
The company is now valued at close to $500 million.
Each age tends to create a model of apprenticeship that is suited to the
system of production that prevails at the time. In the Middle Ages, during
the birth of modern capitalism and the need for quality control, the first
apprenticeship system appeared, with its rigidly defined terms. With the
advent of the Industrial Revolution, this model of apprenticeship became
largely outmoded, but the idea behind it lived on in the form of self-
apprenticeship—developing yourself from within a particular field, as
Darwin did in biology. This suited the growing individualistic spirit of the
time. We are now in the computer age, with computers dominating nearly
all aspects of commercial life. Although there are many ways in which this
could influence the concept of apprenticeship, it is the hacker approach to
programming that may offer the most promising model for this new age.
The model goes like this: You want to learn as many skills as possible,
following the direction that circumstances lead you to, but only if they are
related to your deepest interests. Like a hacker, you value the process of
self-discovery and making things that are of the highest quality. You avoid
the trap of following one set career path. You are not sure where this will all
lead, but you are taking full advantage of the openness of information, all of
the knowledge about skills now at our disposal. You see what kind of work
suits you and what you want to avoid at all cost. You move by trial and
error. This is how you pass your twenties. You are the programmer of this
wide-ranging apprenticeship, within the loose constraints of your personal
interests.
You are not wandering about because you are afraid of commitment,
but because you are expanding your skill base and your possibilities. At a
certain point, when you are ready to settle on something, ideas and
opportunities will inevitably present themselves to you. When that happens,
all of the skills you have accumulated will prove invaluable. You will be the
Master at combining them in ways that are unique and suited to your
individuality. You may settle on this one place or idea for several years,
accumulating in the process even more skills, then move in a slightly
different direction when the time is appropriate. In this new age, those who
follow a rigid, singular path in their youth often find themselves in a career
dead end in their forties, or overwhelmed with boredom. The wide-ranging
apprenticeship of your twenties will yield the opposite—expanding
possibilities as you get older.
REVERSAL
It might be imagined that certain people in history—the naturally gifted, the
geniuses—have either somehow bypassed the Apprenticeship Phase or have
greatly shortened it because of their inherent brilliance. To support such an
argument, people will bring up the classic examples of Mozart and Einstein,
who seemed to have emerged as creative geniuses out of nowhere.
With the case of Mozart, however, it is generally agreed among
classical music critics that he did not write an original and substantial piece
of music until well after ten years of composing. In fact, a study of some
seventy great classical composers determined that with only three
exceptions, all of the composers had needed at least ten years to produce
their first great work, and the exceptions had somehow managed to create
theirs in nine years.
Einstein began his serious thought experiments at the age of sixteen.
Ten years later he came up with his first revolutionary theory of relativity. It
is impossible to quantify the time he spent honing his theoretical skills in
those ten years, but is not hard to imagine him working three hours a day on
this particular problem, which would yield more than 10,000 hours after a
decade. What in fact separates Mozart and Einstein from others is the
extreme youth with which they began their apprenticeships and the intensity
with which they practiced, stemming from their total immersion in the
subject. It is often the case that in our younger years we learn faster, absorb
more deeply, and yet retain a kind of creative verve that tends to fade as we
get older.
There are no shortcuts or ways to bypass the Apprenticeship Phase. It
is the nature of the human brain to require such lengthy exposure to a field,
which allows for complex skills to become deeply embedded and frees the
mind up for real creative activity. The very desire to find shortcuts makes
you eminently unsuited for any kind of mastery. There is no possible
reversal to this process.
It’s like chopping down a huge tree of immense girth. You won’t accomplish it with one swing
of your axe. If you keep chopping away at it, though, and do not let up, eventually, whether it
wants to or not, it will suddenly topple down. When that time comes, you could round up
everyone you could find and pay them to hold the tree up, but they wouldn’t be able to do it. It
would still come crashing to the ground…. But if the woodcutter stopped after one or two
strokes of his axe to ask the third son of Mr. Chang, “Why doesn’t this tree fall?” And after
three or four more strokes stopped again to ask the fourth son of Mr. Li, “Why doesn’t this tree
fall?” he would never succeed in felling the tree. It is no different for someone who is
practicing the Way.
—ZEN MASTER HAKUIN
III
ABSORB THE MASTER’S POWER: THE
MENTOR DYNAMIC
Life is short, and your time for learning and creativity is limited. Without
any guidance, you can waste valuable years trying to gain knowledge and
practice from various sources. Instead, you must follow the example set by
Masters throughout the ages and find the proper mentor. The mentor-
protégé relationship is the most efficient and productive form of learning.
The right mentors know where to focus your attention and how to challenge
you. Their knowledge and experience become yours. They provide
immediate and realistic feedback on your work, so you can improve more
rapidly. Through an intense person-to-person interaction, you absorb a way
of thinking that contains great power and can be adapted to your individual
spirit. Choose the mentor who best fits your needs and connects to your
Life’s Task. Once you have internalized their knowledge, you must move on
and never remain in their shadow. Your goal is always to surpass your
mentors in mastery and brilliance.
THE ALCHEMY OF KNOWLEDGE
Growing up amid poverty in London, it seemed that the fate of Michael
Faraday (1791–1867) was pretty much sealed for him at birth—he would
either follow in his father’s footsteps and become a blacksmith, or he would
pursue some other manual trade. His options were severely limited by his
circumstances. His parents had ten children to feed and support. The father
worked sporadically because of illness, and the family needed additional
income. The parents waited anxiously for the day when young Faraday
would turn twelve and could get a job, or begin some kind of
apprenticeship.
There was one trait, however, that marked him as different and was
potentially troubling—he had an extremely active mind, one that was
perhaps unsuited for a career that would entail mostly physical labor. Some
of his mental restlessness was inspired by the peculiar religion his family
belonged to—they were Sandemanians, a sect of Christianity. Its adherents
believed that God’s presence was manifested in every living thing and every
natural phenomenon. By communing with God on a daily basis and getting
as inwardly close to him as possible, they could see and feel his presence
everywhere in the world.
Young Faraday was steeped in this philosophy. When he was not doing
errands and chores for his mother, he would wander the streets of central
London, observing the world around him with utmost intensity. Nature, it
seemed to him, was full of secrets that he wanted to ponder and unravel.
Because he was taught that the divine presence was everywhere, everything
interested him, and his curiosity was limitless. He would ask endless
questions of his parents, or anyone he could find, about plants or minerals
or any seemingly inexplicable occurrence in nature. He seemed hungry for
knowledge and frustrated by his lack of means to get it.
One day he wandered into a nearby shop that bound and sold books.
The sight of so many shiny books on the shelves astounded him. His own
schooling had been minimal, and he had really only known one book in his
life, the Bible. The Sandemanians believed that the Scripture was the living
embodiment of the Lord’s will, and contained something of his presence. To
Faraday this meant that the printed words of the Bible had a kind of magical
power. He imagined that each of the books in this shop opened up different
worlds of knowledge, a form of magic in its own right.
The owner of the shop, George Riebau, was instantly charmed by the
young man’s reverence for his books. He had never met someone quite so
intense at such a young age. He encouraged him to return, and soon Faraday
began to frequent the shop. To help Faraday’s family, Riebau gave him a
job as a delivery boy. Impressed with his work ethic, he invited him to join
the shop itself as an apprentice bookbinder. Faraday happily accepted, and
in 1805 he began his seven-year apprenticeship.
In the initial months of the job, surrounded by all these books, the
young man could hardly believe his good fortune—new books were rare
commodities in those days, luxury items for the well-to-do. Not even a
public library contained what could be found in Riebau’s shop. The owner
encouraged him to read whatever he liked in his off-hours, and Faraday
obliged by devouring almost every single book that passed through his
hands. One evening he read an encyclopedia passage on the most recent
discoveries in electricity, and he suddenly felt as if he had found his calling
in life. Here was a phenomenon that was invisible to the eye, but that could
be revealed and measured through experiments. This process of uncovering
nature’s secrets through experiment enthralled him. Science, it seemed to
him, was a great quest to unravel the mysteries of Creation itself. Somehow,
he would transform himself into a scientist.
This was not a realistic goal on his part and he knew it. In England at
the time, access to laboratories and to science as a career was only open to
those with a university education, which meant those from the upper
classes. How could a bookbinder’s apprentice even dream of overcoming
such odds? Even if he had the energy and desire to attempt it, he had no
teachers, no guidance, no structure or method to his studies. Then in 1809 a
book came into the shop that finally gave him some hope. It was called
Improvement of the Mind—a self-help guide written by Reverend Isaac
Watts, first published in 1741. The book revealed a system of learning and
improving your lot in life, no matter your social class. It prescribed courses
of action that anyone could follow, and it promised results. Faraday read it
over and over, carrying it with him wherever he went.
He followed the book’s advice to the letter. For Watts, learning had to
be an active process. He recommended not just reading about scientific
discoveries, but actually re-creating the experiments that led to them. And
so, with Riebau’s blessing, Faraday began a series of basic experiments in
electricity and chemistry in the back room of the shop. Watts advocated the
importance of having teachers and not just learning from books. Faraday
dutifully began to attend the numerous lectures on science that were popular
in London at the time. Watts advocated not just listening to lectures but
taking detailed notes, then reworking the notes themselves—all of this
imprinting the knowledge deeper in the brain. Faraday would take this even
further.
Attending the lectures of the popular scientist John Tatum, each week
on a different subject, he would note down the most important words and
concepts, quickly sketch out the various instruments Tatum used, and
diagram the experiments. Over the next few days he would expand the
notes into sentences, and then into an entire chapter on the subject,
elaborately sketched and narrated. In the course of a year this added up to a
thick scientific encyclopedia he had created on his own. His knowledge of
science had grown by leaps and bounds, and had assumed a kind of
organizational shape modeled on his notes.
One day, Monsieur Riebau showed this rather impressive collection of
notes to a customer named William Dance, a member of the prestigious
Royal Institution, an organization that sought to promote the latest advances
in science. Thumbing through Faraday’s chapters, Dance was astounded at
how clearly and concisely he had summarized complicated topics. He
decided to invite the young man to attend a series of lectures by the
renowned and recently knighted chemist Humphry Davy, to be given at the
Royal Institution where Davy was director of the chemistry laboratory.
The lectures had been sold out well in advance and this was a rare
privilege for a young man of Faraday’s background, but for him it was
much more fateful than that. Davy was the preeminent chemist of his time;
he had made numerous discoveries and was advancing the new field of
electrochemistry. His experiments with various gases and chemicals were
highly dangerous and had led to numerous accidents. This only added to his
reputation as a fearless warrior for science. His lectures were events—he
had a flair for the dramatic, performing clever experiments before a dazzled
audience. He came from a modest background and had raised himself to the
heights of science, having gained the attention of some valuable mentors.
To Faraday, Davy was the only living scientist he could model himself after,
considering Davy’s lack of any solid formal education.
Arriving early each time and gaining the closest seat he could find, he
soaked up every aspect of Davy’s lectures, taking the most detailed notes he
had ever attempted. These lectures had a different effect upon Faraday than
others he had attended. He was inspired and yet he also could not help but
feel somewhat dejected. After all of these years of studying on his own, he
had managed to expand his knowledge of science and of the natural world.
But science does not consist of the accumulation of information. It is a way
of thinking, of approaching problems. The scientific spirit is creative—
Faraday could feel it in Davy’s presence. As an amateur scientist looking at
the field from the outside, his knowledge was one-dimensional and would
lead nowhere. He needed to move to the inside, where he could gain
practical, hands-on experience, become part of the community and learn
how to think like a scientist. And to move closer to this scientific spirit and
absorb its essence, he would need a mentor.
This seemed like an impossible quest, but with his apprenticeship
coming to an end, and facing the prospect of being a bookbinder for life,
Faraday went into desperation mode. He wrote letters to the president of the
Royal Society and applied for the most menial jobs in any kind of
laboratory. He was relentless, and yet months went by with no results. Then
one day, out of the blue, he received a message from Humphry Davy’s
office. The chemist had been blinded by yet another explosion in his
laboratory at the Royal Institution, and the condition would last for several
days. During this time he needed a personal assistant to take notes and
organize his materials. Mr. Dance, a good friend of Davy’s, had
recommended young Faraday for the job.
There seemed something fateful, even magical, in this occurrence.
Faraday would have to make the most of it, do whatever he could to
impress the great chemist. Awestruck to be in Davy’s presence, Faraday
listened with utmost intensity to every one of his instructions and did more
than was asked for. When Davy, however, had recovered his sight, he
thanked Faraday for his work but made it clear that the Royal Institution
already had a laboratory assistant and there were simply no openings for
him on any level.
Faraday felt despondent, but he was not ready to give up; he would not
let this be the end. Only a few days in Davy’s presence had revealed so
many learning possibilities. Davy liked to talk about his ideas as they
occurred to him and gain feedback from anyone around him. Discussing
with Faraday one experiment he was planning afforded the young man a
glimpse into how his mind worked, and it was fascinating. Davy would be
the ultimate mentor, and Faraday determined that he would have to make
this happen. He went back to the notes he had taken on Davy’s lectures. He
worked them into a beautifully organized booklet, carefully handwritten,
and full of sketches and diagrams. He sent this off to Davy as a gift. He then
wrote to him a few weeks later, reminding Davy about the experiment he
had mentioned but had probably forgotten about—Davy was notoriously
absentminded. Faraday heard nothing. But then one day, in February 1813,
he was suddenly summoned to the Royal Institution.
That same morning the Institution’s laboratory assistant had been fired
for insubordination. They needed to replace him immediately, and Davy
had recommended young Faraday. The job mostly involved cleaning bottles
and equipment, sweeping, and lighting fireplaces. The pay was low,
considerably lower than what he could gain as a bookbinder, but Faraday,
hardly believing his good fortune, accepted on the spot.
His education was so rapid it shocked him; it was nothing like the
progress he had made on his own. Under his mentor’s supervision, he
learned how to prepare Davy’s chemical mixtures, including some of the
more explosive varieties. He was taught the rudiments of chemical analysis
from perhaps the greatest living practitioner of the art. His responsibilities
began to grow, and he was given access to the lab for his own experiments.
He worked night and day to bring a much-needed order to the laboratory
and its shelves. And slowly, their relationship deepened—clearly Davy saw
him as a younger version of himself.
That summer Davy prepared to go on an extended tour of Europe, and
invited Faraday to come along as his laboratory assistant and valet.
Although Faraday did not relish the thought of acting as a personal servant,
the chance to meet some of Europe’s most preeminent scientists and work
so closely with Davy on his experiments (he traveled with a kind of
portable laboratory) was too much to pass up. It was best to be around him
as much as possible and soak up his knowledge, his whole way of thinking.
During the trip, Faraday assisted Davy on a particular experiment that
would leave a lasting impression on him. The exact chemical composition
of diamonds had long been in dispute. They appeared to be composed of
carbon. But how could something so beautiful be made of exactly the same
substance as charcoal? There had to be more to its chemical composition,
but there was no known way to divide a diamond into its constituent
elements. It was a problem that had baffled many scientists. Davy had long
entertained the radical idea that it was not the elements themselves that
determined the properties of things. Perhaps charcoal and diamonds had
precisely the same chemical composition, but it was changes in their
underlying molecular structure that determined their form. This was a much
more dynamic view of nature, but Davy had no way to prove this until
suddenly, traveling through France, an idea for the perfect experiment came
to him.
After being reminded that one of the most powerful lenses of the time
resided at the Accademia del Cimento in Florence, Davy made a detour
there. Gaining permission to use the lens, he placed a diamond in a tiny
glass globe containing pure oxygen and used the lens to focus intense
sunlight on the globe until the diamond completely evaporated. Inside the
globe, all that remained of the diamond was carbon dioxide gas, proving
that it was indeed composed of pure carbon. Therefore, what turned carbon
into either charcoal or a diamond must involve a change in the underlying
molecular structure. Nothing else could explain the results of his
experiment. What impressed Faraday was the thought process that went into
this. From a simple speculation, Davy found his way to the one experiment
that would physically demonstrate his idea by excluding all other possible
explanations. This was a highly creative way of thinking, and it was the
source of Davy’s power as a chemist.
On his return to the Royal Institution, Faraday was given a pay
increase and a new title—Assistant and Superintendent of the Apparatus
and Mineralogical Collection. And soon a pattern developed. Davy liked to
spend most of his time on the road. Trusting Faraday’s growing skills, he
would send back to him all kinds of mineral samples to analyze. Davy had
slowly grown dependent on his assistant; in letters to Faraday he praised
him as one of the best analytic chemists he knew—he had trained him well.
But by the year 1821, Faraday had to confront an unpleasant reality: Davy
was keeping him under his thumb. After eight years of an intense
apprenticeship, he was now an accomplished chemist in his own right, with
expanding knowledge of other sciences. He was doing independent
research, but Davy was still treating him as an assistant, making him send
packets of dead flies for his fishing lures and assigning him other menial
tasks.
It was Davy who had rescued him from the drudgery of the
bookbinding business. He owed him everything. But Faraday was now
thirty years old, and if he were not allowed soon enough to declare his
independence, his most creative years would be wasted as a laboratory
assistant. To leave on bad terms, however, would ruin his name in the
scientific community, especially considering his own lack of reputation.
Then, finally, Faraday found a chance to separate himself from his
overbearing mentor, and he exploited this opportunity to the maximum.
Scientists throughout Europe were making discoveries about the
relationship between electricity and magnetism, but the effect they had on
each other was strange—creating a movement that was not linear and
direct, but apparently more circular. Nothing in nature was quite like this.
How to reveal the exact shape of this effect or movement in an experiment
became the rage, and soon Davy got involved. Working with a fellow
scientist named William Hyde Wollaston, they proposed the idea that the
movement created by electromagnetism was more like a spiral. Involving
Faraday in their experiments, they devised a way to break up the movement
into small increments that could be measured. Once this was all added up, it
would show the spiral motion.
At about the same time, Faraday was asked by a close friend to write a
review of all that was known about electromagnetism for an established
journal, and so he began a rigorous study of the field. Thinking like his
mentor, he speculated that there must be a way to physically demonstrate
the motion created by electromagnetism in a continual fashion, so that no
one could dispute the results. One night in September 1821 he had a vision
of just such an experiment, and he put it into practice. With a bar magnet
secured upright in a cup of liquid mercury (a metal that conducts
electricity), Faraday placed a suspended wire, buoyed by a cork, in the
mercury. When the wire was charged with electricity, the cork moved
around the magnet in a precise conical path. The reverse experiment (with
the wire secured in the water) revealed the same pattern.
This was the first time in history that electricity had been used to
generate continual motion, the precursor to all electric motors. The
experiment was so simple and yet only Faraday had seen it so clearly. It
revealed a way of thinking that was very much the product of Davy’s
tutelage. Feeling the weight of years of poverty, crushed expectations, and
servitude lifting off of him, he danced around the laboratory. This would be
the discovery that would free him at last. Excited about what he had done,
he rushed to have his results published.
In his haste to get his report out, however, Faraday had forgotten to
mention the research done by Wollaston and Davy. Soon enough, the rumor
spread that Faraday had actually plagiarized their work. Realizing his
mistake, Faraday met with Wollaston and showed him how he had reached
his results independent of anyone else’s work. Wollaston agreed and let the
matter drop. But the rumors continued, and soon it became clear that the
source of them was Davy himself. He refused to accept Faraday’s
explanation and no one knew quite why. When Faraday was nominated to
the Royal Society because of his discovery, it was Davy, as president, who
tried to block it. A year later, when Faraday made yet another important
discovery, Davy claimed partial credit for it. He seemed to believe that he
had created Faraday from nothing and so was responsible for everything he
did.
Faraday had seen enough—their relationship was essentially over. He
would never correspond with or see him again. Now having authority
within the scientific community, Faraday could do as he pleased. His
coming experiments would soon pave the way for all of the most important
advances in electrical energy, and for the field theories that would
revolutionize science in the twentieth century. He would go on to become
one of history’s greatest practitioners of experimental science, far
outshining the fame of his one-time mentor.
KEYS TO MASTERY
At table, the ladies praised a portrait by a young painter. “What is most surprising,” they
added, “he has learned everything by himself.” This could be seen particularly in the hands,
which were not correctly and artistically drawn. “We see,” said Goethe, “that the young man
has talent; however, you should not praise, but rather blame him, for learning everything by
himself. A man of talent is not born to be left to himself, but to devote himself to art and good
masters who will make something of him.”
—JOHANN PETER ECKERMANN, CONVERSATIONS WITH GOETHE
In the past, people of power had an aura of authority that was very real.
Some of this aura emanated from their accomplishments, and some of it
from the position they occupied—being a member of the aristocracy or a
religious elite. This aura had a definite effect and could be felt; it caused
people to respect and worship those who possessed it. Over the centuries,
however, the slow process of democratization has worn away this aura of
authority in all of its guises, to the point today of almost nonexistence.
We feel, rightly so, that no one should be admired or worshipped
merely for the position they occupy, particularly if it comes from
connections or a privileged background. But this attitude carries over to
people who have reached their position mostly through their own
accomplishments. We live in a culture that likes to criticize and debunk any
form of authority, to point out the weaknesses of those in power. If we feel
any aura, it is in the presence of celebrities and their seductive personalities.
Some of this skeptical spirit toward authority is healthy, particularly in
relation to politics, but when it comes to learning and the Apprenticeship
Phase, it presents a problem.
To learn requires a sense of humility. We must admit that there are
people out there who know our field much more deeply than we do. Their
superiority is not a function of natural talent or privilege, but rather of time
and experience. Their authority in the field is not based on politics or
trickery. It is very real. But if we are not comfortable with this fact, if we
feel in general mistrustful of any kind of authority, we will succumb to the
belief that we can just as easily learn something on our own, that being self-
taught is more authentic. We might justify this attitude as a sign of our
independence, but in fact it stems from basic insecurity. We feel, perhaps
unconsciously, that learning from Masters and submitting to their authority
is somehow an indictment of our own natural ability. Even if we have
teachers in our lives, we tend not to pay full attention to their advice, often
preferring to do things our own way. In fact, we come to believe that being
critical of Masters or teachers is somehow a sign of our intelligence, and
that being a submissive pupil is a sign of weakness.
Understand: all that should concern you in the early stages of your
career is acquiring practical knowledge in the most efficient manner
possible. For this purpose, during the Apprenticeship Phase you will need
mentors whose authority you recognize and to whom you submit. Your
admission of need does not say anything essential about you, but only about
your temporary condition of weakness, which your mentor will help you
overcome.
The reason you require a mentor is simple: Life is short; you have only
so much time and so much energy to expend. Your most creative years are
generally in your late twenties and on into your forties. You can learn what
you need through books, your own practice, and occasional advice from
others, but the process is hit-and-miss. The information in books is not
tailored to your circumstances and individuality; it tends to be somewhat
abstract. When you are young and have less experience of the world, this
abstract knowledge is hard to put into practice. You can learn from your
experiences, but it can often take years to fully understand the meaning of
what has happened. It is always possible to practice on your own, but you
will not receive enough focused feedback. You can often gain a self-
directed apprenticeship in many fields, but this could take ten years, maybe
more.
Mentors do not give you a shortcut, but they streamline the process.
They invariably had their own great mentors, giving them a richer and
deeper knowledge of their field. Their ensuing years of experience taught
them invaluable lessons and strategies for learning. Their knowledge and
experience become yours; they can direct you away from unnecessary side
paths or errors. They observe you at work and provide real-time feedback,
making your practice more time efficient. Their advice is tailored to your
circumstances and your needs. Working closely with them, you absorb the
essence of their creative spirit, which you can now adapt in your own way.
What took you ten years on your own could have been done in five with
proper direction.
There is more to this than just time saved. When we learn something in
a concentrated manner it has added value. We experience fewer distractions.
What we learn is internalized more deeply because of the intensity of our
focus and practice. Our own ideas and development flourish more naturally
in this shortened time frame. Having an efficient apprenticeship, we can
make the most of our youthful energy and our creative potential.
What makes the mentor-protégé dynamic so intense and so productive
is the emotional quality of the relationship. By nature, mentors feel
emotionally invested in your education. This can be for several reasons:
perhaps they like you, or see in you a younger version of themselves, and
can relive their own youth through you; perhaps they recognize in you a
special talent that will give them pleasure to cultivate; perhaps you have
something important to offer them, mostly your youthful energy and
willingness to work hard. Being useful to them can build a powerful
emotional connection to you over time. On your part, you also feel
emotionally drawn to them—admiration for their achievements, a desire to
model yourself after them, and so on. Mentors find this immensely
flattering.
With this two-way emotional connection you both open up to each
other in a way that goes beyond the usual teacher-student dynamic. When
you admire people, you become more susceptible to absorbing and
imitating everything they do. You pay deeper attention. Your mirror neurons
are more engaged, allowing for learning that involves more than the
superficial transmission of knowledge, but also includes a style and way of
thinking that is often powerful. On the other side, because of the emotional
bond, mentors will tend to divulge more of their secrets than they would to
others. You must not be afraid of this emotional component to the
relationship. It is precisely what makes you learn more deeply and
efficiently.
Think of it this way: the process of learning resembles the medieval
practice of alchemy. In alchemy, the goal was to find a way to transform
base metals or stones into gold. To effect this, alchemists searched for what
was known as the philosopher’s stone—a substance that would make dead
stones or metals come alive and organically change their chemical
composition into gold. Although the philosopher’s stone was never
discovered, it has profound relevance as a metaphor. The knowledge that
you need to become a Master exists out there in the world—it is like a base
metal or dead stone. This knowledge needs to be heated up and come alive
within you, transforming itself into something active and relevant to your
circumstances. The mentor is like the philosopher’s stone—through direct
interaction with someone of experience, you are able to quickly and
efficiently heat up and animate this knowledge, turning it into something
like gold.
The story of Michael Faraday is the ultimate illustration of this
alchemical process. His life seemed to progress almost through magic—
falling into the one job where he could read books, learn about science, and
impress exactly the right person with his notes, leading to a connection to
the ultimate mentor, Humphry Davy. But there was a logic behind all of this
apparent magic and good fortune. As a young man he possessed an intense
energy and hunger for knowledge. A kind of inner radar directed him to the
one bookshop in the area. Although it was pure luck that the book
Improvement of the Mind fell into his hands, it took someone with such
focus to recognize immediately its worth and exploit it fully. Under Watt’s
guidance, his knowledge became more practical. But that same radar that
directed him to the shop and to this book now pointed him somewhere else.
The knowledge he had gained was still too diffused and disconnected. He
intuited that the only way to transform it into something useful was to find a
living mentor.
Once he secured Davy as his man, he threw himself into the
relationship with the same focus that he had brought to everything else.
Serving under Davy, Faraday learned all of the secrets of chemistry and
electricity that the Master had gleaned throughout his life. He practiced
with these ideas in the laboratory—mixing chemicals for Davy and doing
his own experiments. In the process, he absorbed Davy’s patterns of
thinking, of approaching chemical analysis and experimentation. His
knowledge became increasingly active.
After eight years, this interactive dynamic yielded one of the great
discoveries of science—the uncovering of the secret of electromagnetism.
Faraday’s own studies and what he had learned from Davy became
transformed into creative energy, a form of gold. If he had stayed on the
path of self-apprenticeship out of fear or insecurity, he would have
remained a bookbinder—miserable and unfulfilled. Through the alchemy of
intense mentorship he transformed himself into one of the most creative
scientists in history.
Certainly religion played an important role in Faraday’s education.
Because he believed that everything in the universe was alive with God’s
presence, he tended to animate whatever he encountered, including the
books he read and the phenomenon of electricity itself. Since he saw these
things as alive, he engaged with them on a deeper level, which intensified
the learning process. This way of looking at the world, however, transcends
religion and contains great power for all of us in our apprenticeships. We
too can see the subjects that we study as possessing a kind of vital spirit
with which we must interact, and which we must understand from the inside
out. As with Faraday, this attitude will intensify our level of engagement
with what we are learning.
To initially entice the right Master to serve as your mentor, you will
want to mix in a strong element of self-interest. You have something
tangible and practical to offer them, in addition to your youth and energy.
Before he had ever met him, Davy was aware of Faraday’s work ethic and
organizational skills. That alone made him a desirable assistant.
Considering this, you may not want to go in search of mentors until you
have acquired some elementary skills and discipline that you can rely upon
to interest them.
Almost all Masters and people of power suffer from too many
demands on their time and too much information to absorb. If you can
demonstrate the ability to help them organize themselves on these fronts to
a degree that others cannot, it will be much easier to get their attention and
interest them in the relationship. Do not shy away from anything menial or
secretarial. You want person-to-person access, however you can get it. Once
you establish a relationship, you will find other ways to continually hook
them through their self-interest. Try to see the world through their eyes and
ask the simple question of what it is they need most. Keeping their self-
interest involved will only enhance any emotional connection they feel
toward you.
If you work on yourself first, as Faraday did, developing a solid work
ethic and organizational skills, eventually the right teacher will appear in
your life. Word will spread through the proper channels of your efficiency
and your hunger to learn, and opportunities will come your way. In any
event, you should not feel timid in approaching Masters, no matter how
elevated their position. You will be frequently surprised at how open they
can be to serving as a mentor, if the fit is right and you have something to
offer. The ability to transfer their experience and knowledge to someone
younger often provides them with a great pleasure, akin to parenting.
The best mentors are often those who have wide knowledge and
experience, and are not overly specialized in their field—they can train you
to think on a higher level, and to make connections between different forms
of knowledge. The paradigm for this is the Aristotle–Alexander the Great
relationship. Philip II, Alexander’s father and king of Macedonia, chose
Aristotle to mentor his thirteen-year-old son because the philosopher had
learned and mastered so many different fields. He could thus impart to
Alexander an overall love of learning, and teach him how to think and
reason in any kind of situation—the greatest skill of all. This ended up
working to perfection. Alexander was able to effectively apply the
reasoning skills he had gained from Aristotle to politics and warfare. To the
end of his life he maintained an intense curiosity for any field of
knowledge, and would always gather about him experts he could learn
from. Aristotle had imparted a form of wisdom that played a key role in
Alexander’s success.
You will want as much personal interaction with the mentor as
possible. A virtual relationship is never enough. There are cues and subtle
aspects you can only pick up through a person-to-person interaction—such
as a way of doing things that has evolved through much experience. These
patterns of action are hard to put into words, and can only be absorbed
through much personal exposure. In crafts or in sports this is more obvious.
Tennis instructors, for example, can only reveal many secrets of their skills
by demonstrating things before their pupils’ eyes. Instructors may not in
fact be completely conscious of what makes their backhand so effective, but
in watching them in action pupils can pick up the pattern and motion,
exploiting the power of mirror neurons. But this process of absorption is
also relevant to nonmanual skills. It was only through constant exposure to
Davy’s thought process that Faraday understood the power of finding the
crucial experiment to demonstrate an idea, something he would adapt later
on with great success.
As the relationship progresses you can make this absorption process
more conscious and direct, questioning them about the principles
underlying their way of doing things. If you are clever, you can be a kind of
midwife, getting them to analyze their own creativity for you, and mining
all kinds of rich ideas in the process. They are often grateful for the
opportunity to reveal the inner workings of their power, particularly to
someone they do not perceive as a threat.
Although one mentor at a time is best, it is not always possible to find
the perfect one. In such a case, an alternate strategy is to find several
mentors in your immediate environment, each one filling strategic gaps in
your knowledge and experience. Having more than one mentor has side
benefits, giving you several connections and important allies to rely upon
later on. Similarly, if your circumstances limit your contacts, books can
serve as temporary mentors, as The Improvement of the Mind did for
Faraday. In such a case you will want to convert such books and writers into
living mentors as much as possible. You personalize their voice, interact
with the material, taking notes or writing in the margins. You analyze what
they write and try to make it come alive—the spirit and not just the letter of
their work.
In a looser sense, a figure from the past or present can serve as an
ideal, someone to model yourself after. Through much research and some
imagination on your part, you turn them into a living presence. You ask
yourself—what would they do in this situation or that? Countless generals
have used Napoleon Bonaparte for just such a purpose.
Mentors have their own strengths and weaknesses. The good ones
allow you to develop your own style and then to leave them when the time
is right. Such types can remain lifelong friends and allies. But often the
opposite will occur. They grow dependent on your services and want to
keep you indentured. They envy your youth and unconsciously hinder you,
or become overcritical. You must be aware of this as it develops. Your goal
is to get as much out of them as possible, but at a certain point you may pay
a price if you stay too long and let them subvert your confidence. Your
submitting to their authority is by no means unconditional, and in fact your
goal all along is eventually to find your way to independence, having
internalized and adapted their wisdom.
In this respect, the mentor relationship often replays elements from our
childhood. Although a mentor can be a man or a woman, he or she often
assumes the form of a father figure—there to guide and help us, but
sometimes trying to control too much and plot our life for us. He may take
any attempt at independence, even later in the relationship, as a personal
assault on his authority. You must not allow yourself to feel any guilt when
the time comes to assert yourself. Instead, as Faraday did, you should feel
resentful and even angry about his desire to hold you back, using such
emotions to help you leave him. It is often best to set up this move earlier
on so that you are emotionally prepared to make it. As the relationship
progresses, you can begin to slightly distance yourself from the mentor,
perhaps taking note of some of his weaknesses or character flaws, or even
finding fault with his most cherished beliefs. Establishing your differences
with the mentor is an important part of your self-development, whether he
is of the good or bad parent type.
In Spanish they say al maestro cuchillada—to the Master goes the
knife. It is a fencing expression, referring to the moment when the young
and agile pupil becomes skillful enough to cut his Master. But this also
refers to the fate of most mentors who inevitably experience the rebellion of
their protégés, like the cut from a sword. In our culture, we tend to venerate
those who seem rebellious or at least strike the pose. But rebellion has no
meaning or power if it occurs without something solid and real to rebel
against. The mentor, or father figure, gives you just such a standard from
which you can deviate and establish your own identity. You internalize the
important and relevant parts of their knowledge, and you apply the knife to
what has no bearing on your life. It is the dynamic of changing generations,
and sometimes the father figure has to be killed in order for the sons and
daughters to have space to discover themselves.
In any event, you will probably have several mentors in your life, like
stepping-stones along the way to mastery. At each phase of life you must
find the appropriate teachers, getting what you want out of them, moving
on, and feeling no shame for this. It is the path your own mentor probably
took and it is the way of the world.
STRATEGIES FOR DEEPENING
THE MENTOR DYNAMIC
One repays a teacher badly if one remains only a pupil.
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE
Although you must submit to the authority of mentors in order to learn from
and absorb their power to the highest degree, this does not mean you remain
passive in the process. At certain critical points, you can set and determine
the dynamic, personalize it to suit your purposes. The following four
strategies are designed to help you exploit the relationship to the fullest and
transform the knowledge you gain into creative energy.
1. Choose the mentor according to your needs and inclinations
In 1888 the twenty-year-old Frank Lloyd Wright was an apprentice
draftsman at the prestigious Chicago firm of Joseph Lyman Silsbee. He had
been there a year and was learning much about the business, but he was
getting restless. In his mind he could already envision a totally new style of
architecture that would revolutionize the field, but he lacked the experience
to set up his own practice. Silsbee was a shrewd businessman who saw that
his fortune was tied to staying true to the Victorian style of design that was
popular with his clients. Wright cringed at what he was being asked to
draw; he was learning antiquated design principles that offended him.
Then, out of the blue, he heard that the great Chicago architect Louis
Sullivan was looking for a draftsman to help finish the drawings for a
particular building. It would be dangerous to leave Silsbee after such a short
time and burn his bridge there, but working for Sullivan would be infinitely
more stimulating for his personal development as an architect. Sullivan’s
firm was at the forefront of designing skyscrapers, utilizing the latest
advances in materials and technology.
Wright went on a charm offensive to secure the position. He managed
to get a personal interview and showed Sullivan some of the more
interesting drawings he had done on his own; he engaged him in a
conversation about art and philosophy, knowing Sullivan’s own aesthetic
predilections. Sullivan hired him for the job, and a few months later made
him an apprentice draftsman in his firm. Wright cultivated a personal
relationship with him, eagerly playing the role of the son that Sullivan had
never had. With his talent and Sullivan’s blessing, he quickly rose to the
position of head draftsman in the firm. Wright became, as he put it, “the
pencil in Sullivan’s hand.” In 1893 Sullivan fired him for moonlighting, but
by then Wright had learned everything he could and was more than
prepared to step out on his own. Sullivan had given him in those five years
an education in modern architecture that no one else could have provided.
In 1906 Carl Jung was a promising thirty-one-year-old psychiatrist,
renowned for his work in experimental psychology and holding an
important position at the famous Burghölzli Psychiatric Hospital in Zurich.
But despite the apparent success in his life, he felt insecure. He believed
that his interest in the occult and strange psychic phenomena was a
weakness he needed to work through. He was frustrated that his treatment
of patients was often not effective. He worried that his work had no
legitimacy and that he lacked a certain rigor. He began to correspond with
the founder of the psychoanalytic field, Sigmund Freud, fifty-one years old
at the time. Jung was ambivalent about Freud—he admired, even
worshipped him as a pioneer in the field, but he did not like his emphasis on
sex as the determining factor in neurosis. Perhaps his aversion to this aspect
of Freudian psychology stemmed from his own prejudices or ignorance, and
needed to be overcome by talking it out. In their correspondence they
quickly developed a good rapport, and Jung was able to question the Master
about matters of psychology he did not fully understand.
A year later they finally met in Vienna, and talked nonstop for thirteen
hours. The younger man charmed Freud—he was so much more creative
than his other acolytes. He could serve as his successor in the
psychoanalytic movement. For Jung, Freud could be the father figure and
mentor he so desperately needed—a grounding influence. They traveled
together to the United States, saw each other on frequent visits, and
corresponded incessantly. But some five years into the relationship, Jung’s
initial ambivalence returned. He began to find Freud rather dictatorial. He
chafed at the idea of having to follow Freudian dogma. He now clearly
understood why he had initially disagreed with the emphasis on sexuality as
the root of all neuroses.
By 1913 they had a definitive break, Jung forever banished from
Freud’s inner circle. But through this relationship, Jung had worked out all
of his doubts and sharpened certain core ideas about human psychology. In
the end, the struggle had strengthened his sense of identity. Without this
mentorship, he would have never come to such a clear resolution and been
capable of starting his own rival school of psychoanalysis.
Sometime in the late 1960s, V. S. Ramachandran, a medical student at a
college in Madras, came upon a book called Eye and Brain, written by an
eminent professor of neuropsychology, Richard Gregory. (For more on
Ramachandran’s early years, see here.) The book excited him—the style of
writing, the anecdotes, the provocative experiments he recounted. Inspired
by the book, Ramachandran did his own experiments on optics, and soon
realized that he was better suited for the field than medicine. In 1974 he was
admitted into the PhD Program at Cambridge University, in visual
perception.
Ramachandran had been raised on stories of the great English
scientists of the nineteenth century, and the almost romantic quest for truth
that science seemed to represent. He loved the part that speculation played
in the great theories and discoveries of men such as Faraday and Darwin.
He imagined it would be somewhat similar at Cambridge, but to his surprise
the students and professors tended to treat science as a kind of nine-to-five
job; it was a competitive, cutthroat, almost corporate environment. He
began to feel gloomy and alone in a strange country.
Then one day Richard Gregory himself, a professor at Bristol
University, came to Cambridge to give a lecture. Ramachandran was
mesmerized—it was like something right out of the pages of Humphry
Davy. Gregory performed thought-provoking demonstrations of his ideas on
stage; he had a flair for drama and a great sense of humor. This is what
science should be like, Ramachandran thought. He went up after the talk
and introduced himself. They had an instant rapport. He mentioned to
Gregory an optical experiment he had been pondering, and the professor
was intrigued. He invited Ramachandran to visit Bristol and to stay in his
home, where they could try out his idea together. Ramachandran took up
the offer, and from the moment he saw Gregory’s house he knew he had
found his mentor—it was like something out of Sherlock Holmes, full of
Victorian instruments, fossils, and skeletons. Gregory was precisely the
kind of eccentric Ramachandran could identify with. Soon he was
commuting to Bristol regularly experiments. He had found a lifelong
mentor to inspire and guide him, and over the years he would come to adapt
much of Gregory’s style of speculation and experiment.
Growing up in Japan in the late 1970s, Yoky Matsuoka felt like an outsider.
As discussed in chapter 1 (here), she liked to do things her own way in a
country that esteemed social cohesion and conformity above everything
else. When she decided to take up tennis seriously at the age of eleven, she
used the players John McEnroe and Andre Agassi as her role models,
consummate rebels in what had been a very genteel sport. Later, when she
moved to the United States and began attending university, she brought
with her the same need to go her own way in whatever she did. If there was
a field no one was studying, it excited her. Following this instinct she got
into the then-esoteric field of robotics, and was admitted to the PhD
program at MIT.
There, for the first time in her life, she met someone of her own
temperament—Rodney Brooks, professor of robotics at MIT, and the bad
boy of the department. He was bold, taking on the higher-ups in the
department and arguing against some of the most entrenched ideas in the
field of artificial intelligence. He had developed a completely novel
approach to robotics. It excited her that a professor could get away with
such an unconventional attitude. She began to spend as much time around
him as possible, soaking up his style of thinking, and turning him into her
de facto mentor. He was not a teacher who told you what to do; he let you
find your own way, including your own mistakes, but would lend you
support when you needed it. This style suited her need for independence. It
was only later that she realized how much his ideas had gotten under her
skin. Unconsciously following his lead, she would eventually create her
own approach to robotics and pioneer a totally new field, known as
neurobotics.
The choice of the right mentor is more important than you might imagine.
Because so much of her future influence upon you can be deeper than you
are consciously aware of, the wrong choice can have a net negative effect
upon your journey to mastery. You could end up absorbing conventions and
styles that don’t fit you and that will confuse you later on. If she is too
domineering, you could end up becoming a lifelong imitation of the mentor,
instead of a Master in your own right. People often err in this process when
they choose someone who seems the most knowledgeable, has a charming
personality, or has the most stature in the field—all superficial reasons. Do
not simply choose the first possible mentor who crosses your path. Be
prepared to put as much thought into it as possible.
In selecting a mentor, you will want to keep in mind your inclinations
and Life’s Task, the future position you envision for yourself. The mentor
you choose should be strategically aligned with this. If your path is in a
more revolutionary direction, you will want a mentor who is open,
progressive, and not domineering. If your ideal aligns more with a style that
is somewhat idiosyncratic, you will want a mentor who will make you feel
comfortable with this and help you transform your peculiarities into
mastery, instead of trying to squelch them. If, like Jung, you are somewhat
confused and ambivalent about your direction, it can be useful to choose
someone who can help you gain some clarity about what you want,
someone important in the field who might not fit perfectly with your tastes.
Sometimes part of what a mentor shows us is something we will want to
avoid or actively rebel against. In this latter case, you might initially want to
maintain a little more emotional distance than normally recommended,
particularly if she is the domineering type. Over time you will see what to
absorb and what to reject.
Remember: the Mentor Dynamic replays something of the parental or
father-figure dynamic. It is a cliché that you do not get to choose the family
you are born into, but you are happily free to choose your mentors. In this
case, the right choice can perhaps provide what your parents didn’t give you
—support, confidence, direction, space to discover things on your own.
Look for mentors who can do that, and beware of falling into the opposite
trap—opting for a mentor who resembles one of your parents, including all
of his negative traits. You will merely repeat what hampered you in the first
place.
2. Gaze deep into the mentor’s mirror
Hakuin Zenji (1685–1769) was born in a village near the town of Hara in
Japan, his family on his father’s side coming from an illustrious line of
samurai warriors. As a child, Hakuin had the kind of relentless energy that
would seem to mark him for a life dedicated to the martial arts. But at
around the age of eleven, he heard a priest deliver a sermon about the
torments of hell for those who were not careful, and this talk filled the
young boy with an intense anguish that nothing could extinguish. All of his
tenacious energy was now directed toward doubts about his own worth, and
by the age of fourteen he decided that the only way to quell his anxiety was
to pursue the religious path and become a priest. He was particularly
attracted to Zen Buddhism, having read stories of great Masters in China
and Japan overcoming endless obstacles and suffering to reach
enlightenment. The idea of passing through a phase of suffering accorded
well with his innermost doubts about himself.
At the age of eighteen he was sent to a training center to prepare him
for his life as a priest. The method of teaching, however, disappointed him.
He had imagined twenty-four-hour sessions of meditation and other ordeals.
Instead, he was made to study all kinds of Chinese and Japanese texts. What
he read and heard from his instructors did not change him at all. It was
merely intellectual knowledge that had little connection to his daily life. His
anxieties only increased. He left this temple and began to wander, looking
for the mentor who could guide him.
He entered one Zen school after another, in every corner of Japan, and
he began to get a clear idea of the state of Zen instruction at that time. It
revolved around simple sessions of seated meditation, with little instruction,
until finally a giant bell would sound and the monks would hurry to eat or
sleep. In their spare time, they would chant for happiness and peace. Zen
had turned into one large soporific, designed to lull students into a state of
rest and lethargy. It was deemed too invasive and too overbearing to give
students any direction; they were supposed to find their own way to
enlightenment. Naturally, when given such free rein, they would opt for the
easiest path—doing nothing. This trend had spread throughout Japan;
monks everywhere had convinced themselves that Zen was easy and
simple, and that whatever felt right was right.
Occasionally Hakuin would hear of some school or priest that was
creating a stir somewhere, and he would travel to see for himself. In 1708,
he spent weeks traveling to reach a temple at a coastal town where just such
a provocative priest was making an appearance, but after hearing a few
sentences from his lips, Hakuin felt the same profound boredom and
disappointment—quotes from texts, clever stories, all to cover up the
deadness of the words. He began to wonder if it was time to give up, if true
enlightenment no longer existed. At the temple he met another young monk
who was equally disappointed with the talk of the priest. They became
friends, and one day the monk mentioned that he had studied for a few days
under a strange and completely reclusive Master named Shoju Rojin, who
was not like any other teacher he had encountered. He lived in a hard-to-
reach village, accepted only a handful of students, and was very demanding.
This was all Hakuin needed to hear. He asked the young monk to guide him
right away to Shoju.
When he met the Master, he could see something in his eyes that was
different from any other priest or teacher. He radiated power and self-
mastery; you could read in his expression the pain he had endured to reach
his current state. This man had lived and suffered. Hakuin was delighted
when Shoju said he would accept him as a pupil, but his excitement soon
turned to fear. During their first personal interview, Shoju asked him, “How
do you understand the koan (a Zen anecdote designed for instruction) about
the Dog and the Buddha-Nature?” “No way to lay a hand or foot on that,”
Hakuin replied, imagining that was a clever response, at which point Shoju
reached out and grabbed his nose, pushing it with a harsh twist and yelling
in his face, “Got a pretty good hand on it there!” He held on tightly for
several minutes, giving Hakuin a feeling of utter paralysis.
Over the course of the next few days he endured more and more abuse.
Shoju made him feel that all of his studies and traveling had taught him
nothing. He could not say or do one right thing. Out of nowhere he would
receive a blow or a gob of spit in his face. He began to doubt every element
of his previous knowledge, and he lived in complete terror of what Shoju
would do next.
Shoju gave him a series of the most difficult koans Hakuin had ever
heard to ponder and discuss. He could not make heads or tails of them. His
feelings of dejection and demoralization were reaching a breaking point, but
knowing that persistence was important, he kept at it night and day. Soon he
had doubts about Shoju himself, and entertained thoughts of leaving him in
the near future.
One day, feeling particularly agitated, he wandered into a nearby
village, and without knowing why or how, he began to contemplate one of
the thorniest koans Shoju had given him. Deep in thought, he strayed into
the garden of a private house. The woman who lived there yelled at him to
leave, but Hakuin seemed oblivious. Thinking he was a madman or a bandit
she attacked him with a stick, knocking him hard to the ground. When he
came to, minutes later, he suddenly felt different—he had finally penetrated
to the core of Shoju’s koan! He understood it from the inside out! It was
alive within him! Everything fell into place and he was certain that he had
finally reached enlightenment, the world appearing to him in a totally new
guise. He began clapping his hands and screaming with delight. For the first
time he felt the weight of all of his anxieties lifted from him.
He ran all the way back to Shoju, who recognized right away what had
happened to his pupil. This time the Master was gentle with him, stroking
Hakuin’s back with his fan. He finally revealed to his pupil his thoughts—
from the first time they had met, he had recognized in Hakuin the necessary
ingredients for true learning. He was fierce, determined, and hungry for
enlightenment. The problem with all students, he said, is that they
inevitably stop somewhere. They hear an idea and they hold on to it until it
becomes dead; they want to flatter themselves that they know the truth. But
true Zen never stops, never congeals into such truths. That is why everyone
must constantly be pushed to the abyss, starting over and feeling their utter
worthlessness as a student. Without suffering and doubts, the mind will
come to rest on clichés and stay there, until the spirit dies as well. Not even
enlightenment is enough. You must continually start over and challenge
yourself.
Shoju had faith that Hakuin would continue in this process because he
was tenacious. Zen was dying throughout Japan. He wanted Hakuin to stay
with him and serve as his successor. He believed the young man would
someday be responsible for reviving the religion. In the end, however,
Hakuin could not tame his restlessness. After eight months he left Shoju,
certain he would return as soon as he could. But the years went by, and once
again he fell into new doubts and anxieties. He wandered from temple to
temple, experiencing continual highs and lows.
At the age of forty-one, he finally had his ultimate and deepest
moment of enlightenment, bringing with it a mind-set that would not leave
him for the rest of his life. At this point, all of the ideas and teachings of
Shoju came back to him as if he had heard them yesterday, and he realized
that Shoju was the only true Master he had ever known. He wanted to return
to thank him, but the Master had died some five years earlier. His way to
repay him was to become a teacher himself, keeping alive his Master’s
teachings. In the end, it was indeed Hakuin who rescued Zen practice from
the decay it had fallen into, just as Shoju had predicted.
To reach mastery requires some toughness and a constant connection to
reality. As an apprentice, it can be hard for us to challenge ourselves on our
own in the proper way, and to get a clear sense of our own weaknesses. The
times that we live in make this even harder. Developing discipline through
challenging situations and perhaps suffering along the way are no longer
values that are promoted in our culture. People are increasingly reluctant to
tell each other the truth about themselves—their weaknesses, their
inadequacies, flaws in their work. Even the self-help books designed to set
us straight tend to be soft and flattering, telling us what we want to hear—
that we are basically good and can get what we want by following a few
simple steps. It seems abusive or damaging to people’s self-esteem to offer
them stern, realistic criticism, to set them tasks that will make them aware
of how far they have to go. In fact, this indulgence and fear of hurting
people’s feelings is far more abusive in the long run. It makes it hard for
people to gauge where they are or to develop self-discipline. It makes them
unsuited for the rigors of the journey to mastery. It weakens people’s will.
Masters are those who by nature have suffered to get to where they are.
They have experienced endless criticisms of their work, doubts about their
progress, setbacks along the way. They know deep in their bones what is
required to get to the creative phase and beyond. As mentors, they alone can
gauge the extent of our progress, the weaknesses in our character, the
ordeals we must go through to advance. In this day and age, you must get
the sharpest dose of reality that is possible from your mentor. You must go
in search of it and welcome it. If possible, choose a mentor who is known
for supplying this form of tough love. If they shy away from giving it, force
them to hold up the mirror that will reflect you as you are. Get them to give
you the proper challenges that will reveal your strengths and weaknesses
and allow you to gain as much feedback as possible, no matter how hard it
might be to take. Accustom yourself to criticism. Confidence is important,
but if it is not based on a realistic appraisal of who you are, it is mere
grandiosity and smugness. Through the realistic feedback of your mentor
you will eventually develop a confidence that is much more substantial and
worth possessing.
3. Transfigure their ideas
In 1943 the eminent pianist and teacher Alberto Guerrero accepted a new
pupil, a precocious eleven-year-old named Glenn Gould who was unlike
any other student he had ever encountered. Glenn had been playing since he
was four years old, having been taught by his mother, who was an
accomplished piano player in her own right. After a few years under her
tutelage, Glenn had surpassed his mother in skill on many levels; he began
to argue and correct her; he wanted more challenging work. Guerrero was
well known in Toronto, Canada, where the Goulds lived; he was reputed to
be very patient, yet also demanding—traits that could serve him well as a
teacher for the young Gould, which is why the parents chose him. From the
very first session, Guerrero could sense an unusual seriousness and intensity
in someone so young. Gould listened with complete attention and could
absorb Guerrero’s style of playing in a way he had never seen in a pupil. He
was a consummate mimic.
Soon, however, Guerrero began to notice some strange traits in his
pupil. On one occasion he decided to expand Gould’s repertoire,
introducing him to the music of Arnold Schoenberg—the great composer of
atonal music whose work Guerrero liked to champion. Expecting his pupil
to be excited by the newness of the sound, he was surprised instead to see
an expression of complete disgust. Gould took the sheet music home with
him, but apparently he never practiced the pieces, and Guerrero let the
matter drop. Then, a few weeks later, he shared with his teacher some of his
own recent compositions—interesting work that was clearly inspired by
Schoenberg. Soon after that, he brought in sheet music that he wanted to
practice with Guerrero—all atonal music from various composers,
including Schoenberg, but not the pieces Guerrero had originally given him.
He had obviously been studying the music on his own and had decided he
liked it.
It became almost impossible for Guerrero to gauge how Gould would
respond to his ideas. For instance, he recommended to his pupils that they
learn and memorize a piece by studying it on paper, before ever trying to
play it. In this way, it would come alive first in their minds and they would
be able to envision it as a whole, instead of merely playing the notes. Gould
dutifully followed this advice with a particular composition of Bach’s, but
when they discussed the structure and concept behind the piece, the young
man had his own notions that were rather strange and quite contrary to
Guerrero’s, which Gould found romantic and quaint. On another occasion
Guerrero revealed his idea that it was often best to imagine you were
playing a piano piece by Bach as if it were on a harpsichord. Gould warmed
to this idea, then a few months later said that he preferred imagining a
different instrument with Bach.
Guerrero’s most important ideas revolved around the physical aspects
of playing the piano. He had spent years studying human physiology,
particularly anything related to the hands and fingers. His goal was to
impart in his pupils a relaxed yet powerful style, in which they would gain
complete command of the keyboard with fingers that had a lightning touch.
He spent hours indoctrinating Gould in his approach, working on the
peculiar posture he advocated—a kind of slump or hunch over the
keyboard, with all of the action coming from the lower back and hands, the
shoulders and arms completely still. He demonstrated this technique
endlessly to his pupil. He gave Gould all kinds of unusual exercises he had
developed to strengthen the fingers. Gould seemed interested enough, but as
with everything, Guerrero had the impression he would soon forget it all
and go his own way.
As the years went by, Gould began to argue with his teacher more and
more. He found Guerrero’s ideas and approach to music too Latin, too
mired in another era. Finally, at the age of nineteen, Gould announced that
he was going to proceed on his own. He had no more need for a mentor, a
fact that Guerrero graciously accepted. It was clear that by now the young
man needed to work through his own ideas about music and performing.
Over the years, however, as Gould slowly established himself as one
of the greatest pianists who has ever lived, Guerrero began to realize how
deeply his former pupil had absorbed all of his ideas. He would read
reviews of Gould’s performances in which the critic would note how he
seemed to play Bach as if it were on the harpsichord, something soon
echoed by others. His posture, his way of crouching and leaning over the
instrument made him look like an uncanny double of the younger Guerrero;
his finger work was so unusually powerful, it was clear he had spent years
using the exercises Guerrero had taught him. In interviews, Gould would
talk about the importance of learning a piece of music on paper before
performing it, but he would say it all as if it were his own idea. Strangest of
all, Gould played particular pieces of music as Guerrero had always
imagined them in his mind, but with a verve and style that he could never
have matched. It was as if his former protégé had internalized the essence
of his style and transfigured it into something greater.
As a child, Glenn Gould intuited his great dilemma. He had an uncanny ear
for music; he was so responsive that he could pick up the nuances of
another piano player and reproduce them after a single hearing. At the same
time, he knew that he was a peculiar young man with very distinct tastes.
He had the ambition to become a master performer. If he listened too
closely to teachers and other performers and picked up their ideas or styles,
he would lose his sense of identity in the process. But he also needed
knowledge and mentorship. This dilemma became particularly acute with
Alberto Guerrero, who was a charismatic teacher. It is often a curse to learn
under someone so brilliant and accomplished—your own confidence
becomes crushed as you struggle to follow all of their great ideas. Many
pianists become lost in the shadow of their illustrious mentors and never
amount to anything.
Because of his ambition, Gould found his way to the only real solution
to this dilemma. He would listen to all of Guerrero’s ideas about music and
try them out. In the course of playing, he would subtly alter these ideas to
suit his inclinations. This would make him feel that he had his own voice.
As the years went by, he made this differentiation between himself and his
instructor more pronounced. Because he was so impressionable, over the
course of the apprenticeship he had unconsciously internalized all of the
important ideas of his mentor, but through his own active engagement he
had managed to adapt them to his individuality. In this way, he could learn
and yet incubate a creative spirit that would help set him apart from
everyone else once he left Guerrero.
As apprentices, we all share in this dilemma. To learn from mentors,
we must be open and completely receptive to their ideas. We must fall
under their spell. But if we take this too far, we become so marked by their
influence that we have no internal space to incubate and develop our own
voice, and we spend our lives tied to ideas that are not our own. The
solution, as Gould discovered, is subtle: Even as we listen and incorporate
the ideas of our mentors, we must slowly cultivate some distance from
them. We begin by gently adapting their ideas to our circumstances, altering
them to fit our style and inclinations. As we progress we can become
bolder, even focusing on faults or weaknesses in some of their ideas. We
slowly mold their knowledge into our own shape. As we grow in
confidence and contemplate our independence, we can even grow
competitive with the mentor we once worshipped. As Leonardo da Vinci
said, “Poor is the apprentice who does not surpass his Master.”
4. Create a back-and-forth dynamic
In 1978, a promising lightweight boxer named Freddie Roach traveled to
Las Vegas with his father in search of a trainer that could elevate him to the
next level. And as previously narrated in chapter 1 (see here), Freddie and
his father quickly settled on Eddie Futch, one of the most legendary boxing
coaches in the field.
Futch had a magnificent résumé. As a young man he had sparred with
Joe Louis. Barred from turning professional because of a heart murmur, he
became a trainer, working later with some of the most illustrious
heavyweights, including Joe Frazier. He was a quiet, patient man who knew
how to give precise instructions; he was a master at improving a fighter’s
technique. Under his guidance, Roach advanced quickly, winning his first
ten bouts.
Soon, however, Roach began to notice a problem: in training he
listened intently to what Futch had to say, and put it into practice with
relative ease. But in actual bouts, the moment he exchanged blows with his
opponent, he would suddenly throw out all the technique he had learned and
fight on pure emotion. Sometimes this worked, but he took a lot of blows,
and his career started to sputter. What surprised him several years into the
process was that Futch did not really seem to notice this problem of his.
With so many fighters in his stable, he tended to keep his distance; he did
not give much personalized attention.
Finally, in 1986, Roach retired. Living in Vegas and moving from one
bad job to another, in his off-hours he began to frequent the gym where he
had trained. Soon he was giving advice to fighters and helping out. Without
getting paid, he became a de facto assistant to Futch, even directly training
a few of the fighters himself. He knew Futch’s system well and had
internalized many of the techniques he taught. He added his own wrinkle to
the training sessions. He took the mitt work—the large padded gloves that a
trainer uses in the ring to practice various punches and combinations with
his fighter—to a higher level, creating a longer and more fluid practice
session. It also gave Roach a chance to be more involved in the action,
something he missed. After several years he realized he was good at this
and so left Futch to begin his own career as a trainer.
To Roach, the sport was changing. Fighters had become faster, but
trainers such as Futch still promoted a rather static style of boxing that did
not exploit these changes. Slowly, Roach began to experiment with the
whole training dynamic. He expanded the mitt work into something larger,
a simulation of a fight that could go on for several rounds. This allowed him
to get closer to his fighters, to literally feel their full arsenal of punches over
time, to see how they moved in the ring. He began to study tapes of
opponents, looking for any kind of pattern or weakness in their style. He
would devise a strategy around this weakness and go over it with his boxers
in the mitt work. Interacting so closely with his fighters, he would develop a
different kind of rapport than what he had with Futch—more visceral and
connected. But no matter the boxer, these moments of connection would
inevitably fade in and out. As they improved, the fighters would begin to
tune him out, feeling like they already knew enough. Their egos would get
in the way and they would stop learning.
Then, in 2001, an entirely different kind of fighter came through the
doors of Roach’s gym in Hollywood, California. His name was Manny
Pacquiao, a 122-pound left-handed featherweight fighter, who had had
some success in his native Philippines but was looking for a trainer in the
States, someone who could elevate his game to another level. Many trainers
had already passed on Pacquiao—they watched him work out and spar, and
he was impressive, but there was no money to be made from someone in
such a lightweight division.
Roach, however, was a different breed of trainer—he immediately
went to mitt work with Pacquiao, and from the first punch he knew
something was different about this fighter. It had an explosive, intense
quality, a snap unlike any another fighter’s. The other trainers had only
watched and could not feel what he now felt. After one round Roach was
certain he had found the boxer he had always been looking to train, one
who could help initiate the new style of boxing he wanted to introduce.
Pacquiao was equally impressed.
To Roach, Pacquiao had the material to be an unbeatable fighter, but
he was somewhat one-dimensional: he had a great left hand and not much
else. He was constantly looking for the knockout blow, to the exclusion of
everything else. Roach’s goal was to transform Pacquiao into a multi-
dimensional beast in the ring. He began with heavy mitt practice, trying to
develop a powerful right hand and more fluid footwork. What immediately
struck him was the intensity with which Pacquiao focused on his
instructions and how quickly he caught on. He was eminently teachable,
and so the progress was more rapid than it had ever been with any other
fighter. Pacquiao seemed to never tire of training or to worry about
overdoing it. Roach kept waiting for the inevitable dynamic in which the
fighter would begin to tune him out, but this never came. This was a boxer
he could work harder and harder. Soon, Pacquiao had developed a
devastating right hand, and his footwork could match the speed of his
hands. He began to win fight after fight, in impressive fashion.
As the years went by, the relationship began to evolve. In their mitt
work, Pacquiao would adjust or improve upon the maneuvers Roach had
been developing for the next bout. He gave input on Roach’s strategy,
altering it on occasion. Pacquiao had gained a sixth sense for what Roach
was getting at and could take his thinking further. On one occasion Roach
watched Pacquiao improvise a maneuver on the ropes in which he ducked
out and attacked a fighter from an angle instead of head-on. To Roach, this
was a move that made instant sense. He wanted to develop this further into
a whole new possible style of fighting. He was now learning almost as
much from Pacquiao. The previous trainer-fighter relationship had now
morphed into something interactive and alive. To Roach, this meant that
they could move past the seemingly inevitable plateau for fighters in which
it all became stale and opponents would catch on to their weaknesses.
Working together in this way, Roach was able to transform this one-
dimensional, relatively unknown fighter into perhaps the greatest boxer of
his generation.
In theory, there should be no limit to what we can learn from mentors who
have wide experience. But in practice, this is rarely the case. The reasons
are several: at some point the relationship can become flat; it is difficult for
us to maintain the same level of attention that we had in the beginning. We
might come to resent their authority a little, especially as we gain in skill
and the difference between us becomes somewhat less. Also, they come
from a different generation, with a different worldview. At a certain point,
some of their cherished principles might seem a bit out of touch or
irrelevant, and we unconsciously tune them out. The only solution is to
evolve a more interactive dynamic with the mentor. If they can adapt to
some of your ideas, the relationship becomes more animated. Feeling a
growing openness on their part to your input, you are less resentful. You are
revealing to them your own experiences and ideas, perhaps loosening them
up so their principles don’t harden into dogma.
Such a style of interaction is more in tune with our democratic times
and can serve as something of an ideal. But it should not go along with a
rebellious attitude or a lessening in respect. The dynamic sketched out
earlier in this chapter remains the same. Like Pacquiao, you bring to the
relationship the utmost in admiration and your total attention. You are
completely open to their instruction. Gaining their respect for how
teachable you are, they will fall a bit under your spell, as Roach did with
Pacquiao. With your intense focus, you improve in your skill levels, giving
you the power to introduce more of yourself and your needs. You give them
feedback to their instruction, perhaps adjust some of their ideas. This must
begin with you, as you set the tone with your hunger to learn. Once a back-
and-forth dynamic is sparked, the relationship has almost limitless potential
for learning and absorbing power.
REVERSAL
It is never wise to purposefully do without the benefits of having a mentor
in your life. You will waste valuable time in finding and shaping what you
need to know. But sometimes you have no choice. There is simply no one
around who can fill the role, and you are left to your own devices. In such a
case, you must make a virtue of necessity. That was the path taken by
perhaps the greatest historical figure to ever attain mastery alone—Thomas
Alva Edison (1847–1931).
From a very early age Edison became used to doing things for himself,
by necessity. His family was poor, and by the age of twelve he had to earn
money to help his parents. He sold newspapers on trains, and traveling
around his native Michigan for his job, he developed an ardent curiosity
about everything he saw. He wanted to know how things worked—
machines, gadgets, anything with moving parts. With no schools or teachers
in his life, he turned to books, particularly anything he could find on
science. He began to conduct his own experiments in the basement of his
family home, and he taught himself how to take apart and fix any kind of
watch. At the age of fifteen he apprenticed as a telegraph operator, then
spent years traveling across the country plying his trade. He had no chance
for a formal education, and nobody crossed his path who could serve as a
teacher or mentor. And so in lieu of that, in every city he spent time in, he
frequented the public library.
One book that crossed his path played a decisive role in his life:
Michael Faraday’s two-volume Experimental Researches in Electricity.
This book became for Edison what The Improvement of the Mind had been
for Faraday. It gave him a systematic approach to science and a program for
how to educate himself in the field that now obsessed him—electricity. He
could follow the experiments laid out by the great Master of the field and
absorb as well his philosophical approach to science. For the rest of his life,
Faraday would remain his role model.
Through books, experiments, and practical experience at various jobs,
Edison gave himself a rigorous education that lasted about ten years, up
until the time he became an inventor. What made this successful was his
relentless desire to learn through whatever crossed his path, as well as his
self-discipline. He had developed the habit of overcoming his lack of an
organized education by sheer determination and persistence. He worked
harder than anyone else. Because he was a consummate outsider and his
mind had not been indoctrinated in any school of thought, he brought a
fresh perspective to every problem he tackled. He turned his lack of formal
direction into an advantage.
If you are forced onto this path, you must follow Edison’s example by
developing extreme self-reliance. Under these circumstances, you become
your own teacher and mentor. You push yourself to learn from every
possible source. You read more books than those who have a formal
education, developing this into a lifelong habit. As much as possible, you
try to apply your knowledge in some form of experiment or practice. You
find for yourself second-degree mentors in the form of public figures who
can serve as role models. Reading and reflecting on their experiences, you
can gain some guidance. You try to make their ideas come to life,
internalizing their voice. As someone self-taught, you will maintain a
pristine vision, completely distilled through your own experiences—giving
you a distinctive power and path to mastery.
To learn by example is to submit to authority. You follow your master because you trust his
manner of doing things even when you cannot analyze and account in detail for its
effectiveness. By watching the master and emulating his efforts…the apprentice unconsciously
picks up the rules of the art, including those which are not explicitly known to the master
himself.
—MICHAEL POLANYI
IV
SEE PEOPLE AS THEY ARE: SOCIAL
INTELLIGENCE
Often the greatest obstacle to our pursuit of mastery comes from the
emotional drain we experience in dealing with the resistance and
manipulations of the people around us. If we are not careful, our minds
become absorbed in endless political intrigues and battles. The principal
problem we face in the social arena is our naïve tendency to project onto
people our emotional needs and desires of the moment. We misread their
intentions and react in ways that cause confusion or conflict. Social
intelligence is the ability to see people in the most realistic light possible.
By moving past our usual self-absorption, we can learn to focus deeply on
others, reading their behavior in the moment, seeing what motivates them,
and discerning any possible manipulative tendencies. Navigating smoothly
the social environment, we have more time and energy to focus on learning
and acquiring skills. Success attained without this intelligence is not true
mastery, and will not last.
THINKING INSIDE
In 1718, Benjamin Franklin (1706–90) went to work as an apprentice in his
brother James’s printing shop in Boston. His dream was to transform
himself into a great writer. At the printing shop he would not only be taught
how to handle the machines, but also how to edit manuscripts. Surrounded
by books and newspapers, he would have plenty of examples of good
writing to study and learn from. It would be the perfect position for him.
As the apprenticeship progressed, the literary education he had
imagined for himself came to pass, and his writing skills improved
immensely. Then, in 1722, it seemed that he would finally have the perfect
opportunity to prove himself as a writer—his brother was about to launch
his own large-scale newspaper called The New-England Courant. Benjamin
approached James with several interesting ideas for stories he could write,
but to his great disappointment, his brother was not interested in his
contributing to the new paper. This was a serious venture, and Benjamin’s
work was too immature for The Courant.
Benjamin knew it was pointless to argue with James; he was a very
stubborn young man. But as he thought about the situation, an idea
suddenly came to him: what if he were to create a fictional character who
would write letters to The Courant? If he wrote them well enough, James
would never suspect they were from Benjamin, and he would print them. In
this way, he would have the last laugh. After much thinking, he decided
upon the perfect character to create: a young female widow named Silence
Dogood who had lots of strong opinions about life in Boston, many of them
rather absurd. To make this believable, Benjamin spent long hours
imagining a detailed past for her. He thought so deeply into the character
that she began to come alive within him. He could hear her way of thinking,
and soon there emerged a very realistic writing voice all her own.
He sent the first, rather lengthy letter to The Courant and watched with
amusement as his brother published it and added a note in the newspaper
asking for more letters from her. James probably suspected it was the work
of some established writer in town using a pseudonym—the letter was so
witty and satirical—but he clearly had no idea it was from Benjamin. James
continued publishing the subsequent letters, and they quickly became the
most popular part of The Courant.
Benjamin’s responsibilities at the shop began to grow, and he proved
to be quite an adept editor for the newspaper as well. Feeling proud of all
his precocious achievements, one day he could not help himself—he
confessed to James that he was the author of the Dogood letters. Expecting
some praise for this, he was surprised by James’s vitriolic response—his
brother did not like being lied to. To make matters worse, over the next few
months he turned increasingly cold and even abusive to Benjamin. It soon
became impossible to work for him, and by the fall of 1723, feeling
somewhat desperate, Benjamin decided to flee Boston, turning his back on
brother and family.
After several weeks of wandering he ended up in Philadelphia,
determined to settle there. He was only seventeen, with virtually no money
and no contacts, but for some reason he felt full of hope. In the five years
working for his brother he had learned more about the business than men
twice his age. He was fiercely disciplined and ambitious. And he was a
talented and successful writer to boot. With no more limitations on his
freedom, Philadelphia would be his to conquer. Surveying the scene in his
first few days there, his confidence only increased. The two printing shops
in town at the time were well below the level of anything in Boston, and the
writing in the local papers was abysmal. This meant endless opportunities
to fill a void and make his way.
Sure enough, within a few weeks he managed to secure a position at
one of the two printing shops in town, owned by a man named Samuel
Keimer. Philadelphia was still relatively small and provincial at the time—
word spread quickly of the newcomer and his literary skills.
The governor of the colony of Pennsylvania, William Keith, had
ambitions of transforming Philadelphia into a cultural center, and was not
happy with the two established printing businesses. Hearing of Benjamin
Franklin and of his writing talent, he sought him out. Clearly impressed
with the young man’s intelligence, he urged him to start his own printing
shop, promising to lend him the initial amount that was needed to get the
business going. The machines and materials would have to come from
London, and Keith advised him to go there personally to supervise the
acquisition. He had contacts there and would bankroll it all.
Franklin could hardly believe his good fortune. Only a few months
earlier he was a menial apprentice to his brother. Now, thanks to the
generous and enterprising governor, he would soon have his own printing
business, and through it he could start a newspaper and become a leading
voice in the city, all before he turned twenty. As he made his plans for
London, the money Keith had promised as a loan was not forthcoming, but
after writing to him a few times, word finally came from the governor’s
office not to worry—letters of credit would be waiting for him once he
disembarked in England. And so, without explaining to Keimer what he
was up to, he quit his job and bought his passage for the transatlantic
journey.
When he got to England there were no letters waiting. Feeling there
must have been some kind of miscommunication, he frantically looked in
London for a representative of the governor to whom he could explain their
agreement. In his search he came upon a wealthy merchant from
Philadelphia who, hearing his story, revealed to him the truth—Governor
Keith was a notorious talker. He was always promising everything to
everyone, trying to impress people with his power. His enthusiasm for a
scheme would rarely last more than a week. He had no money to lend, and
his character was worth about as much as his promises.
As Franklin took this all in and considered his current predicament,
what disturbed him was not that he now found himself in a precarious
position—alone and without money, far from home. There was no place
more exciting for a young man than London, and he would somehow make
his way there. What bothered him was how badly he had misread Keith and
how naïve he had been.
Fortunately, London was teeming with large-scale printing shops, and
within a few weeks of his arrival he found a position within one of them. To
forget about the Keith fiasco he threw himself into the work, quickly
impressing his employer with his dexterity with the various machines and
with his editing skills. He got along well enough with his colleagues, but
soon he encountered a strange British custom: five times a day his fellow
printers would take a break to drink a pint of beer. It fortified them for the
work, or so they said. Every week Franklin was expected to contribute to
the beer fund for those in the room, including himself, but he refused to pay
up—he did not like to drink during working hours, and the idea that he
should give up a part of his hard-earned wages for others to ruin their health
made him angry. He spoke honestly about his principles, and they politely
accepted his decision.
Over the ensuing weeks, however, strange things began to happen:
mistakes kept popping up in texts he had already proofread, and almost
every day he noticed some new error for which he was blamed. He started
to feel like he was losing his mind. If this continued any longer he would be
fired. Clearly, somebody was sabotaging his work, and when he complained
to his fellow printers, they attributed it all to a mischievous ghost who was
known to haunt the room. Finally figuring out what this meant, he let go of
his principles and contributed to the beer fund; the mistakes suddenly
disappearing along with the ghost.
After this incident and several other indiscretions in London, Franklin
began to seriously wonder about himself. He seemed hopelessly naïve,
constantly misreading the intentions of the people around him. Thinking
about this problem, he was struck by an apparent paradox: when it came to
his work, he was supremely rational and realistic, always looking to
improve himself. With his writing, for instance, he could see his
weaknesses clearly and practiced hard to overcome them. But with people it
was virtually the opposite: he would inevitably become swept up in his
emotions and lose all contact with reality. With his brother, he wanted to
impress him by revealing his authorship of the letters, totally unaware of the
envy and malevolence he would unleash; with Keith, he was so wrapped up
in his dreams that he paid no attention to obvious signs that the governor
was all talk; with the printers, his anger blinded him to the fact that they
would obviously resent his attempts at reform. What was worse, he seemed
incapable of changing this self-absorbed dynamic.
Determined to break this pattern and change his ways, he decided there
was only one solution: in all of his future interactions with people, he would
force himself to take an initial step backward and not get emotional. From
this more detached position, he would focus completely on the people he
was dealing with, cutting off his own insecurities and desires from the
equation. Exercising his mind this way every time, it would turn into a
habit. In imagining how this would work, he had a strange sensation. It
reminded him of the process he went through in creating the Dogood letters
—thinking inside the character he had created, entering her world, and
making her come alive in his mind. In essence, he would be applying this
literary skill to everyday life. Gaining position inside people’s minds, he
could see how to melt their resistance or thwart their malevolent plans.
To make this process foolproof, he decided he would also have to
adopt a new philosophy: complete and radical acceptance of human nature.
People possess ingrained qualities and characters. Some are frivolous like
Keith, or vindictive like his brother, or rigid like the printers. There are
people like this everywhere; it has been that way since the dawn of
civilization. To get upset or try to alter them is futile—it will only make
them bitter and resentful. Better to accept such people as one accepts the
thorns on a rose. Better to observe and accumulate knowledge on human
nature, as one accumulates knowledge in the sciences. If he could follow
this new path in life, he would rid himself of his terrible naïveté and bring
some rationality to his social relations.
After more than a year and a half of work in London, Franklin finally
saved enough money for his return journey to the colonies, and in 1727 he
found himself back in Philadelphia, looking once more for work. In the
midst of his search, his former employer, Samuel Keimer, surprised him by
offering Franklin a nice position in the printing shop—he would be in
charge of the staff and training the others Keimer had recently hired as part
of his expanding business. For this he would receive a nice yearly salary.
Franklin accepted, but almost from the beginning he could sense something
was not right. And so, as he had promised himself, he took a step back and
calmly reviewed the facts.
He had five men to train, but once he accomplished this task there
would be little work left over for him. Keimer himself had been acting
strangely—much friendlier than usual. He was an insecure and prickly
gentleman, and this friendly front did not fit him. Imagining the situation
from Keimer’s perspective, he could sense that he must have greatly
resented Franklin’s sudden departure for London, leaving him in the lurch.
He must have seen Franklin as a young whippersnapper who needed his
comeuppance. He was not the type to discuss this with anyone, but would
seethe from within and scheme on his own. Thinking in this way, Keimer’s
intentions became clear to him: he was planning to get Franklin to impart
his extensive knowledge of the business to the new employees, then fire
him. This would be his revenge.
Certain he had read this correctly, he decided to quietly turn the tables.
He used his new managerial position to build relationships with customers
and to connect with successful merchants in the area. He experimented with
some new manufacturing methods he had learned in England. When
Keimer was away from the shop, he taught himself new skills such as
engraving and ink-making. He paid close attention to his pupils, and
carefully cultivated one of them to be a first-rate assistant. And just when
he suspected that Keimer was about to fire him, he left and set up his own
shop—with financial backing, greater knowledge of the business, a solid
base of customers who would follow him everywhere, and a first-rate
assistant whom he had trained. In executing this strategy, Franklin noticed
how free he was from any feelings of bitterness or anger toward Keimer. It
was all maneuvers on a chessboard, and by thinking inside Keimer he was
able to play the game to perfection, with a clear and level head.
Over the ensuing years, Franklin’s printing business prospered. He
became a highly successful newspaper publisher, a best-selling writer, a
scientist renowned for his experiments with electricity, and an inventor of
such things as the Franklin stove (and later in his life that of the lightning
rod, bifocal glasses, and so on). As an increasingly prominent member of
the Philadelphia community, in 1736 he decided it was time to take his
career further and enter politics, becoming a delegate to Pennsylvania’s
colonial legislature. Within a few months he was chosen unanimously by
fellow members to serve as the clerk to the legislature, a position of some
influence. But when it was time to renew the appointment, a new member
of the legislature, Isaac Norris, suddenly voiced his vehement opposition,
supporting another candidate. After much heated debate Franklin won the
vote, but in contemplating the situation, he saw danger on the horizon.
Norris was a wealthy, well-educated, and charismatic businessman. He
was also ambitious and certain to rise within the ranks. If Franklin became
antagonistic toward him, as would be expected after what had happened
with the battle over the clerk position, he would confirm any unpleasant
notions Norris had entertained of him and convert him into an implacable
foe. On the other hand, if he ignored him, Norris might read this as an
example of Franklin’s haughtiness and hate him all the more. To some it
might seem to be the strong and manly thing to go on the attack and fight
back, proving he was not someone to mess with. But would it not be
infinitely more powerful to work against Norris’s expectations and subtly
convert him into an implacable ally?
And so Franklin went to work. He observed the man closely in the
legislature, gathered information from insiders, and thought himself deeply
into Norris’s mind. He came to the conclusion that Norris was a proud and
somewhat emotional young man who harbored a few insecurities as well.
He seemed impatient for attention, for being liked and admired by others;
perhaps he envied Franklin’s popularity and achievements. Through his
insiders, he learned that Norris had one rather odd obsession—an extensive
personal library containing many rare books, including one that was
particularly rare and that he prized above all others. These books seemed to
represent to him his own feelings of distinction and nobility.
Knowing all of this, Franklin decided upon the following course of
action: he wrote to Norris a very polite note, expressing admiration for his
collection. He was an avid book lover himself, and hearing so much about
that one rare book in Norris’s collection, he would be excited beyond belief
if he could somehow peruse it at his leisure. If Norris would lend it to him
for a few days, he would take great care of it and return it promptly.
Clearly pleased by this attention, Norris sent the book over right away
and Franklin returned it as promised, with another note expressing his
gratitude for the favor. At the next meeting of the legislature, Norris came
up to Franklin and engaged him in friendly conversation, something he had
never done before. As he had predicted, he had created doubt in Norris’s
mind. Instead of his suspicions being confirmed about Franklin, he was
confronted with the fact that the man behaved as a true gentleman, shared
his interest in rare books, and kept to his word. How could he continue to
harbor bad feelings without wondering about himself and why he had sent
the book? Playing on Norris’s emotional nature, Franklin shifted his
feelings from antagonism to warmth. They became close friends and then
staunch political allies to the end of their careers. (Franklin would go on to
practice similar magic on many of his future political foes.)
In Philadelphia, Benjamin Franklin was thought of as the quintessence
of the trustworthy merchant and citizen. Like his fellow townsfolk, he
dressed plainly; he worked harder than anyone they knew; he never
frequented bars or gambling houses; and he had a folksy and even humble
manner. His popularity was almost universal. But in the last public chapter
of his life, he acted in a way that seemed to indicate that he had changed
and lost his common touch.
In 1776, a year after the outbreak of the War of Independence,
Benjamin Franklin—now a distinguished political figure—was dispatched
to France as a special commissioner to obtain arms, financing and an
alliance. Soon stories spread throughout the colonies of his various intrigues
with French women and courtesans, and of his attendance at lavish parties
and dinners—much of which was true. Prominent politicians such as John
Adams accused him of becoming corrupted by the Parisians. His popularity
among Americans plummeted. But what the critics and public did not
realize was that wherever he went he assumed the look, the outward morals,
and the behavior of the culture at hand, so that he could better make his
way. Desperate to win the French over to the American cause and
understanding their nature quite well, he had transformed himself into what
they had wanted to see in him—the American version of the French spirit
and way of life. He was appealing to their notorious narcissism.
All of this worked to perfection—Franklin became a beloved figure to
the French, and a man of influence with their government. In the end, he
brokered an important military alliance and gained the kind of financing
nobody else could have wrested from the stingy French king. This final
public act in his life was not an aberration, but the ultimate application of
his social rationality.
KEYS TO MASTERY
You must allow everyone the right to exist in accordance with the character he has, whatever it
turns out to be: and all you should strive to do is to make use of this character in such a way
as its kind of nature permits, rather than to hope for any alteration in it, or to condemn it
offhand for what it is. This is the true sense of the maxim—Live and let live…. To become
indignant at [people’s] conduct is as foolish as to be angry with a stone because it rolls into
your path. And with many people the wisest thing you can do, is to resolve to make use of those
whom you cannot alter.
—ARTHUR SCHOPENHAUER
We humans are the preeminent social animal. Hundreds of thousands of
years ago, our primitive ancestors developed complex social groupings. To
adapt to this, they evolved mirror neurons (see introduction, here), which
were more refined and sensitive than those of other primates. This meant
that they could use these mirror neurons not only to imitate those around
them, but also to imagine what others might be thinking and feeling, all on
a preverbal level. Such empathy allowed for a higher degree of cooperation.
With the invention of language and the reasoning powers it brought
them, our ancestors could take this empathic ability further—seeing
patterns in people’s behavior and deducing their motivations. Over the
years, these reasoning skills have become infinitely more powerful and
refined. In theory, all of us today possess the natural tools—empathy,
rational thinking—to have a supreme understanding of our fellow humans.
In practice, however, these tools remain mostly undeveloped, and the
explanation for this can be found in the peculiar nature of our childhood,
and our extended period of dependency.
Compared to other animals, we humans enter the world remarkably
weak and helpless. We remain relatively weak for many years before we
can truly operate on our own. This extended period of immaturity, lasting
some twelve to eighteen years, serves a valuable function: it gives us a
chance to focus on developing our brain—by far the most important
weapon in the human arsenal. But this prolonged childhood comes with a
price. During this time of weakness and dependency, we experience the
need to idealize our parents. Our survival depends on their strength and
reliability. To think of them as having their own frailties would fill us with
unbearable anxiety. And so we inevitably see them as stronger, more
capable, and more selfless than they are in reality. We come to view their
actions through the lens of our needs, and so they become extensions of
ourselves.
During this long period of immaturity, we often transfer these
idealizations and distortions to teachers and friends, projecting onto them
what we want and need to see. Our view of people becomes saturated with
various emotions—worship, admiration, love, need, anger. Then inevitably,
often in adolescence, we start to glimpse a less-than-noble side to many
people, including our parents, and we cannot help but feel upset at the
disparity between what we had imagined and the reality. In our
disappointment, we tend to exaggerate their negative qualities, much as we
once had exaggerated the positive ones. If we had been forced earlier on in
life to make it on our own, practical needs would have come to dominate
our thinking, and we would have become more detached and realistic. But
as it is, the many years of viewing people through the lens of our emotional
needs turns into a habit that we can hardly control.
Let us call this the Naïve Perspective. Although it is natural to have
such a perspective because of the unique character of our childhood, it is
also dangerous because it envelops us in childish illusions about people,
distorting our view of them. We carry this perspective with us into the adult
world, into the Apprenticeship Phase. In the work environment the stakes
are suddenly raised. People are no longer struggling for good grades or
social approval, but for survival. Under such pressure, they reveal qualities
of their characters that they normally try to conceal. They manipulate,
compete, and think of themselves first. We are blindsided by this behavior
and our emotions are churned up even more than before, locking us into the
Naïve Perspective.
The Naïve Perspective makes us feel sensitive and vulnerable.
Looking inward as to how the words and actions of others implicate us in
some way, we continually misread their intentions. We project our own
feelings onto them. We have no real sense of what they are thinking or what
motivates them. With colleagues in the work environment, we fail to see the
source of their envy or the reason for their manipulations; our attempts at
influencing them are based on the assumptions that they want the same
things as ourselves. With mentors and bosses, we project onto them our
childhood fantasies, becoming unnecessarily adoring or fearful of authority
figures and creating stormy and brittle relationships in the process. We think
we understand people, but we are viewing them through a distorted lens. In
this state, all of our empathic powers are rendered useless.
With the inevitable mistakes we make, we become entangled in battles
and dramas that consume our minds and distract us from learning. Our
sense of priorities becomes warped—we end up giving far too much
importance to social and political issues because we are not handling them
well. If we are not careful, we carry these patterns over to the next phase in
life, the Creative-Active Phase, in which we are in a more public position.
At this level, being socially inept can prove particularly embarrassing, even
fatal to our careers. People who retain their childish attitudes will rarely be
able to hold on to the success they may achieve through their talent.
Social intelligence is nothing more than the process of discarding the
Naïve Perspective and approaching something more realistic. It involves
focusing our attention outward instead of inward, honing the observational
and empathic skills that we naturally possess. It means moving past our
tendency to idealize and demonize people, and seeing and accepting them
as they are. It is a way of thinking that must be cultivated as early as
possible, during the Apprenticeship Phase. But before we can begin to
acquire this intelligence we must first come to grips with the Naïve
Perspective itself.
Look at the case of Benjamin Franklin, the icon of social intelligence
and the clearest example of the role it plays in mastery. As the second
youngest of a large extended family, he learned to get his way through
charm. As he got older he came to believe, as many young people do, that
getting along with others is a function of behaving charmingly and winning
them over with a friendly manner. But as he engaged with the real world, he
began to see his charm as the actual source of his problem. Being charming
was a strategy he had developed out of childish need; it was a reflection of
his narcissism, of the love he had of his own words and wit. It had no
relation to other people and their needs. It did not prevent them from
exploiting or attacking him. To be truly charming and socially effective you
have to understand people, and to understand them you have to get outside
yourself and immerse your mind in their world.
Only when he realized how deeply naïve he had been could he take the
necessary steps to move past this naïveté. His focus on gaining social
intelligence was the turning point of his career—it transformed him into the
preeminent observer of human nature, a man with a magical ability to see
into people. It also made him the perfect social companion—men and
women everywhere fell under his spell because of his ability to attune
himself to their energies. With tranquil and productive social relations, he
could focus more of his time and attention to writing, to questions of
science, to his endless inventions—to mastery.
It might be deduced from Benjamin Franklin’s story that social
intelligence requires a detached, emotionless approach to people, making
life rather dull in the process, but this is hardly the case. Franklin himself
was by nature a very emotional man. He did not repress this nature, but
rather turned his emotions in the opposite direction. Instead of obsessing
over himself and what other people were not giving him, he thought deeply
of how they were experiencing the world, what they were feeling and
missing. Emotions seen inside other people create empathy and bring a
deep understanding of what makes them tick. For Franklin, this outward
focus gave him a pleasant feeling of lightness and ease; his life was hardly
dull, but simply free of unnecessary battles.
Understand: you will continue to have problems in attaining social
intelligence until you come to the realization that your view of people is
dominated by the Naïve Perspective. Following Franklin’s example, you
can reach this awareness by reviewing your past, paying particular attention
to any battles, mistakes, tensions, or disappointments on the social front. If
you look at these events through the lens of the Naïve Perspective, you will
focus only on what other people have done to you—the mistreatments you
endured from them, the slights or injuries you felt. Instead, you must turn
this around and begin with yourself—how you saw in others qualities they
did not possess, or how you ignored signs of a dark side to their nature. In
doing this, you will be able to clearly see the discrepancy between your
illusions about who they are and the reality, and the role you played in
creating this discrepancy. If you look closely enough, you can often
perceive in your relationships with bosses or superiors reenactments of the
childhood family dynamic—the idealizing or demonizing that has become
habitual.
By making yourself aware of the distorting process of the Naïve
Perspective, you will naturally grow less comfortable with it. You will
realize that you are operating in the dark, blind to people’s motivations and
intentions, vulnerable to the same mistakes and patterns that occurred in the
past. You will feel your lack of real connection to other people. The desire
will naturally arise from within to change this dynamic—to start looking
outward instead of focusing only on your own feelings, to observe before
you react.
This new clarity about your perspective should be accompanied by an
adjustment of your attitude. You must avoid the temptation to become
cynical in your approach as an overreaction to your prior naïveté. The most
effective attitude to adopt is one of supreme acceptance. The world is full of
people with different characters and temperaments. We all have a dark side,
a tendency to manipulate, and aggressive desires. The most dangerous types
are those who repress their desires or deny the existence of them, often
acting them out in the most underhanded ways. Some people have dark
qualities that are especially pronounced. You cannot change such people at
their core, but must merely avoid becoming their victim. You are an
observer of the human comedy, and by being as tolerant as possible, you
gain a much greater ability to understand people and to influence their
behavior when necessary.
With this new awareness and attitude in place, you can begin to
advance in your apprenticeship in social intelligence. This intelligence
consists of two components, both equally important to master. First, there is
what we shall call specific knowledge of human nature—namely the ability
to read people, to get a feel for how they see the world, and to understand
their individuality. Second, there is the general knowledge of human nature,
which means accumulating an understanding of the overall patterns of
human behavior that transcend us as individuals, including some of the
darker qualities we often disregard. Because we are all a mix of unique
qualities and traits common to our species, only the possession of both
forms of knowledge can give you a complete picture of the people around
you. Practice both forms of knowledge and they will yield invaluable skills
that are essential in the quest for mastery.
Specific Knowledge—Reading People
Most of us have had the sensation at some point in our lives of experiencing
an uncanny connection with another person. In such moments we have an
understanding that is hard to put into words; we even feel that we can
anticipate the thoughts of the other person. Such communication generally
occurs with close friends and partners, people whom we trust and feel
attuned to on many levels. Because we trust them, we open up to their
influence and vice versa. In our normal state we are often nervous,
defensive, and self-absorbed, and our minds are turned inward. But in these
moments of connection, the internal monologue is shut off, and we pick up
more cues and signals from the other person than usual.
What this means is that when we are not inward-directed but attending
more deeply to another person, we gain access to forms of communication
that are largely nonverbal in nature, and quite effective in their own way.
We can imagine that our primitive ancestors, needing to cooperate on a high
level yet not experiencing the kind of interior monologue that comes with
words, possessed an incredibly powerful sensitivity to the moods and
feelings of others within the group, bordering on telepathy. This would be
similar to what other social animals possess, but in this case this sensitivity
would have been heightened by our ancestor’s ability to place themselves in
the minds of others.
The intense nonverbal connection we experience with those we are
close to is clearly not appropriate in a work environment, but to the degree
we open ourselves up and direct our attention outward to other people, we
can access a part of the sensitivity that our ancestors had, and become much
more effective at reading people.
To begin this process, you need to train yourself to pay less attention to
the words that people say and greater attention to their tone of voice, the
look in their eye, their body language—all signals that might reveal a
nervousness or excitement that is not expressed verbally. If you can get
people to become emotional, they will reveal a lot more. Cutting off your
interior monologue and paying deep attention, you will pick up cues from
them that will register with you as feelings or sensations. Trust these
sensations—they are telling you something that you will often tend to
ignore because it is not easy to verbalize. Later you can try to find a pattern
to these signals and attempt to analyze what they mean.
On this nonverbal level, it is interesting to observe how people behave
around those in positions of power and authority. They will tend to reveal
an anxiety, a resentment, or a sycophantic falseness that betrays something
essential about their psychological makeup, something that goes back to
their childhoods and that can be read in their body language.
When you drop your defense mechanisms and pay deep attention to
others, you will need to lower your guard and open yourself up to their
influence as well. But as long as your emotions and empathy are directed
outward, you will be able to detach yourself when necessary and analyze
what you have gleaned. Resist the temptation to interpret what they say or
do as somehow implicitly involving you—this will cause you to turn your
thoughts inward and close off the immediacy of the connection.
As an exercise, after you have known people for a while, try to
imagine that you are experiencing the world from their point of view,
placing yourself in their circumstances and feeling what they feel. Look for
any common emotional experiences—a trauma or difficulty you’ve had, for
instance, that resembles in some way what they are going through. Reliving
a part of that emotion can help you begin the identifying process. The goal
is not to literally inhabit their mind, which is impossible, but to practice
your empathic powers and gain a more realistic appraisal of their
worldview. Being able to place yourself to any degree in the mind-set of
others is a brilliant means of loosening up your own thought process, which
will tend to get locked into certain ways of seeing things. Your ability to
empathize with others is related to the creative process of feeling your way
into the subject you are studying.
This intuitive form of reading people becomes more effective and
accurate the more you use it, but it is best to combine it with other, more
conscious forms of observation. For instance, you should take particular
note of people’s actions and decisions. Your goal is to figure out the hidden
motives behind them, which will often revolve around power. People will
say all kinds of things about their motives and intentions; they are used to
dressing things up with words. Their actions, however, say much more
about their character, about what is going on underneath the surface. If they
present a harmless front but have acted aggressively on several occasions,
give the knowledge of that aggression much greater weight than the surface
they present. In a similar vein, you should take special note of how people
respond to stressful situations—often the mask they wear in public falls off
in the heat of the moment.
When looking for cues to observe, you should be sensitive to any kind
of extreme behavior on their part—for instance, a blustery front, an overly
friendly manner, a constant penchant for jokes. You will often notice that
they wear this like a mask to hide the opposite, to distract others from the
truth. They are blustery because they are inwardly very insecure; they are
overly friendly because they are secretly ambitious and aggressive; or they
joke to hide a mean-spiritedness.
In general, you are reading and decoding every possible sign—
including the clothes they wear and the organized or disorganized nature of
their workspace. The choice of mate or partner can be quite eloquent too,
particularly if it seems slightly inconsistent with the character they try to
project. In this choice they can reveal unmet needs from childhood, a desire
for power and control, a low self-image, and other qualities they normally
seek to disguise. What might seem like small issues—chronically being
late, insufficient attention to detail, not returning any favors on your part—
are signs of something deeper about their character. These are patterns you
must pay attention to. Nothing is too small to notice.
You must avoid the common mistake of making judgments based on
your initial impressions of people. Such impressions can sometimes tell you
something, but more often they are misleading. There are several reasons
for this. In your initial encounter you tend to be nervous, less open, and
more inward. You are not really paying attention. Furthermore, people have
trained themselves to appear a certain way; they have a persona they use in
public that acts like a second skin to protect them. Unless you are incredibly
perceptive, you will tend to mistake the mask for the reality. For instance,
the man you judged to be so powerful and assertive may be merely masking
his fears and may have far less power than you first imagined. Often it is
the quiet ones, those who give out less at first glance, who hide greater
depths, and who secretly wield greater power.
What you want is a picture of a person’s character over time, which
will give you a far more accurate sense of their true character than any first
impression could. So restrain yourself from the natural tendency to judge
right away, and let the passing months reveal more and more about who
people are, as you get better at reading them.
In the end, your goal is to identify and pierce through to what makes
people unique, to understand the character and values that lie at their cores.
The more you can fathom about people’s pasts and their way of thinking
about things, the more deeply you can enter into their spirit. In this way you
will be able to understand their motivations, foresee their actions, and
recognize how best to win them to your side. You will no longer be
operating in the dark.
You will encounter thousands of various individuals in your life, and
the ability to see them as they are will prove invaluable. Keep in mind,
however, that people are in a state of continual flux. You must not let your
ideas about them harden into a set impression. You are continually
observing them and bringing your readings of them up to date.
General Knowledge—The Seven Deadly Realities
Throughout recorded history we can detect patterns of human behavior that
transcend culture and time, indicating certain universal features that belong
to us as a species. Some of these traits are quite positive—for instance, our
ability to cooperate with one another in a group—while some of them are
negative and can prove destructive. Most of us have these negative qualities
—Envy, Conformism, Rigidity, Self-obsessiveness, Laziness, Flightiness,
and Passive Aggression—in relatively mild doses. But in a group setting,
there will inevitably be people who have one or more of these qualities to a
high enough degree that they can become very destructive. We shall call
these negative qualities the Seven Deadly Realities.
The problem for us is that people do not like to display these traits
publicly because they are seen as ugly and undesirable. They tend to
disguise them from view, finally revealing their reality through some action
that blindsides and harms us. In our surprise, we tend to react emotionally,
increasing the damage, the effects of which we can carry with us the rest of
our lives. Through study and observation, we must understand the nature of
these Seven Deadly Realities so that we can detect their presence and avoid
triggering them in the first place. Consider the following as essential
knowledge in acquiring social intelligence.
Envy: It is our nature to constantly compare ourselves to others—in
terms of money, looks, coolness, intelligence, popularity, or any number of
categories. If we are upset that someone we know is more successful than
we are, we will naturally experience some envy, but often we will find a
way to minimize it because it is an unpleasant emotion. We tell ourselves
that the success of another person is a matter of luck or came through their
connections, or that it won’t last. But for some people it goes much deeper
than this, usually because of the level of their insecurities. Seething with
envy, the only way to discharge it is to find a way to obstruct or sabotage
the person who elicited the emotion. If they take such action they will never
say it is because of envy, but will find some other, more socially acceptable
excuse. They often won’t even admit their envy to themselves. This makes
it a quality very hard to recognize in people. There are, however, a few
indications you can look for. People who praise you too much or who
become overly friendly in the first stages of knowing you are often envious
and are getting closer in order to hurt you. You should be wary of such
behavior. Also, if you detect unusual levels of insecurity in a person, he or
she will certainly be more prone to envy.
In general, however, envy is very difficult to discern, and the most
prudent course of action is to make sure your own behavior does not
inadvertently trigger it. If you have a gift for a certain skill, you should
make a point of occasionally displaying some weakness in another area,
avoiding the great danger of appearing too perfect, too talented. If you are
dealing with insecure types, you can display great interest in their work and
even turn to them for advice. You must be careful not to boast of any
success, and if necessary, to ascribe it to just good luck on your part. It is
always wise to occasionally reveal your own insecurities, which will
humanize you in other people’s eyes. Self-deprecating humor will work
wonders as well. You must be particularly careful to never make people feel
stupid in your presence. Intelligence is the most sensitive trigger point for
envy. In general, it is by standing out too much that you will spark this ugly
emotion, and so it is best to maintain a nonthreatening exterior and to blend
in well with the group, at least until you are so successful it no longer
matters.
Conformism: When people form groups of any type, a kind of
organizational mind-set inevitably sets in. Although members of the group
might trumpet their tolerance and celebration of people’s differences, the
reality is that those who are markedly different make them feel
uncomfortable and insecure, calling the values of the dominant culture into
question. This culture will have unwritten standards of correctness that shift
with the times we live in. In some environments, physical appearance is
important. But generally, the spirit of correctness runs deeper than that.
Often unconsciously conforming to the spirit of the man or woman on top,
members will share the same values about morals or politics. You can
become aware of this group spirit by observing how much people feel the
need to display certain opinions or ideas that conform to the standards.
There will always be a few within the group who are the overseers of
correctness and who can be quite dangerous.
If you have a rebellious or naturally eccentric streak, as is often the
case with those who are aiming for mastery, you must be careful in
displaying your difference too overtly, particularly in the Apprenticeship
Phase. Let your work subtly demonstrate your individual spirit, but when it
comes to matters of politics, morals, and values, make a show of adhering
to the accepted standards of your environment. Think of the workplace as a
kind of theater in which you are always wearing a mask. (Reserve your
most interesting and colorful thoughts for your friends, and for those whom
you can trust outside work.) Be careful in what you say—it is not worth the
bother of freely expressing your opinions. If you sin against this Deadly
Reality, people will not acknowledge the cause of their disaffection,
because they do not want to think of themselves as conformists. They will
find some other reason to ostracize or sabotage you. Do not give them
material for this kind of attack. Later, as you gain mastery, you will have
ample opportunity to let your individuality shine through and to reveal your
contempt for people’s correctness.
Rigidity: The world has become increasingly complex in many ways,
and whenever we humans face a situation that seems complicated our
response is to resort to a kind of artificial simplicity, to create habits and
routines that give us a sense of control. We prefer what is familiar—ideas,
faces, procedures—because they are comforting. This extends to the group
at large. People follow procedures without really knowing why, simply
because these procedures may have worked in the past, and they become
highly defensive if their ways are brought into question. They become
hooked on a certain idea and they hold on to it, even if that idea has been
proven repeatedly to be wrong. Look at the history of science: whenever a
new idea or way of looking at the world is introduced, despite all of the
proofs behind it, those who are entrenched in the old ways will fight to the
death to preserve them. It is often against human nature, particularly as we
get older, to consider alternative ways of thinking or doing things.
People do not advertise their rigidity. You will only trip up against it if
you try to introduce a new idea or procedure. Some in the group—the
hyper-rigid—will become irritable, even panicky at the thought of any kind
of change. If you press your case with logic and reason, you will tend to
make them even more defensive and resistant. If you are an adventurous,
open-minded type, your very spirit will prove disruptive and upsetting. If
you are not aware of the dangers of butting up against this fear of the new,
you will create all sorts of hidden enemies, who will resort to anything to
conserve the old order. It is useless to fight against people’s rigid ways, or
to argue against their irrational concepts. You will only waste time and
make yourself rigid in the process. The best strategy is to simply accept
rigidity in others, outwardly displaying deference to their need for order. On
your own, however, you must work to maintain your open spirit, letting go
of bad habits and deliberately cultivating new ideas.
Self-obsessiveness: In the work environment, we almost inevitably
think first and foremost of ourselves. The world is a harsh and competitive
place, and we must look after our own interests. Even when we act for the
greater good, we are often unconsciously motivated by the desire to be liked
by others and to have our image enhanced in the process. There is no shame
in this. But because being self-interested does not make us feel or appear
noble, many people go out of their way to disguise their self-interest. Often
those who are the most self-absorbed will surround their actions with a
moral or saintly aura, or will make a show of supporting all of the right
causes. Confused by these appearances, when it is time to ask such people
for assistance, you will often appeal to their sense of gratitude, their
seemingly charitable nature, or their friendly feelings. You are then
frustrated and disappointed when they politely decline to help you, or put
you off long enough that you give up. Of course, they never reveal the real
reason for this behavior—that there is nothing in it for themselves.
Instead of putting yourself in this position, you must understand and
accept this Deadly Reality. When it is time to ask for a favor or help, you
must think first of appealing to people’s self-interest in some way. (You
should apply this to everyone, no matter their level of self-obsessiveness.)
You must look at the world through their eyes, getting a sense of their
needs. You must give them something valuable in exchange for helping you
—a return favor that will save them time, a contact they need, and so on.
Sometimes the chance to look good in doing you a favor or supporting a
cause will suffice, but it is generally better to find something stronger than
that—some concrete benefit they can foresee coming from you in the
future. In general, in your interactions with people, find a way to make the
conversations revolve around them and their interests, all of which will go
far to winning them to your side.
Laziness: We all have the tendency to want to take the quickest,
easiest path to our goals, but we generally manage to control our
impatience; we understand the superior value of getting what we want
through hard work. For some people, however, this inveterate lazy streak is
far too powerful. Discouraged by the thought that it might take months or
years to get somewhere, they are constantly on the lookout for shortcuts.
Their laziness will assume many insidious forms. For example, if you are
not careful and talk too much, they will steal your best ideas and make them
their own, saving themselves all of the mental effort that went into
conceiving them. They will swoop in during the middle of your project and
put their name on it, gaining partial credit for your work. They will engage
you in a “collaboration” in which you do the bulk of the hard work but they
share equally in the rewards.
Your best defense is your prudence. Keep your ideas to yourself, or
conceal enough of the details so that it is not possible to steal them. If you
are doing work for a superior, be prepared for them to take full credit and
leave your name out (this is a part of everyone’s apprenticeship and must be
accepted as such), but do not let this happen with colleagues. Secure your
credit in advance as part of the terms of working together. If people want
you to do work for them, then pass it off as a “collaborative” effort, always
gauge whether such work will add to your skill base, and examine their past
record to measure the intensity of their work ethic. In general, be wary of
people who want to collaborate—they are often trying to find someone who
will do the heavier lifting for them.
Flightiness: We like to make a show of how much our decisions are
based on rational considerations, but the truth is that we are largely
governed by our emotions, which continually color our perceptions. What
this means is that the people around you, constantly under the pull of their
emotions, change their ideas by the day or by the hour, depending on their
mood. You must never assume that what people say or do in a particular
moment is a statement of their permanent desires. Yesterday they were in
love with your idea; today they seem lukewarm. This will confuse you and
if you are not careful, you will waste valuable mental space trying to figure
out their real feelings, their mood of the moment, their fleeting motivations.
It is best to cultivate both distance and a degree of detachment from
other people’s shifting emotions so that you are not caught up in the
process. Focus on their actions, which are generally more consistent, and
not on their words. Do not take so seriously people’s promises or their ardor
in wanting to help you. If they come through, so much the better, but be
prepared for the more frequent change of heart. Rely upon yourself to get
things done and you will not be disappointed.
Passive Aggression: The root cause of all passive aggression is the
human fear of direct confrontation—the emotions that a conflict can churn
up and the loss of control that ensues. And so because of this fear some
people look for indirect means for getting their way, making their attacks
subtle enough so that it is hard to figure out what is going on, while giving
them control of the dynamic. We are all passive-aggressive to some extent.
Procrastinating on a project, showing up late, or making offhand comments
designed to upset people are common forms of low-level passive
aggression. When dealing with this low-level variety in others, you can call
them on their behavior and make them aware of it, which can often work.
Or, if it is truly harmless, simply ignore it. But there are people out there
seething with insecurities who are veritable passive-aggressive warriors and
can literally ruin your life.
Your best defense is to recognize such types before you become
embroiled in a battle, and avoid them like the plague. The most obvious
clues come from their track record—they have a reputation, you hear stories
of past skirmishes, and so on. Take a look at the people around them, such
as assistants—do they act with unusual caution and terror in their presence?
Sometimes you are confused because you suspect sabotage or obstruction,
but they present such a friendly or benign exterior. Discard the exterior and
focus only on their actions and you will have a clearer picture. If they evade
you and delay necessary action on something important to you, or make you
feel guilty and leave you unsure why, or if they act harmfully but make it
seem like an accident, you are most likely under a passive-aggressive
attack. You have one of two options: either get out of their way and leave
their presence, or return the attack with something equally indirect,
signaling in some subtle way that messing with you will come with a price.
This will often discourage them and make them find another victim. At all
cost, avoid entangling yourself emotionally in their dramas and battles.
They are masters at controlling the dynamic, and you will almost always
lose in the end.
Developing social intelligence will not simply help you manage your
relations with other people—acquiring it will also have an immensely
beneficial effect on your ways of thinking and on your creativity in general.
Look at the example of Benjamin Franklin. With people, he cultivated the
ability to home in on the details that made them unique and to connect to
their experience and motivations. He built up a high degree of sensitivity to
the subtleties of human nature, avoiding the common tendency to lump
people together. He made himself uncommonly patient and open-minded in
his dealings with people from many different cultures and backgrounds.
And this social intelligence of his became completely integrated into his
intellectual labors—his sharp eye for detail in scientific work, his fluid
manner of thinking and patient approach to tackling problems, and his
uncanny way of getting into the minds and voices of the various characters
he created in his writing.
Understand: the human brain is an interconnected organ, which is in
turn interconnected with our bodies. Our brains developed in tandem with
our expanding powers as social primates. The refinement of mirror neurons
for the purpose of better communication with people became equally
applied to other forms of reasoning. The ability to think inside objects and
phenomena is an integral part of scientific creativity—from Faraday’s
feeling for electricity to the thought experiments of Einstein.
In general, the greatest Masters in history—Leonardo, Mozart,
Darwin, and others—displayed a fluid, sensitive way of thinking that
developed along with their expanding social intelligence. Those who are
more rigidly intellectual and inward can go far in their fields, but their work
often ends up lacking a creativity, an openness, and a sensitivity to detail
that becomes more pronounced with time. In the end, the ability to think
inside other people is no different from the intuitive feel Masters gain in
relation to their field of study. To develop your intellectual powers at the
expense of the social is to retard your own progress to mastery, and limit the
full range of your creative powers.
STRATEGIES FOR ACQUIRING SOCIAL
INTELLIGENCE
We must, however, acknowledge…that man with all his noble qualities, with sympathy which
feels for the most debased, with benevolence which extends not only to other men but to the
humblest living creature, with his god-like intellect which has penetrated into the movements
and constitution of the solar system—with all these exalted powers—Man still bears in his
bodily frame the indelible stamp of his lowly origin.
—CHARLES DARWIN
In dealing with people, you will often encounter particular problems that
will tend to make you emotional and lock you into the Naïve Perspective.
Such problems include unexpected political battles, superficial judgments
of your character based on appearances, or petty-minded criticisms of your
work. The following four essential strategies, developed by Masters past
and present, will help you to meet these inevitable challenges and maintain
the rational mind-set necessary for social intelligence.
1. Speak through your work
A. In 1846, a twenty-eight-year-old Hungarian doctor named Ignaz
Semmelweis began work as an assistant in the obstetrics department of the
University of Vienna, and almost from the beginning he was a man
obsessed. The great disease that plagued the maternity wards in Europe at
the time was that of childbed fever. At the hospital where young
Semmelweis worked, one in six mothers died of the disease shortly after
giving birth. When their bodies were dissected, doctors would discover the
same whitish pus that smelled horrifically, and an unusual amount of putrid
flesh. Seeing the effects of the disease on almost a daily basis, Semmelweis
could think of nothing else. He would devote his time to solving the riddle
of its origins.
At the time, the most common explanation for the cause of the disease
revolved around the idea that airborne particles, ingested through the lungs,
brought on the fever. But to Semmelweis, this made no sense. The
epidemics of childbed fever did not seem to depend on weather,
atmospheric conditions, or anything in the air. He noted, as did a few others,
that the incidence was much higher among women who had had their
babies delivered by a doctor as opposed to a midwife. Nobody could
explain the reason for such a difference, and few seemed perturbed by this.
After much thinking and studying of the literature on the subject,
Semmelweis came to the startling conclusion that it was the direct, hand-to-
hand contact between doctor and patient that caused the disease—a
revolutionary concept at the time. As he was formulating this theory, an
event occurred that seemed to prove it conclusively: A leading doctor in the
department had been accidently pricked in the finger by a knife while
conducting an autopsy on a woman who had had childbed fever, and the
doctor died within a few days of a massive infection. When they dissected
his body, he had the same white pus and putrid flesh as the woman.
It now seemed clear to Semmelweis that in the autopsy room the
physicians’ hands became infected, and in examining the women and
delivering the babies, they passed the disease into the women’s blood
through various open wounds. The physicians were literally poisoning their
patients with childbed fever. If this was the cause, it would be simple to
solve—doctors would have to wash and disinfect their hands before
handling any patients, a practice no one followed in any hospital at the time.
He instituted this practice in his ward, and the number of mortalities was
instantly halved.
On the brink of perhaps a major discovery in science—the connection
between germs and contagious disease—Semmelweis seemed to be on his
way to an illustrious career. But there was one problem. The head of the
department, Johann Klein, was a most conservative gentleman who wanted
his doctors to adhere to strict medical orthodoxies established by previous
practice. He believed that Semmelweis was an inexperienced doctor turned
radical, who wanted to overturn the establishment and make a name for
himself in the process.
Semmelweis argued with him incessantly over the subject of childbed
fever, and when the young man finally promulgated his theory, Klein
became furious. The implication was that doctors, including Klein himself,
had been murdering their patients, and this was too much to take. (Klein
himself ascribed the lower number of mortalities in Semmelweis’s ward to a
new ventilation system he had installed.) When in 1849 Semmelweis’s
assistantship was nearing its end, Klein refused to renew it, essentially
leaving the young man without a job.
By now, however, Semmelweis had gained several key allies within
the medical department, particularly among the younger set. They urged
him to conduct some controlled experiments to strengthen his case, and
then to write up his findings in a book that would spread his theory
throughout Europe. Semmelweis, however, could not turn his attention
away from the battle with Klein. Day by day his anger rose. Klein’s
adherence to a ridiculous and disproven theory about the fever was
criminal. Such blindness to the truth made his blood boil. How could one
man have such power in his field? Why should Semmelweis have to take so
much of his time to do experiments and write books, when the truth was
already so apparent? He decided instead to give a series of lectures on the
subject, in which he could also express his scorn toward the closed-
mindedness of so many in the profession.
Doctors from all over Europe attended Semmelweis’s lectures.
Although some remained skeptical, he won over more converts to his cause.
His allies at the university pressed him to continue the momentum by doing
more research and by writing a book on his theory. But within a few months
of the lectures, and for reasons no one could understand, Semmelweis
suddenly left town and returned to his native Budapest, where he found the
university and medical position that had eluded him in Vienna. It seemed he
could not endure another moment in the same city as Klein, and required
complete freedom to operate on his own—even though Budapest was
somewhat of a medical backwater at the time. His friends felt completely
betrayed. They had staked their reputations on supporting him, and now he
had left them in the lurch.
In the Budapest hospitals where he now worked, Semmelweis
instituted his disinfection policies with such a rigor and tyrannical intensity
that he cut the mortality rates but alienated almost all of the doctors and
nurses he worked with. More and more people were turning against him. He
had forced upon everyone his novel ideas on disinfection, but without
books or the proper experiments to back them up it seemed that he was
merely promoting himself, or obsessed with some fanciful idea of his own
creation. The vehemence with which he insisted on its truth only called
more attention to the lack of scholarly rigor to back it up. Doctors
speculated about other possible causes for his success in cutting the
incidence of childbed fever.
Finally in 1860, under pressure from colleagues yet again, he decided
to write the book that would explain his theory in full. When he was
finished with it, what should have been a relatively small volume had
ballooned into a 600-page diatribe that was nearly impossible to read. It was
hopelessly repetitive and convoluted. His arguments would turn into
polemics as he enumerated the doctors who had opposed him and who were
therefore murderers. During such passages his writing became almost
apocalyptic.
Now his opponents came out of the woodwork. He had committed
himself to writing but had done such a bad job that they could poke holes
through his arguments, or merely call attention to his violent tone, which
was self-damning enough. His former allies did not rally to his cause. They
had come to hate him. His behavior became increasingly grandiose and
erratic, until his employers at the hospital had to dismiss him. Virtually
penniless and abandoned by almost everyone, he fell ill and died in 1865 at
the age of forty-seven.
B. As a medical student at the University of Padua in Italy in 1602, the
Englishman William Harvey (1578–1657) began to entertain doubts about
the whole conception of the heart and its function as an organ. What he had
been taught in school was based on the theories of the second-century
Greek physician Galen, which stated that some blood was manufactured in
the liver and some in the heart, and was transported by veins and absorbed
by the body, supplying it with nutrition. According to the theory, this blood
flowed ever so slowly from the liver and heart to the various parts of the
body that needed it, but did not flow back—it was merely consumed. What
troubled Harvey was how much blood the body contained. How could it
possibly produce and consume so much liquid?
Over the ensuing years his career prospered, culminating in his
appointment as Royal Physician to King James I. During these years, he
continued to ponder the same questions about blood and the role of the
heart. And by the year 1618 he had come up with a theory: blood flows
through the body not slowly but rapidly, the heart acting as a pump. Blood
is not produced and consumed; instead it circulates continually.
The problem with this theory was that he had no direct means of
verifying it. At the time, to open the heart of a human to study it would
spell instant death. The only means available for research was vivisection of
animals and the dissection of human corpses. Once the heart was opened in
animals, however, it would behave erratically and pump far too rapidly. The
mechanics of the heart were complex, and for Harvey they could only be
deduced through controlled experiments—such as using elaborate
tourniquets on human veins—and could never be observed directly with the
eyes.
After many such controlled experiments Harvey felt certain he was
correct, but he knew he would have to carefully strategize his next step. His
theory was radical. It would overturn many concepts about anatomy that
had been accepted as fact for centuries. He knew that to publish his results
so far would only stir up enmity and create many enemies for himself. And
so, thinking deeply about people’s natural reluctance to accept new ideas,
he decided to do the following: he delayed publishing the results of his
findings, waiting until he had firmed up his theory and amassed more
evidence. In the meantime, he involved his colleagues in further
experiments and dissections, always eliciting their opinions. Increasing
numbers of them were impressed and supported his new theory. Slowly
winning most of them to his side, in 1627 he was appointed to the highest
position within the College of Physicians, virtually ensuring him of
employment for the rest of his life and freeing him from the worry that his
theory would jeopardize his livelihood.
As the court physician, first to James I and then to Charles I who
ascended the throne in 1625, Harvey worked diligently to gain royal favor.
He played the court diplomat, and avoided aligning himself with any
faction or becoming involved in any intrigues. He behaved humbly and
with self-deprecation. He confided his discoveries to the king early on to
gain his trust and support. In the country, there was a young man who had
severely broken ribs on the left side of his chest, leaving a cavity through
which one could see and touch the heart. He brought the young man to the
king’s court and used him to demonstrate to Charles the nature of the heart’s
contractions and expansions, and how the heart worked as a pump for the
blood.
Finally, in 1628 he published the results of his years of work, opening
the book with a very clever dedication to Charles I: “Most serene King! The
animal’s heart is the basis of its life, its chief member, the sun of its
microcosm; on the heart all its activity depends, from the heart all its
liveliness and strength arise. Equally is the King the basis of his kingdom,
the sun of his microcosm, the heart of the state; from him all power arises
and all grace stems.”
The book naturally created a stir, particularly on the Continent, where
Harvey was less known. Opposition primarily came from older physicians
who could not reconcile themselves with a theory that so completely
overturned their idea of anatomy. To the numerous publications that came
out to discredit his ideas, Harvey remained mostly silent. An occasional
attack from eminent physicians would cause him to write personal letters in
which he very politely and yet thoroughly refuted their ideas.
As he had foreseen, with the strength of his position within the medical
profession and the court, and with the great amount of evidence he had
accumulated over the years, which was clearly outlined in his book, his
theory slowly gained acceptance. By the time of Harvey’s death in 1657, his
work had become an accepted part of medical doctrine and practice. As his
friend Thomas Hobbes would write: “[Harvey was] the only man I know,
who, conquering envy, hath established a new doctrine in his life-time.”
The common historical accounts of Semmelweis and Harvey reveal our
tendency to ignore the critical role of social intelligence in all fields,
including the sciences. For instance, most versions of the Semmelweis story
emphasize the tragic shortsightedness of men like Klein who pushed the
noble-minded young Hungarian over the edge. With Harvey, they
emphasize his theoretical brilliance as the singular cause of his success. But
in both cases, social intelligence played a key role. Semmelweis completely
ignored its necessity; such considerations annoyed him; all that mattered
was the truth. But in his zeal, he unnecessarily alienated Klein, who had
faced other disagreements with students before but never to such a degree.
Through constant arguing, Semmelweis had pushed Klein to the point of
having to fire him, and thus lost an important position within the university
from which he could spread his ideas. Consumed with his battle with Klein,
he failed to express his theory in a clear and reasonable form, displaying a
monumental disregard for the importance of persuading others. If he had
merely devoted his time to making his case in writing, he would have saved
far more lives in the long run.
Harvey’s success, on the other hand, was greatly due to his social
agility. He understood that even a scientist must play the courtier. He
involved others in his work, making them emotionally attached to his
theory. He published his results in a thoughtful, well-reasoned, and easy-to-
read book. And then he quietly allowed his book to speak for itself,
knowing that by asserting himself after its publication, he would merely call
attention to the person and not the work. He did not give fuel to the
foolishness of others by engaging in petty battles, and any opposition to his
theories withered away on its own.
Understand: your work is the single greatest means at your disposal for
expressing your social intelligence. By being efficient and detail oriented in
what you do, you demonstrate that you are thinking of the group at large
and advancing its cause. By making what you write or present clear and
easy to follow, you show your care for the audience or public at large. By
involving other people in your projects and gracefully accepting their
feedback, you reveal your comfort with the group dynamic. Work that is
solid also protects you from the political conniving and malevolence of
others—it is hard to argue with the results you produce. If you are
experiencing the pressures of political maneuvering within the group, do
not lose your head and become consumed with all of the pettiness. By
remaining focused and speaking socially through your work, you will both
continue to raise your skill level and stand out among all the others who
make a lot of noise but produce nothing.
2. Craft the appropriate persona
From early on in life, Teresita Fernández (b. 1968) had the feeling that she
was watching the world around her from a distance, like a voyeur. As a
young girl growing up in Miami, Florida, she would observe the adults
around her, eavesdropping on their conversations, trying to decode the
secrets of their strange world. As she got older, she applied her
observational skills to her classmates. In high school, people were expected
to fit into one of the various cliques. She could see clearly the rules and
conventions that went into being a part of these groups, and the kinds of
behavior that were considered correct. She felt alienated from all of these
different cliques, and so she remained on the outside.
She had a similar experience in relation to Miami itself. Although she
had an affinity with the Cuban culture that was part of her own background
as a first generation Cuban-American, she could not identify with the happy
beach lifestyle that prevailed there. There was something more somber and
edgier to her spirit. All of this accentuated her sense of being an outsider, a
floater that did not fit in anywhere. There were other floaters in school, and
they tended to drift into theater or the art scene—places where it was safer
to be unconventional. Teresita had always liked making things with her
hands, and so she began to take art classes. But the art she produced in high
school did not seem to connect to that grittier side of her character. It came
too easily; her work was too glib and superficial; something was lacking.
In 1986, still uncertain of her direction in life, she entered Florida
International University, in Miami. Following her high school inclinations,
she took a sculpture class. But working in clay, with its softness and ease of
manipulation, gave her the same feeling she’d had in high school of making
things that were merely artificial and pretty. Then one day, spending time in
the sculpture building, she noticed some artists working in metal, crafting
large-scale pieces. These sheets of steel had a visceral effect upon her
unlike any other artwork she had seen, and she felt in some way that this
was the material that had been meant for her all along. It was gray and
heavy and resistant, requiring great effort to shape it. The properties of steel
corresponded to the sense of resiliency and power that she had always felt
inside herself, despite her petite size, and that she had always wanted to
express.
And so she began to apply herself feverishly to her newfound medium.
To work in metal required firing up the foundry and using acetylene
torches. The tropical heat of Miami could make such labor intensely
uncomfortable during the daytime hours, so she began to work on her
sculptures exclusively at night. This led to an unusual schedule—starting at
nine, working until two or three in the morning, then sleeping through a
good part of the next day. Besides the cooler air, working at night had other
advantages—with few people around, the studio was quite peaceful and
conducive to serious work. She could focus deeply. She could experiment
with her pieces, make mistakes that no one would see. She could be fearless
and take chances.
Slowly Fernández began to take command of the medium, and in
making her sculptures, she felt like she was forging and transforming
herself. She was interested in creating pieces that were large and
impressive, but to make such work she had to devise her own method. She
would design the pieces on paper, but would work on them in smaller
sections that she could manage by herself. Then, in the quiet of her studio,
she would assemble the sculptures. Soon her pieces began to be displayed
within the department and on campus.
Almost everyone was quite impressed by her work. Standing in the
bright Miami sunshine, her enormous steel sculptures conveyed that sense
of power she had always felt within her. But there was another response to
her pieces that surprised her. Because few people had seen her at work, it
appeared that these sculptures flowed out of her effortlessly—as if she had
some unusual gift. This drew attention to her personality. Sculpture was a
largely male domain that tended to attract the most macho male artists. As
she was one of the few female artists working in heavy steel, people
naturally projected onto her all kinds of preconceptions and fantasies. The
discrepancy between her slight, feminine appearance and her large-scale,
imposing works was quite glaring, and people would wonder how she
managed to make such work, and who she really was. Intrigued by her
character, and also by the way her beautifully crafted sculptures seemed to
appear out of nowhere, they saw her as alluringly mysterious, a mix of hard
and soft qualities, an anomaly, a magician with metal.
With all of this scrutiny, Fernández suddenly became aware that she
was no longer a voyeur, watching others from a distance, but was at the
center of attention. The art world felt right to her. For the first time in her
life she had the sensation of fitting in, and she wanted to hold on to this
interest that others had in her work. Now that she was thrust into a more
public position, it would be natural for her to want to talk about herself and
her experiences, but she intuited that it would be a mistake to deflate the
powerful effect her work had on others by suddenly revealing to everyone
how many hours she had applied herself to these sculptures, and how they
were really the product of intense labor and discipline. Sometimes, she
reasoned, what you do not reveal to people is all the more eloquent and
powerful. She decided to go along with the image that others had of her and
her work. She would create an air of mystery around her, making sure not to
talk about her process, keeping details of her life hidden, and allowing
people to project onto her their own fantasies.
As she progressed in her career, however, something about the persona
she had created in her university years no longer felt appropriate. She noted
an element in her public personality that could play against her—if she
were not careful, people would judge her based on her physical appearance
as an attractive young woman. They would not see her as a serious artist.
Her elusiveness might seem like a cover for a lack of intelligence, as if she
were merely feeling her way through things, and not on a par with the
heavy-hitting intellectuals in the field. It was a prejudice female artists had
to deal with. Any hint of being wishy-washy or inarticulate when it came to
talking about her work carried the danger of feeding the preconception that
she was frivolous, merely dabbling in the arts. And so she slowly developed
a new style that suited her well—she would be assertive and speak with
authority about the content of her work, while still enveloping her work
process in mystery. She was not weak or vulnerable, but in clear command
of the subject. If male artists needed to seem serious and articulate, as a
woman she would have to appear even more so. Her assertive tone was
always dignified and respectful, but she made it clear she was no
lightweight.
Over the years, as Teresita Fernández became a world-renowned
conceptual artist working in all types of materials, she continued to play
with her appearance and make it fit her changing circumstances. The
stereotype for artists is that they are disorganized and only interested in
what is happening in the art world. She would play against these
expectations. She transformed herself into an eloquent lecturer, exposing
her work and ideas to the public at large. Audiences would ponder and be
intrigued by the discrepancy between her pleasant, composed surface and
the complex, challenging content of her discourse. She became versed in
many fields outside art, combining these interests in her work, and in the
process exposed herself to a wide range of people outside the art world. She
taught herself to mingle equally well with the workers mining the graphite
for her pieces as with gallery dealers—a kind of courtier flexibility that
made her life as an artist much easier and made it impossible for her to be
typecast. In essence, her public persona became another form of art—a
material she could cast and transform according to her needs and desires.
It is not generally acknowledged or discussed, but the personality we
project to the world plays a substantial role in our success and in our
ascension to mastery. Look at the case of Teresita Fernández. If she had
merely kept to herself and focused exclusively on her work, she would have
found herself defined by others in a way that would have hindered her
progress. If, after her initial success, she had boasted about all the hours of
practice that went into training herself in metalwork, people would have
seen her as a mere laborer and craftsman. They would have inevitably
pegged her as the female artist who was using metal as a gimmick to
promote herself and get attention. They would have found weaknesses in
her character to exploit. The public arena, in art or any endeavor, can be
ruthless that way. Able to look at herself and at the art world with a level of
detachment, Fernández intuited the power she could possess by being
conscious of her persona and taking control of the appearance dynamic.
Understand: people will tend to judge you based on your outward
appearance. If you are not careful and simply assume that it is best to be
yourself, they will begin to ascribe to you all kinds of qualities that have
little to do with who you are but correspond to what they want to see. All of
this can confuse you, make you feel insecure, and consume your attention.
Internalizing their judgments, you will find it hard to focus on your work.
Your only protection is to turn this dynamic around by consciously molding
these appearances, creating the image that suits you, and controlling
people’s judgments. At times you will find it appropriate to stand back and
create some mystery around you, heightening your presence. At other times
you will want to be more direct and impose a more specific appearance. In
general, you never settle on one image or give people the power to
completely figure you out. You are always one step ahead of the public.
You must see the creation of a persona as a key element in social
intelligence, not something evil or demonic. We all wear masks in the social
arena, playing different roles to suit the different environments we pass
through. You are simply becoming more conscious of the process. Think of
it as theater. By creating a persona that is mysterious, intriguing, and
masterful, you are playing to the public, giving them something compelling
and pleasurable to witness. You are allowing them to project their fantasies
onto you, or directing their attention to other theatrical qualities. In your
private life, you can let the mask fall. In this diverse, multicultural world, it
is best that you learn how to mingle and blend into all types of
environments, giving yourself maximum flexibility. You must take pleasure
in creating these personas—it will make you a better performer on the
public stage.
3. See yourself as others see you
Growing up with autism, Temple Grandin (see chapter 1, here, for more on
this) had much to overcome in life, but by the end of high school she had
managed to transform herself—through keen desire and discipline—into a
gifted student with a promising future in the sciences. She understood that
her greatest weakness was in the social arena. With animals, she had almost
telepathic powers to read their moods and desires, but with humans it was
the opposite. People were too tricky for her; they often seemed to
communicate with one another through subtle, nonverbal cues—for
instance, falling into patterns of laughter in a group, according to some
interpersonal rhythm she could not fathom. She felt as if she were an alien,
watching these strange creatures interact.
It seemed to her that there was nothing she could do about her
awkwardness with people. What she could control, however, was her own
work. She decided she would make herself so efficient in whatever job she
had that her social handicap would not matter. But after graduating college
with a degree in animal behavior and entering the work world as a
consultant in the design of feedlots and cattle handling facilities, she
realized, through a series of mistakes on her part, that this was completely
unrealistic.
On one occasion, Grandin had been hired by the manager of a plant to
improve its overall design. She did an excellent job, but soon she began to
notice that the machinery was constantly breaking down, as if it were the
fault of her design. She knew that the malfunctioning could not be because
of any flaws in her work, and with further investigation she discovered that
the machinery had problems only when a certain man was working in the
room. The only possible conclusion was that he was sabotaging the
equipment to make her look bad. This made no sense to her—why would he
deliberately work against the interests of the company that employed him?
This was not a design problem she could solve intellectually. She simply
had to give up and leave the job.
On another occasion, a plant engineer had hired her to fix a particular
problem, but after a few weeks on the job she noticed that there were other
parts of the factory that were very poorly designed and clearly dangerous.
She wrote to the president of the company to point this out. Her tone in the
letter was a bit brusque, but she was annoyed that people could be so blind
to such design issues. A few days later she was fired. Although no
explanation was given, it was clear that her letter to the president must have
been the cause.
As she mulled over these incidents, and other similar ones that had
marred her career, she felt that the source of the problem had to be herself.
She had known for years that she often did things that rubbed people the
wrong way, and that they avoided her for that reason. In the past she had
tried to go about her life ignoring this painful reality, but now her social
deficiencies were threatening her ability to make a living.
Ever since she was a child, Grandin had the peculiar ability to see
herself from the outside, as if she were looking at another person. It was
more of a sensation that would come and go, but as an adult she realized
she could use this gift for practical effect, by looking at her past mistakes as
if watching another person in action.
For instance, in the case of the man who had sabotaged the machinery,
she could clearly recall how she had barely interacted with him and the
other engineers, and how she had made a point of doing everything herself.
She could see in her mind the meetings in which she had presented her
design ideas with rigorous logic and not opened them up for discussion. In
the case of the letter to the president, she could recall how she had bluntly
criticized people in front of their peers and had made no attempt to interact
with the man who had hired her. Visualizing these moments with such
clarity, she could finally understand the problem—she was making her
coworkers feel insecure, useless, and inferior. She had injured their male
egos and had paid a price.
Her realization of what had gone wrong did not stem from empathy as
it might have for other people—it was an intellectual exercise, like solving
a puzzle or a design problem. But because her emotions were not so deeply
involved, it was easier to go through the process and make the necessary
corrections. In the future, she would discuss her ideas with engineers,
involve them as much as possible in her work, and never directly criticize
people for anything. She would practice this in every subsequent job until it
became second nature.
Slowly, developing social intelligence in her own way, Temple ironed
out much of her awkwardness and her career prospered. In the 1990s, as she
grew famous, she was increasingly invited to give talks—initially about her
experiences as a professional who had overcome autism, and later as an
expert on animal behavior.
In giving these talks, she had imagined that they had gone quite well.
They were full of information and appropriate slides to illustrate her ideas.
But after a few such lectures she was handed the evaluations from the
audience, and what she read was shocking. People complained that she
made no eye contact, read her talk mechanically from her notes, and did not
engage with the audience, to the point of rudeness. The audience had the
impression that she was simply repeating the same talk over and over, with
the same slides, as if she were a machine.
Strangely enough, none of this bothered Temple. In fact, the idea of
these evaluations excited her. They gave her a clear and realistic picture of
herself as others saw her, and that is all she ever needed for self-correction.
She pursued this process with great zeal, determined to transform herself
into a skilled lecturer. As enough evaluations came in, she pored over them,
looking for patterns and criticisms that made sense. Working from this
feedback, she taught herself to mix in anecdotes and even jokes, and to
make her slides not so logical and tight. She shortened the length of her
talks, trained herself to speak without notes, and made sure to take as many
questions as the audience wanted to ask at the end.
For those who had seen her initial efforts and then attended her
lectures years later, it was hard to believe she was the same person. She was
now an entertaining and engaging speaker, one who could hold the attention
of an audience better than most. They could not imagine how this had come
about, which made her transformation seem all the more miraculous.
Almost all of us have social flaws of some sort, ranging from the relatively
harmless to those that can get us in trouble. Perhaps it could be that we talk
too much, or are too honest in our criticisms of people, or take offense too
easily when others do not respond positively to our ideas. If we repeat
instances of such behavior often enough, we tend to offend people without
ever really knowing why. The reason for this is twofold: first, we are quick
to discern the mistakes and defects of others, but when it comes to
ourselves we are generally too emotional and insecure to look squarely at
our own. Second, people rarely tell us the truth about what it is that we do
wrong. They are afraid to cause conflict or to be viewed as mean-spirited.
And so it becomes very difficult for us to perceive our flaws, let alone
correct them.
We sometimes have the experience of doing work that we consider to
be quite brilliant, and then are rather shocked when we receive feedback
from others who do not see it the same way at all. In such moments we are
made aware of the discrepancy between our emotional and subjective
relationship to our own work, and the response of others who view it with
complete detachment, capable of pointing out flaws we could never see.
The same discrepancy, however, exists on the social level. People see our
behavior from the outside, and their view of us is never what we imagine it
to be. To have the power to see ourselves through the eyes of others would
be of immense benefit to our social intelligence. We could begin to correct
the flaws that offend, to see the role that we play in creating any kind of
negative dynamic, and to have a more realistic assessment of who we are.
To see ourselves objectively, we must follow the example of Temple
Grandin. We can begin this process by looking at negative events in our
past—people sabotaging our work, bosses firing us for no logical reason,
nasty personal battles with colleagues. It is best to start with events that are
at least several months old, and thus not so emotionally charged. In
dissecting these occurrences, we must focus on what we did that either
triggered or worsened the dynamic. In looking at several such incidents, we
might begin to see a pattern that indicates a particular flaw in our character.
Seeing these events from the perspective of the other people involved will
loosen the lock our emotions have on our self-image, and help us
understand the role we play in our own mistakes. We can also elicit
opinions from those we trust about our behavior, making certain to first
reassure them that we want their criticisms. Slowly, in this way, we can
develop increasing self-detachment, which will yield us the other half of
social intelligence—the ability to see ourselves as we really are.
4. Suffer fools gladly
In 1775, the twenty-six-year-old German poet and novelist Johann
Wolfgang Goethe (later von Goethe) was invited to spend some time at the
court of Weimar by its eighteen-year-old Duke Karl August. The duke’s
family had been trying to transform the isolated and less renowned duchy of
Weimar into a literary center, and the addition of Goethe to their court
would be a great coup. Shortly after his arrival, the duke offered him a
prominent position in his cabinet and the role of personal adviser, and so
Goethe decided to stay. The poet saw this as a way to broaden his
experience in the world and perhaps apply some enlightened ideas to the
government of Weimar.
Goethe came from a solid middle-class background, and had never
really spent much time around nobility. Now, as a prized member of the
duke’s court, he was to have his apprenticeship in aristocratic manners.
After only a few short months, however, he found court life quite
unbearable. The lives of the courtiers revolved around rituals of card games,
shooting parties, and the exchanging of endless bits of gossip. A passing
remark by Herr X, or the failure of Frau Y to show up at a soirée, would be
blown up into something of great importance, and courtiers would strain to
interpret the meaning of it. After attending the theater they would chat
endlessly about who had shown up accompanied by whom, or dissect the
look of the new actress on the scene, but they would never discuss the play
itself.
In conversation, if Goethe dared to discuss some reform he was
considering, suddenly a courtier would get all up in arms about what this
might mean for a particular minister, and how it could jeopardize his
position within the court, and Goethe’s idea would get lost in the ensuing
heated dialog. Even though he was the author of the most famous novel of
the day, The Sorrows of Young Werther, nobody seemed particularly
interested in his opinions. They found it more interesting to tell the
celebrated novelist their own ideas and to see his reaction. In the end, their
interests seemed constricted to the claustrophobic court and its intrigues.
Goethe felt trapped—he had accepted a position with the duke and
took it most seriously, but he found it hard to tolerate the social life to
which he was now condemned. As a confirmed realist in life, however, he
found it useless to complain about what he could not change. And so,
accepting his fellow courtiers as his companions for the next few years,
Goethe devised a strategy, making a virtue out of necessity: He would talk
very little, rarely venturing an opinion on anything. He would get his
interlocutors to go on and on and about this or that subject. He would wear
a pleasant mask as he listened, but inwardly he would observe them as if
they were figures in a stage play. They would reveal to him their secrets,
their petty dramas, and their inane ideas, and all the while he would smile
and always take their side.
What the courtiers did not realize was that they were supplying him
with endless material—for characters, bits of dialogue, and stories of folly
that would fill the plays and novels he was to write in the future. In this way
he transformed his social frustrations into a most productive and pleasant
game.
The great Austrian-American film director Josef von Sternberg (1894–
1969) had risen from studio errand boy to become one of the most
successful directors in Hollywood during the 1920s and ’30s. He developed
along the way a particular philosophy that would serve him well throughout
his directorial career, which would last into the 1950s: all that mattered was
the final product. His role was to get everyone on the same page and guide
the production according to the vision he had, employing whatever means
necessary to get the results he wanted. And the greatest impediment to
realizing his vision came inevitably from the actors. They thought first and
foremost of their careers. The film as a whole mattered less than the
attention they received for their part. This would make them try to steal the
limelight, and in the process they would alter the quality of the film. With
such actors, von Sternberg would have to find a way to trick or beguile
them into doing his bidding.
In 1930, von Sternberg was invited to Berlin to direct what would be
his most famous film, The Blue Angel, which would feature the world-
renowned actor Emil Jannings. In looking for the female lead for the film,
von Sternberg discovered a relatively unknown German actress named
Marlene Dietrich, whom he would go on to direct in seven feature films,
singlehandedly transforming her into a star. Von Sternberg had worked with
Jannings before and knew that the actor was an impossibly foolish person.
Jannings did everything he could to disrupt the flow of the production. He
took as a personal affront any attempt by the director to direct him. His
whole method was to goad the director into useless battles and wear him
down until he relented and let Jannings do as he wished.
Von Sternberg was prepared for all of this and went to war in his own
way. He steeled himself against Jannings’s childish games. Jannings
demanded that the director show up every morning in his dressing room to
reassure the actor of his undying love and admiration for his work—von
Sternberg did this without complaint. He asked that the director take him to
lunch every day and listen to his ideas about the film—von Sternberg
indulged him in this, listening patiently to Jannings’s horrible suggestions.
If von Sternberg showed attention to any other actor, Jannings would throw
a jealous fit, and von Sternberg would have to act the role of the contrite
spouse. Letting him have his way on these petty matters, he took much of
the bite out of Jannings’s strategy. On the set, he would not become
entangled in any battles. But since time was of the essence, he would
inevitably have to trick the actor into doing what he wanted.
When for some unknown reason Jannings refused to pass through a
doorway and make his entrance into a scene, von Sternberg set up the
hottest light available to boil the back of his neck every time Jannings stood
there, forcing him to pass through. When Jannings declaimed his first scene
in the most ridiculously elevated German, von Sternberg congratulated him
for his fine tone and said he would be the only person in the film to talk like
that, which would make him stand out and look bad, but so be it. Jannings
quickly dropped the haughty accent. Whenever he went into a pout and
remained in his room, von Sternberg would get the word passed to him that
the director was lavishing attention on Marlene Dietrich, which would
promptly make the jealous actor hurry to the set to compete for attention.
Scene by scene, von Sternberg maneuvered him into the position he desired,
managing to extract out of Jannings perhaps the greatest performance of his
career.
As previously discussed in chapter 2 (here), Daniel Everett and his family
moved to the heart of the Amazon in 1977, to live among people known as
the Pirahã. Everett and his wife were missionaries, and their task was to
learn the Pirahã language—which was then considered the hardest in the
world to decipher—and to translate the Bible into their indigenous tongue.
Slowly, Everett made progress, using the various devices he had been
taught in his training in linguistics.
He had studied in depth the works of the great MIT linguist Noam
Chomsky, who advocated the idea that all languages are essentially related
because grammar itself is hardwired into the human brain, and is part of our
genetic code. This would mean that by their nature all languages share the
same features. Convinced that Chomsky was correct, Everett worked hard
to find these universal features in Pirahã. Over the years of studying it,
however, he began to find many exceptions to Chomsky’s theory, and this
troubled him.
After much thought, Everett came to the conclusion that the Pirahã
language reflected many peculiarities of their life in the jungle. He
determined, for instance, that their culture placed a supreme value on
“immediacy of experience”—what was not before their eyes did not exist,
and therefore there were almost no words or concepts for things outside
immediate experience. In elaborating this concept, he theorized that the
basic features of all languages are not simply genetic in origin and
universal, but that each language has elements that reflect the uniqueness of
its culture. Culture plays a larger role than we might imagine in how we
think and communicate.
In 2005 he finally felt ready to make all of this public, and had an
article published in an anthropology journal that expressed these
revolutionary ideas. He expected that his findings might stir up some
animated discussion, but he was not prepared at all for what would ensue.
People at MIT (linguists and graduate students) associated with
Chomsky began to hound Everett. When he gave a talk at an important
symposium at the University of Cambridge about his findings, some of
these linguists flew over to attend it. They peppered him with questions
meant to poke holes in his ideas and publicly embarrass him. Not ready for
this, Everett fumbled and did not handle it well. This continue with
subsequent lectures. They zeroed in on any kind of inconsistency in his talk
or his writings, and used these inconsistencies to discredit his overall idea.
Some of their attacks on him became personal—they publicly called him a
charlatan, and questioned his motives. Even Chomsky himself implied that
Everett was out for fame and money.
When Everett published his first book, Don’t Sleep, There are Snakes,
some of these linguists wrote letters to critics who were going to review it,
trying to dissuade them from even discussing his material—it was too far
below academic standards, they claimed. They went so far as to put
pressure on National Public Radio, which was about to do a large segment
on Everett. The show was canceled.
At first Everett could not help but become emotional. What his
detractors were bringing up in their arguments did not discredit his theory,
but merely revealed some possible weak points. They seemed less
interested in the truth and more concerned with making him look bad.
Quickly, however, he moved past this emotional stage and began to use
these attacks for his own purpose—they forced him to make sure everything
he wrote was airtight; they made him rethink and strengthen his arguments.
He could hear their possible criticisms in his head, and he addressed them
one by one in his subsequent writings. This made him a better writer and
thinker, and the controversy they stirred up only increased the sales of Don’t
Sleep, There are Snakes, winning many converts to his argument in the
process. In the end, he came to welcome the attacks of his enemies for how
much they had improved his work and toughened him up.
In the course of your life you will be continually encountering fools. There
are simply too many to avoid. We can classify people as fools by the
following rubric: when it comes to practical life, what should matter is
getting long-term results, and getting the work done in as efficient and
creative a manner as possible. That should be the supreme value that guides
people’s actions. But fools carry with them a different scale of values. They
place more importance on short-term matters—grabbing immediate money,
getting attention from the public or media, and looking good. They are
ruled by their ego and insecurities. They tend to enjoy drama and political
intrigue for their own sake. When they criticize, they always emphasize
matters that are irrelevant to the overall picture or argument. They are more
interested in their career and position than in the truth. You can distinguish
them by how little they get done, or by how hard they make it for others to
get results. They lack a certain common sense, getting worked up about
things that are not really important while ignoring problems that will spell
doom in the long term.
The natural tendency with fools is to lower yourself to their level.
They annoy you, get under your skin, and draw you into a battle. In the
process, you feel petty and confused. You lose a sense of what is really
important. You can’t win an argument or get them to see your side or
change their behavior, because rationality and results don’t matter to them.
You simply waste valuable time and emotional energy.
In dealing with fools you must adopt the following philosophy: they
are simply a part of life, like rocks or furniture. All of us have foolish sides,
moments in which we lose our heads and think more of our ego or short-
term goals. It is human nature. Seeing this foolishness within you, you can
then accept it in others. This will allow you to smile at their antics, to
tolerate their presence as you would a silly child, and to avoid the madness
of trying to change them. It is all part of the human comedy, and it is
nothing to get upset about or lose sleep over. This attitude—“Suffer Fools
Gladly”—should be forged in your Apprenticeship Phase, during which you
are almost certainly going to encounter this type. If they are causing you
trouble, you must neutralize the harm they do by keeping a steady eye on
your goals and what is important, and ignoring them if you can. The height
of wisdom, however, is to take this even further and to actually exploit their
foolishness—using them for material for your work, as examples of things
to avoid, or by looking for ways to turn their actions to your advantage. In
this way, their foolishness plays into your hands, helping you achieve the
kind of practical results they seem to disdain.
REVERSAL
While studying for his PhD at Harvard University in Computer Science,
Paul Graham (b. 1964) discovered something about himself: he had a
profound distaste for any kind of politicking or social maneuvering. (For
more on Graham, see here.) He was not good at it, and it irritated him to no
end to be dragged into situations in which others behaved manipulatively.
His brief encounter with politics within the department convinced him he
was not cut out for a life in academia. This lesson became strengthened a
few years later when he went to work for a software company. Almost
everything they did was irrational—firing the original tech people, making
a salesperson the head of the company, creating too long a time between
releases of new products. All of these bad choices came about because in a
group, politics and ego often trump sound decision making.
Unable to tolerate this, he came up with his own solution: as much as
possible, he would avoid any environment that involved politicking. This
meant sticking to doing startups on the smallest scale—a constraint that
made him disciplined and creative. Later, when he founded Y Combinator, a
kind of apprenticeship system for tech startups, he could not prevent the
company from growing in size—it was too successful. His solution was
twofold: One, he had his wife and partner in the company, Jessica
Livingston, handle all of the tricky social situations, since she possessed a
high level of social intelligence. Two, he maintained a very loose, non-
bureaucratic structure to the company.
If, like Graham, you simply do not have the patience that is required
for managing and mastering the more subtle and manipulative sides of
human nature, then your best answer is to keep yourself away from those
situations as best as possible. This will rule out working in groups larger
than a handful of people—above a certain number, political considerations
inevitably rise to the surface. This means working for yourself or on very
small startups.
Even still, it is generally wise to try to gain the rudiments of social
intelligence—to be able to read and recognize the sharks, and to charm and
disarm difficult people. The reason is that no matter how hard you might try
to avoid situations that call for such knowledge, the world is one large
teeming court of intrigue, and it will inevitably pull you in. Your conscious
attempt to opt out of the system will retard your apprenticeship in social
intelligence and can make you vulnerable to the worst forms of naïveté,
with all of the disasters that are likely to ensue.
It is a great folly to hope that other men will harmonize with us; I have never hoped this. I
have always regarded each man as an independent individual, whom I endeavored to
understand with all his peculiarities, but from whom I desired no further sympathy. In this way
have I been enabled to converse with every man, and thus alone is produced the knowledge of
various characters and the dexterity necessary for the conduct of life.
—JOHANN WOLFGANG VON GOETHE
V
AWAKEN THE
DIMENSIONAL MIND:
THE CREATIVE-ACTIVE
As you accumulate more skills and internalize the rules that govern your
field, your mind will want to become more active, seeking to use this
knowledge in ways that are more suited to your inclinations. What will
impede this natural creative dynamic from flourishing is not a lack of talent,
but your attitude. Feeling anxious and insecure, you will tend to turn
conservative with your knowledge, preferring to fit into the group and
sticking to the procedures you have learned. Instead, you must force
yourself in the opposite direction. As you emerge from your apprenticeship,
you must become increasingly bold. Instead of feeling complacent about
what you know, you must expand your knowledge to related fields, giving
your mind fuel to make new associations between different ideas. You must
experiment and look at problems from all possible angles. As your thinking
grows more fluid your mind will become increasingly dimensional, seeing
more and more aspects of reality. In the end, you will turn against the very
rules you have internalized, shaping and reforming them to suit your spirit.
Such originality will bring you to the heights of power.
THE SECOND TRANSFORMATION
From the moment he was born, Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart (1756–91) was
surrounded by music. His father, Leopold, was a violinist and composer in
the court of Salzburg, Austria, as well as a music instructor. All during the
day, Wolfgang would hear Leopold and his students practicing in the house.
In 1759, his seven-year-old sister Maria Anna began taking piano lessons
from their father. She showed great promise and practiced at all hours.
Wolfgang, enchanted by the simple melodies that she played, began to hum
along to the music; he would sometimes sit at the family’s harpsichord and
try to imitate what his sister had played. Leopold could soon detect
something unusual in his son. For a three-year-old, the child had a
remarkable memory for melody and an impeccable sense of rhythm, all
without having had any instruction.
Although he had never attempted to teach someone so young, Leopold
decided to begin teaching piano to Wolfgang when he turned four, and after
only a few sessions he realized the boy had other interesting qualities.
Wolfgang listened more deeply than other students, his mind and body
completely absorbed in the music. With such intensity of focus, he learned
more quickly than other children. Once when he was five years old, he stole
a rather complicated exercise meant for Maria Anna, and within thirty
minutes he could play it with ease. He had heard Maria Anna practice the
piece, and remembering it vividly, the moment he saw the notes on the page
he could rapidly reproduce the music.
This remarkable focus had its roots in something that Leopold saw
almost from the beginning—the boy had an intense love of music itself. His
eyes would light up with excitement the moment Leopold laid out a new
challenging piece for him to conquer. If the piece was new and hard to
figure out, he would attack it day and night with such tenacity that it would
soon become part of his repertoire. At night, his parents would have to force
him to stop practicing and send him to bed. This love of practice only
seemed to increase with the years. When it came time to play with other
children, he would find a way to transform a simple game into something
that involved music. His favorite game, however, was to take some piece he
had been playing and improvise on it, giving it a personal flair that was
quite charming and inventive.
From his earliest years, Wolfgang was exceptionally emotional and
sensitive. His moods would swing wildly—he would be petulant one
moment, highly affectionate the next. He had a perpetually anxious look on
his face that would only disappear when he sat down at the piano; then he
was in his element, losing himself in the music.
One day in 1762, as Leopold Mozart heard his two children playing a
piece for two pianos, an idea came to him. His daughter Maria Anna was a
very talented piano player in her own right, and Wolfgang was a veritable
marvel. Together, they were like precious toys. They had a natural
charisma, and Wolfgang had a showman’s flair. As a mere court musician,
Leopold’s income was rather limited, but he could see the potential for
making a fortune through his children. And so, thinking this through, he
decided to take his family on a grand tour of the capitals of Europe, playing
before royal courts and the public and charging money for the
entertainment. To add to the spectacle, he dressed the children up—Maria
Anna as a princess, and Wolfgang as a court minister, complete with wig,
elaborate waistcoat, and a sword dangling from his belt.
They began in Vienna, where the children charmed the Austrian
emperor and empress. They then spent months in Paris, where they played
for the royal court and Wolfgang bounced on the knee of the delighted King
Louis XV. They continued to London where they ended up staying for over
a year, playing before all kinds of large crowds. And while the sight of the
two children in their costumes charmed audiences enough, Wolfgang’s
playing astounded them. He had developed numerous parlor tricks, stage-
managed by his father. He would play a minuet on a keyboard that was
hidden from his view by a cloth, using only one finger. He would deftly
sight-read the latest composition by a famous composer. He would play his
own compositions—it was impressive to hear a sonata composed by a
seven-year-old, no matter how simple it was. Most marvelous of all,
Wolfgang could play at an incredible speed, his tiny fingers flying over the
keyboard.
As the tour continued, an amusing pattern began to develop. The
family would be invited to do some sightseeing, tour the countryside, or
attend a soirée, while Wolfgang would find some excuse to stay behind—a
feigned illness or complaints of exhaustion—and would devote his time
instead to music. His favorite ploy in this vein was to attach himself to the
most illustrious composers in the particular court they were visiting. In
London, for instance, he managed to charm the great composer Johann
Christian Bach, son of Johann Sebastian Bach. When the family was invited
out on a jaunt, he declined to join them with the perfect excuse—he had
already engaged Bach to give him lessons in composition.
The education he received in this fashion, from all of the composers he
met, went far beyond anything any child could hope to receive. Although
some argued that it was a waste of childhood for someone so young to be so
single-minded, Wolfgang felt such an ardent love for music and the constant
challenges it presented that in the end he derived much greater pleasure
from his obsession than any amusement or game could provide.
The tour was a great financial success, but it nearly ended in tragedy.
In Holland in 1766, as the family was beginning its return journey,
Wolfgang fell ill with a powerful fever. Losing weight rapidly, he drifted in
and out of consciousness, and at one point appeared near death. But
miraculously, the fever passed, and over the course of several months he
slowly recovered. The experience, however, altered him. From that moment
on, he had a constant feeling of melancholy and a foreboding that he would
die young.
The Mozart family had come now to depend on the money that the
children had generated through the tour, but as the years went by the
invitations began to dry up. The novelty had worn off, and the children no
longer seemed so young and precious. Desperate to generate money,
Leopold came up with a different scheme. His son was turning into a
serious composer, with the ability to compose in different genres. What was
needed was to secure for him a stable position as a court composer, and
attract commissions for concertos and symphonies. With this goal in mind,
in 1770 father and son embarked on series of tours of Italy, then the center
of all things musical in Europe.
The trip went well. Wolfgang performed his magic on the piano before
all of the major courts in Italy. He gained acclaim for his symphonies and
concert pieces—they were quite impressive for a teenager. He mingled yet
again with the most celebrated composers of his time, intensifying the
musical knowledge he had gained on his previous tours. In addition, he
rediscovered his greatest passion in music—the opera. As a child he had
always had the feeling that he was destined to compose great operas. In
Italy he saw the finest productions and realized the source of his fascination
—it was the drama translated into pure music, the nearly limitless potential
of the human voice to express the full range of emotion, and the overall
spectacle. He had an almost primal attraction to any kind of theater. But
despite all of the attention and inspiration he received, after nearly three
years of visiting the various courts in Italy, he was not offered a position or
a commission that was worthy of his talents. And so, in 1773, father and
son returned to Salzburg.
After some delicate negotiation with the archbishop of Salzburg,
Leopold finally managed to secure for his son a relatively lucrative position
as court musician and composer. And by all appearances the arrangement
was good: not having to worry about money, Wolfgang would have endless
time to work on composing. But almost from the beginning Wolfgang felt
uncomfortable and restless. He had spent almost half of his youth traveling
throughout Europe, mingling with the leading minds in music, and listening
to the most renowned orchestras, and now he was relegated to life in
provincial Salzburg, isolated from the European centers of music, in a city
that had no theater or opera tradition.
More troubling, however, was the mounting frustration he felt as a
composer. For as long as he could remember, his head was continuously
filled with music, but it was always the music of other people. He knew that
his own pieces were simply clever imitations and adaptations of other
composers. He had been like a young plant, passively absorbing nutrients
from the environment in the form of the different styles he had learned and
mastered. But he could feel stirring from deep within something more
active, the desire to express his own music and to stop imitating. The soil
was now rich enough. As an adolescent, he was assailed by all kinds of
conflicting and powerful emotions—elation, depression, erotic desires. His
great desire was to transpose these feelings into his work.
Almost without being aware of it, he began to experiment. He wrote a
series of slow movements for various string quartets that were long and
drawn out with strange mixes of moods, full of anxiety that would rise to
great crescendos. When he showed these pieces to his father, Leopold was
horrified. Their income depended on Wolfgang supplying the court with the
kind of pleasant melodies that would delight people and make them smile.
If they or the archbishop heard these new compositions, they would think
Wolfgang had gone insane. Besides, the pieces were too complicated for the
court musicians of Salzburg to perform. He begged his son to stop
indulging in such strange music, or at least to wait until he had a position
somewhere else.
Wolfgang acquiesced, but as time went on he grew increasingly
depressed. The music he was being forced to write seemed so hopelessly
dead and conventional; it had no relation to what was going on inside him.
He composed fewer pieces and performed less often. For the first time in
his life he was losing his love for music itself. Feeling imprisoned, he grew
irritable. When he heard an operatic aria sung in public he was reminded of
the kind of music he could be composing, and he would go into a funk. He
began to quarrel incessantly with his father, passing from anger to begging
for forgiveness for his disobedience. Slowly he resigned himself to his fate:
he would die in Salzburg at an early age, without the world ever hearing the
kind of music he knew existed within him.
In 1781 Wolfgang was invited to accompany the archbishop of
Salzburg to Vienna, where he was planning to showcase the musical talents
of his various court musicians. Suddenly, in Vienna, the nature of his status
as a court musician became clear. The archbishop ordered him about as if
he were simply one of his personal staff, a mere servant. Now all the
resentment Wolfgang had felt for the past seven years bubbled and rose to
the surface. He was twenty-five years old and losing valuable time. His
father and the archbishop were actively holding him back. He loved his
father and depended on his family for emotional support, but he could
tolerate his circumstances no longer. When it was time to return to
Salzburg, he did the unthinkable—he refused to leave. He asked to be
dismissed from his position. The archbishop treated him with the utmost
contempt, but finally relented. His father sided with the archbishop and
ordered his son to return, promising that all would be forgiven. But
Wolfgang had made up his mind: he would stay in Vienna, for what would
turn out to be the rest of his life.
The rift with his father was permanent and extremely painful, but
sensing that his time was short and that he had almost too much to express,
he threw himself into his music with an intensity that was even greater than
what he had displayed in childhood. As if all of his ideas had been pent up
for too long, he exploded in a creative outburst unprecedented in the history
of music.
The apprenticeship of the past twenty years had prepared him well for
this moment. He had developed a prodigious memory—in his mind he
could hold together all of the harmonies and melodies that he had absorbed
over the years. Instead of notes or chords, he could think in terms of blocks
of music and write them out as quickly as he heard them in his head. His
speed of composing would now astonish those who witnessed it. For
instance, the night before the premiere in Prague of the opera Don
Giovanni, Mozart had gone out drinking. When his friends reminded him
that he had not yet written the overture, he hurried home, and while his wife
kept him awake by singing to him, he wrote one of his most popular and
brilliantly conceived overtures in a matter of hours.
More important, the years he had spent learning how to compose in
every conceivable genre now allowed him to use these genres to express
something new, to stretch their boundaries and even permanently transform
them through his creative powers. Feeling turmoil within himself, he
searched for a way to make music something powerful and expressive, and
not merely decorative.
In his time, the piano concerto and symphony had become rather light
and frivolous genres, with short, simple movements, small orchestras, and
an overabundance of melody. Mozart completely reworked these forms
from within. He wrote for larger orchestras, expanding in particular the
violin sections. Such orchestras could produce a more powerful sound than
had previously been known. He expanded the length of his symphonic
movements well beyond convention. In his opening movement, he would
establish a mood of tension and dissonance that he would proceed to build
up in the slow second movement, and which he would resolve in a grand
and dramatic resolution at the finale. He gave his compositions the power to
express dread, sadness, foreboding, anger, exhilaration, and ecstasy.
Audiences were spellbound by this new sweeping sound that suddenly had
so many new dimensions. After these innovations, it became almost
impossible for composers to return to the light, frothy court music that had
previously prevailed. European music had forever been altered.
These innovations did not spring from any conscious desire on his part
to provoke or rebel. Rather, his transforming spirit emerged as if it were
completely natural and beyond his control, like a bee secreting wax. Aided
by his superior sense of music, he simply could not help but personalize
every genre he worked in.
In 1786 he came upon a version of the Don Juan legend that excited
him. He immediately identified with the story of the great seducer. He
shared Don Juan’s obsessive need and love for women, and he had the same
disdain for authority figures. But more important, Mozart felt that as a
composer he had the supreme ability to seduce audiences and that music
itself represented the ultimate seduction, with its irresistible power to strike
at our emotions. Translating this story into an opera, he could convey all of
these ideas. And so the following year he began early work on his opera
Don Giovanni (Italian for Don Juan). To make this story come alive in the
way he had imagined it, he would once again apply his transformative
powers—this time to the genre of opera.
At the time, operas tended to be rather static and formulaic. They
consisted of recitatives (spoken dialogue accompanied by harpsichord that
conveyed the story and action), arias (sung portions in which the singer
would react to the information in the recitative), and choral pieces, featuring
large groups of people singing together. For his opera, Mozart created
something that flowed as a continuous whole. He conveyed the character of
Don Giovanni not just through the words but through the music,
accompanying the seducer’s presence on stage with a constant twitching
tremolo in the violins to represent his nervous, sensual energy. He gave the
work an accelerated, almost frantic pace that no one had ever witnessed
before in the theater. To push the expressive value of the music further, he
invented ensembles—stirring, climactic moments in which several
characters would sing, sometimes over one another, in an elaborate
counterpoint, giving the opera a dreamlike feel and flow.
From beginning to end, Don Giovanni resonated with the demonic
presence of the great seducer. Although all of the other characters condemn
him, it is impossible not to admire Don Giovanni even as he remains
unrepentant to the end, laughing all the way to hell and refusing to submit
to authority. Don Giovanni was not like any opera anyone had ever seen
before, either in the story or in the music, and it was perhaps too far ahead
of its time. Many complained that it was all rather ugly and harsh to the
ears; they found the pace too frenetic and the moral ambiguity too
disturbing.
Continuing to work at a deliriously creative pace, Mozart exhausted
himself and died in 1791, two months after the premier of his last opera,
The Magic Flute, at the age of thirty-five. Several years after his death
audiences caught up with the radical sound he had created in works such as
Don Giovanni, which soon became among the five most frequently
performed operas in history.
KEYS TO MASTERY
…Several things dovetailed in my mind, & at once it struck me, what quality went to form a
Man of Achievement especially in Literature & which Shakespeare possessed so enormously—
I mean Negative Capability, that is when man is capable of being in uncertainties, Mysteries,
doubts, without any irritable reaching after fact & reason….
—JOHN KEATS
If we think deeply about our childhood, not just about our memories of it
but how it actually felt, we realize how differently we experienced the
world back then. Our minds were completely open, and we entertained all
kinds of surprising, original ideas. Things that we now take for granted,
things as simple as the night sky or our reflection in a mirror, often caused
us to wonder. Our heads teemed with questions about the world around us.
Not yet having commanded language, we thought in ways that were
preverbal—in images and sensations. When we attended the circus, a
sporting event, or a movie, our eyes and ears took in the spectacle with
utmost intensity. Colors seemed more vibrant and alive. We had a powerful
desire to turn everything around us into a game, to play with circumstances.
Let us call this quality the Original Mind. This mind looked at the
world more directly—not through words and received ideas. It was flexible
and receptive to new information. Retaining a memory of this Original
Mind, we cannot help but feel nostalgia for the intensity with which we
used to experience the world. As the years pass, this intensity inevitably
diminishes. We come to see the world through a screen of words and
opinions; our prior experiences, layered over the present, color what we see.
We no longer look at things as they are, noticing their details, or wonder
why they exist. Our minds gradually tighten up. We become defensive
about the world we now take for granted, and we become upset if our
beliefs or assumptions are attacked.
We can call this way of thinking the Conventional Mind. Under
pressure to make a living and conform to society, we force our minds into
tighter and tighter grooves. We may seek to retain the spirit of childhood
here and there, playing games or participating in forms of entertainment
that release us from the Conventional Mind. Sometimes when we visit a
different country where we cannot rely upon everything being familiar, we
become childlike again, struck by the oddness and newness of what we are
seeing. But because our minds are not completely engaged in these
activities, because they last only a short while, they are not rewarding in a
deep sense. They are not creative.
Masters and those who display a high level of creative energy are
simply people who manage to retain a sizeable portion of their childhood
spirit despite the pressures and demands of adulthood. This spirit manifests
itself in their work and in their ways of thinking. Children are naturally
creative. They actively transform everything around them, play with ideas
and circumstances, and surprise us with the novel things they say or do. But
the natural creativity of children is limited; it never leads to discoveries,
inventions, or substantial works of art.
Masters not only retain the spirit of the Original Mind, but they add to
it their years of apprenticeship and an ability to focus deeply on problems or
ideas. This leads to high-level creativity. Although they have profound
knowledge of a subject, their minds remain open to alternative ways of
seeing and approaching problems. They are able to ask the kinds of simple
questions that most people pass over, but they have the rigor and discipline
to follow their investigations all the way to the end. They retain a childlike
excitement about their field and a playful approach, all of which makes the
hours of hard work alive and pleasurable. Like children, they are capable of
thinking beyond words—visually, spatially, intuitively—and have greater
access to preverbal and unconscious forms of mental activity, all of which
can account for their surprising ideas and creations.
Some people maintain their childlike spirit and spontaneity, but their
creative energy is dissipated in a thousand directions, and they never have
the patience and discipline to endure an extended apprenticeship. Others
have the discipline to accumulate vast amounts of knowledge and become
experts in their field, but they have no flexibility of spirit, so their ideas
never stray beyond the conventional and they never become truly creative.
Masters manage to blend the two—discipline and a childlike spirit—
together into what we shall call the Dimensional Mind. Such a mind is not
constricted by limited experience or habits. It can branch out into all
directions and make deep contact with reality. It can explore more
dimensions of the world. The Conventional Mind is passive—it consumes
information and regurgitates it in familiar forms. The Dimensional Mind is
active, transforming everything it digests into something new and original,
creating instead of consuming.
It is hard to say exactly why Masters are able to retain their childlike
spirit while accumulating facts and knowledge, when such a feat has been
difficult if not impossible for so many. Perhaps they found it harder to let go
of childhood, or perhaps at some point they intuited the powers they could
have by keeping their childhood spirit alive and bringing it to bear in their
work. In any event, achieving the Dimensional Mind is never easy. Often,
the childlike spirit of Masters lies dormant in the Apprenticeship Phase as
they patiently absorb all of the details of their field. This spirit then comes
back to them as they attain the freedom and opportunity to actively use the
knowledge they have gained. Often it is a struggle, and Masters go through
a crisis as they deal with the demands of others to conform and be more
conventional. Under such pressure, they may try to repress their creative
spirit, but often it comes back later with double intensity.
Understand: we all possess an inborn creative force that wants to
become active. This is the gift of our Original Mind, which reveals such
potential. The human mind is naturally creative, constantly looking to make
associations and connections between things and ideas. It wants to explore,
to discover new aspects of the world, and to invent. To express this creative
force is our greatest desire, and the stifling of it the source of our misery.
What kills the creative force is not age or a lack of talent, but our own
spirit, our own attitude. We become too comfortable with the knowledge we
have gained in our apprenticeships. We grow afraid of entertaining new
ideas and the effort that this requires. To think more flexibly entails a risk—
we could fail and be ridiculed. We prefer to live with familiar ideas and
habits of thinking, but we pay a steep price for this: our minds go dead from
the lack of challenge and novelty; we reach a limit in our field and lose
control over our fate because we become replaceable.
What this means, however, is that we equally possess the potential to
spark this innate creative force back to life, no matter how old we are.
Experiencing a return of this creative force has an immensely therapeutic
effect on our spirits and on our career. By understanding how the
Dimensional Mind operates and what helps it flourish, we can consciously
revive our mental elasticity and reverse the deadening process. The powers
that the Dimensional Mind can bring are nearly limitless, and within the
reach of almost all of us.
Look at the case of Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. He is generally
considered the epitome of the child prodigy and the inexplicable genius, a
freak of nature. How else are we to explain his uncanny abilities at such a
young age, and the ten-year burst of creative activity at the end of his life
that culminated in so many innovations and universally loved works? In
truth, his genius and creativity is eminently explicable, which does not at all
diminish his achievements.
Immersed in and enchanted by music from the very beginning of his
life, he brought to his earliest studies a high level of focus and intensity.
The mind of a four-year-old is even more open and impressionable than that
of a child a few years older. Much of this powerful attention stemmed from
his deep love of music. And so practicing the piano was not some kind of
chore or duty, but an opportunity to expand his knowledge and to explore
more musical possibilities. By the age of six, he had accumulated the hours
of practice of someone twice his age. The years of touring exposed him to
every possible trend and innovation of his time. His mind became filled
with an extensive vocabulary of forms and styles.
In his adolescence Mozart experienced a typical creative crisis, one
that often destroys or derails those who are less tenacious. For close to eight
years, under pressure from his father, the archbishop, and the court of
Salzburg, and bearing the burden of supporting his family, he had to temper
his own powerful creative urges. At this critical point he could have
succumbed to this dampening of his spirit and continued to write relatively
tame pieces for the court. He would have then ended up among the lesser-
known composers of the eighteenth century. Instead he rebelled and
reconnected with his childlike spirit—that original desire of his to transform
the music into his own voice, to realize his dramatic urges in opera. With all
of his pent-up energy, his long apprenticeship, the deep level of his
knowledge, he naturally exploded with creativity once he had freed himself
from his family. The speed with which he could compose such masterpieces
is not a reflection of some divine gift, but rather of how powerfully his
mind had come to think in musical terms, which he could translate easily
onto paper. He was not a freak, but a signpost of the outer reaches of the
creative potential we all naturally possess.
The Dimensional Mind has two essential requirements: one, a high
level of knowledge about a field or subject; and two, the openness and
flexibility to use this knowledge in new and original ways. The knowledge
that prepares the ground for creative activity largely comes from a rigorous
apprenticeship in which we have mastered all of the basics. Once the mind
is freed from having to learn these basics, it can focus on higher, more
creative matters. The problem for us all is that the knowledge we gain in the
Apprenticeship Phase—including numerous rules and procedures—can
slowly become a prison. It locks us into certain methods and forms of
thinking that are one-dimensional. Instead, the mind must be forced from its
conservative positions and made active and exploratory.
To awaken the Dimensional Mind and move through the creative
process requires three essential steps: first, choosing the proper Creative
Task, the kind of activity that will maximize our skills and knowledge;
second, loosening and opening up the mind through certain Creative
Strategies; and third, creating the optimal mental conditions for a
Breakthrough or Insight. Finally, throughout the process we must also be
aware of the Emotional Pitfalls—complacency, boredom, grandiosity, and
the like—that continually threaten to derail or block our progress. If we can
move through the steps while avoiding these traps, we cannot fail to unleash
powerful creative forces from within.
Step One: The Creative Task
You must begin by altering your very concept of creativity and by trying to
see it from a new angle. Most often, people associate creativity with
something intellectual, a particular way of thinking. The truth is that
creative activity is one that involves the entire self—our emotions, our
levels of energy, our characters, and our minds. To make a discovery, to
invent something that connects with the public, to fashion a work of art that
is meaningful, inevitably requires time and effort. This often entails years of
experimentation, various setbacks and failures, and the need to maintain a
high level of focus. You must have patience and faith that what you are
doing will yield something important. You could have the most brilliant
mind, teeming with knowledge and ideas, but if you choose the wrong
subject or problem to attack, you can run out of energy and interest. In such
a case all of your intellectual brilliance will lead to nothing.
The task that you choose to work on must have an obsessive element.
Like the Life’s Task, it must connect to something deep within you. (For
Mozart, it wasn’t simply music, but opera that fully engaged him.) You
must be like Captain Ahab in Melville’s Moby-Dick, obsessed with hunting
down the Great White Whale. With such a deep-rooted interest, you can
withstand the setbacks and failures, the days of drudgery, and the hard work
that are always a part of any creative action. You can ignore the doubters
and critics. You will then feel personally committed to solving the problem
and will not rest until you do so.
Understand: it is the choice of where to direct his or her creative
energy that makes the Master. When Thomas Edison saw his first
demonstration of the electric arc light, he knew then and there that he had
found the ultimate challenge and the perfect goal toward which to direct his
creative energies. Figuring out how to make electric light not just a
gimmick, but something that would eventually replace the gaslight, would
require years of intense labor, but it would change the world like nothing
else. It was the perfect riddle for him to solve. He had met his creative
match. For the artist Rembrandt, it was not until he found particular subject
matters that appealed to him—dramatic scenes from the Bible and
elsewhere that conveyed the darker and more tragic aspects of life—that he
rose to the occasion and invented a whole new way of painting and
capturing light. The writer Marcel Proust suffered for years as he struggled
to find the subject matter upon which to base a novel. Finally, when he
realized that his own life and his own failed attempts to write the great
novel was actually the subject he was looking for, it all poured out of him
and into one of the greatest novels ever written, In Search of Lost Time.
This is The Primary Law of the Creative Dynamic that you must
engrave deeply in your mind and never forget: your emotional commitment
to what you are doing will be translated directly into your work. If you go at
your work with half a heart, it will show in the lackluster results and in the
laggard way in which you reach the end. If you are doing something
primarily for money and without a real emotional commitment, it will
translate into something that lacks a soul and that has no connection to you.
You may not see this, but you can be sure that the public will feel it and that
they will receive your work in the same lackluster spirit it was created in. If
you are excited and obsessive in the hunt, it will show in the details. If your
work comes from a place deep within, its authenticity will be
communicated. This applies equally to science and business as to the arts.
Your creative task may not rise to the same obsessive level as it did for
Edison, but it must have a degree of this obsessiveness or your efforts will
be doomed. You must never simply embark on any creative endeavor in
your field, placing faith in your own brilliance to see it through. You must
make the right, the perfect choice for your energies and your inclinations.
To aid in this process, it is often wise to choose something that appeals
to your sense of unconventionality and calls up latent feelings of
rebelliousness. Perhaps what you want to invent or discover is being
ignored or ridiculed by others. The work that you envision will stir up
controversy and ruffle some feathers. In opting for something that has deep
personal appeal to you, you will naturally move in an unorthodox direction.
Try to ally this with a desire to subvert conventional paradigms and go
against the grain. The sense of having enemies or doubters can serve as a
powerful motivating device and fill you with an added creative energy and
focus.
There are two things to keep in mind: First, the task that you choose
must be realistic. The knowledge and skills you have gained must be
eminently suited to pulling it off. To reach your goal you may have to learn
a few new things, but you must have mastered the basics and possess a solid
enough grasp of the field so that your mind can focus on higher matters. On
the other hand, it is always best to choose a task that is slightly above you,
one that might be considered ambitious on your part. This is a corollary of
the Law of the Creative Dynamic—the higher the goal, the more energy
you will call up from deep within. You will rise to the challenge because
you have to, and will discover creative powers in yourself that you never
suspected.
Second, you must let go of your need for comfort and security.
Creative endeavors are by their nature uncertain. You may know your task,
but you are never exactly sure where your efforts will lead. If you need
everything in your life to be simple and safe, this open-ended nature of the
task will fill you with anxiety. If you are worried about what others might
think and about how your position in the group might be jeopardized, then
you will never really create anything. You will unconsciously tether your
mind to certain conventions, and your ideas will grow stale and flat. If you
are worried about failure or going through a period of mental and financial
instability, then you will violate the Primary Law of the Creative Dynamic,
and your worries will be reflected in the results. Think of yourself as an
explorer. You cannot find anything new if you are unwilling to leave the
shore.
Step Two: Creative Strategies
Think of the mind as a muscle that naturally tightens up over time unless it
is consciously worked upon. What causes this tightening is twofold. First,
we generally prefer to entertain the same thoughts and ways of thinking
because they provide us with a sense of consistency and familiarity.
Sticking with the same methods also saves us a lot of effort. We are
creatures of habit. Second, whenever we work hard at a problem or idea,
our minds naturally narrow their focus because of the strain and effort
involved. This means that the further we progress on our creative task, the
fewer alternative possibilities or viewpoints we tend to consider.
This tightening process afflicts all of us, and it is best to admit that you
share in this flaw. The only antidote is to enact strategies to loosen up the
mind and let in alternative ways of thinking. This is not only essential for
the creative process, but is also immensely therapeutic for our psyches. The
following five strategies for developing such flexibility have been distilled
from the lessons and stories of the most creative Masters, past and present.
It would be wise to adapt all of them at some point, stretching and
loosening the mind in all directions.
A. CULTIVATE NEGATIVE CAPABILITY
In 1817 the twenty-two-year-old poet John Keats wrote a letter to his
brothers in which he explained his most recent thoughts on the creative
process. The world around us, he wrote, is far more complex than we can
possibly imagine. With our limited senses and consciousness, we only
glimpse a small portion of reality. Furthermore, everything in the universe
is in a state of constant flux. Simple words and thoughts cannot capture this
flux or complexity. The only solution for an enlightened person is to let the
mind absorb itself in what it experiences, without having to form a
judgment on what it all means. The mind must be able to feel doubt and
uncertainty for as long as possible. As it remains in this state and probes
deeply into the mysteries of the universe, ideas will come that are more
dimensional and real than if we had jumped to conclusions and formed
judgments early on.
To accomplish this, he wrote, we must be capable of negating our ego.
We are by nature fearful and insecure creatures. We do not like what is
unfamiliar or unknown. To compensate for this, we assert ourselves with
opinions and ideas that make us seem strong and certain. Many of these
opinions do not come from our own deep reflection, but are instead based
on what other people think. Furthermore, once we hold these ideas, to admit
they are wrong is to wound our ego and vanity. Truly creative people in all
fields can temporarily suspend their ego and simply experience what they
are seeing, without the need to assert a judgment, for as long as possible.
They are more than ready to find their most cherished opinions contradicted
by reality. This ability to endure and even embrace mysteries and
uncertainties is what Keats called negative capability.
All Masters possess this Negative Capability, and it is the source of
their creative power. This quality allows them to entertain a broader range
of ideas and experiment with them, which in turn makes their work richer
and more inventive. Throughout his career, Mozart never asserted any
particular opinions about music. Instead, he absorbed the styles he heard
around himself and incorporated them into his own voice. Late in his career,
he encountered for the first time the music of Johann Sebastian Bach—a
kind of music very different from his own, and in some ways more
complex. Most artists would grow defensive and dismissive of something
that challenged their own principles. Instead, Mozart opened his mind up to
new possibilities, studying Bach’s use of counterpoint for nearly a year and
absorbing it into his own vocabulary. This gave his music a new and
surprising quality.
At a young age, Albert Einstein found himself fascinated by the
apparent paradox of two people observing the same beam of light—one
pursuing it at the speed of light, the other at rest, on Earth—and how it
would appear the same to both of them. Instead of using available theories
to gloss this over or explain it away, for ten long years he contemplated this
paradox, in a state of Negative Capability. Operating in this way, he was
able to consider almost every possible solution, until finally he hit upon the
one that led to his theory of relativity. (For more on this, see chapter 6,
here.)
This might seem like some kind of poetic conceit, but in fact
cultivating Negative Capability will be the single most important factor in
your success as a creative thinker. In the sciences, you will tend to entertain
ideas that fit your own preconceptions and that you want to believe in. This
unconsciously colors your choices of how to verify these ideas, and is
known as confirmation bias. With this type of bias, you will find the
experiments and data that confirm what you have already come to believe
in. The uncertainty of not knowing the answers beforehand is too much for
most scientists. In the arts and letters, your thoughts will congeal around
political dogma or predigested ways of looking at the world, and what you
will often end up expressing is an opinion rather than a truthful observation
about reality. To Keats, William Shakespeare was the ideal because he did
not judge his characters, but instead opened himself up to their worlds and
expressed the reality of even those who were considered evil. The need for
certainty is the greatest disease the mind faces.
To put Negative Capability into practice, you must develop the habit of
suspending the need to judge everything that crosses your path. You
consider and even momentarily entertain viewpoints opposite to your own,
seeing how they feel. You observe a person or event for a length of time,
deliberately holding yourself back from forming an opinion. You seek out
what is unfamiliar—for instance, reading books from unfamiliar writers in
unrelated fields or from different schools of thought. You do anything to
break up your normal train of thinking and your sense that you already
know the truth.
To negate the ego you must adopt a kind of humility toward
knowledge. The great scientist Michael Faraday expressed this attitude in
the following way: Scientific knowledge is constantly progressing. The
greatest theories of the time are eventually disproven or altered at some
future point. The human mind is simply too weak to have a clear and
perfect vision of reality. The idea or theory that you are currently
formulating, that seems so fresh and alive and truthful, will almost certainly
be shot down or ridiculed in a few decades or centuries. (We tend to laugh
at people prior to the twentieth century who did not yet believe in evolution
and who saw the world as only 6,000 years old, but imagine how people
will be laughing at us for the naïve beliefs we hold in the twenty-first
century!) And so it is best to keep this in mind and not grow too fond of
your ideas or too certain of their truth.
Negative Capability should not be a permanent state of mind. In order
to produce work of any sort we must create limits on what we’ll consider;
we must organize our thoughts into relatively cohesive patterns, and
eventually, come up with conclusions. In the end, we must make certain
judgments. Negative Capability is a tool we use in the process to open the
mind up temporarily to more possibilities. Once this way of thinking leads
to a creative avenue of thought, we can give our ideas a clearer shape and
gently let it go, returning to this attitude whenever we feel stale or blocked.
B. ALLOW FOR SERENDIPITY
The brain is an instrument developed for making connections. It operates as
a dual processing system, in which every bit of information that comes in is
at the same time compared to other information. The brain is constantly
searching for similarities, differences, and relationships between what it
processes. Your task is to feed this natural inclination, to create the optimal
conditions for it to make new and original associations between ideas and
experiences. And one of the best ways to accomplish this is by letting go of
conscious control and allowing chance to enter into the process.
The reason for this is simple. When we are consumed with a particular
project, our attention tends to become quite narrow as we focus so deeply.
We grow tense. In this state, our mind responds by trying to reduce the
amount of stimuli we have to deal with. We literally close ourselves off
from the world in order to concentrate on what is necessary. This can have
the unintended consequence of making it harder for us to see other
possibilities, to be more open and creative with our ideas. When we are in a
more relaxed state, our attention naturally broadens and we take in more
stimuli.
Many of the most interesting and profound discoveries in science
occur when the thinker is not concentrating directly on the problem but is
about to drift off to sleep, or get on a bus, or hears a joke—moments of
unstrained attention, when something unexpected enters the mental sphere
and triggers a new and fertile connection. Such chance associations and
discoveries are known as serendipity—the occurrence of something we are
not expecting—and although by their nature you cannot force them to
happen, you can invite serendipity into the creative process by taking two
simple steps.
The first step is to widen your search as far as possible. In the research
stage of your project, you look at more than what is generally required. You
expand your search into other fields, reading and absorbing any related
information. If you have a particular theory or hypothesis about a
phenomenon, 
you 
examine 
as 
many 
examples 
and 
potential
counterexamples as humanly possible. It might seem tiring and inefficient,
but you must trust this process. What ensues is that the brain becomes
increasingly excited and stimulated by the variety of information. As
William James expressed it, the mind “transitions from one idea to
another…the most unheard of combination of elements, the subtlest
associations of analogy; in a word, we seem suddenly introduced into a
seething cauldron of ideas, where everything is fizzling and bobbling about
in a state of bewildering activity.” A kind of mental momentum is
generated, in which the slightest chance occurrence will spark a fertile idea.
The second step is to maintain an openness and looseness of spirit. In
moments of great tension and searching, you allow yourself moments of
release. You take walks, engage in activities outside your work (Einstein
played the violin), or think about something else, no matter how trivial.
When some new and unanticipated idea now enters your mind, you do not
ignore it because it is irrational or does not fit the narrow frame of your
previous work. You give it instead full attention and explore where it leads
you.
Perhaps the greatest illustration of this would be the discovery by
Louis Pasteur of immunology and how contagious diseases can be
prevented by inoculation. Pasteur spent years demonstrating that various
diseases are caused by microorganisms or germs, a novel concept for the
time. In developing his germ theory, he expanded his knowledge into all
different branches of medicine and chemistry. In 1879 he was researching
chicken cholera. He had prepared cultures of this disease, but the cholera
work got interrupted by other projects, and for several months the cultures
remained untouched in his laboratory. When he returned to the work, he
injected the cultures into chickens and was surprised when they all
recovered easily from the disease. Figuring these cultures had lost their
virulence because of the time factor, he ordered some new varieties, which
he injected immediately into the same chickens and into some new ones as
well. The new ones all died, as expected, but all of the old chickens
survived.
Many doctors in the past had witnessed similar phenomena, but had
not taken notice or had refused to contemplate its meaning. Pasteur had
such wide and deep knowledge of the field that the survival of the chickens
instantly caught his attention. In thinking deeply about what it could mean,
he realized he had stumbled upon a whole new practice in medicine—the
inoculation of the body against disease by injecting small doses of the
actual disease. The wideness of his searches and the openness of his spirit
allowed him to make this connection and “random” discovery. As Pasteur
himself commented, “Chance favors only the prepared mind.”
Such serendipitous discoveries are extremely common in science and
in technological inventions. The list would include, among hundreds of
others, the discoveries by Wilhelm Röntgen of X-rays and Alexander
Fleming of penicillin, and the invention of the printing press by Johannes
Gutenberg. Perhaps one of the most illuminating of all such examples
occurred with the great inventor Thomas Edison. He had been working long
and hard on improving the mechanics of the roll of paper as it moved
through the telegraph and recorded the various dots and dashes. The work
was not going well, and what particularly bothered him was the sound the
machine made as the paper passed through—it gave off “a light, musical,
rhythmical sound, resembling human talk heard indistinctly.”
He wanted to get rid of this sound somehow, but over the course of the
next few months as he let go of the work on the telegraph, the whirring
noise continued to haunt him. One day, as he heard it yet again in his head,
an astounding thought occurred to him—he might have inadvertently hit
upon a way to record sound and the human voice. He spent the next few
months immersing himself in the science of sound, which led to his first
experiments on creating a phonograph that would record the human voice,
using a very similar technology to the telegraph.
This discovery shows us the essence of the creative mind. In such a
mind, every stimulus that enters the brain is processed, turned over, and
reevaluated. Nothing is taken at face value. A whirring sound is never
neutral, never merely a sound, but something to interpret, a possibility, a
sign. Dozens of such possibilities lead nowhere, but to an open and fluid
mind they are not only worth considering, but are a constant pleasure to
investigate. Perception itself becomes a stimulating exercise in thinking.
One reason that serendipity plays such a large role in discoveries and
inventions is that our minds are limited. We cannot explore all avenues and
imagine every possibility. Nobody could have come upon the invention of
the phonograph in Edison’s time by a rational process of imagining rolls of
paper that could record sound. Random external stimuli lead us to
associations we cannot come by on our own. Like seeds floating in space,
they require the soil of a highly prepared and open mind to take root in and
sprout a meaningful idea.
Serendipity strategies can be interesting devices in the arts as well. For
instance, the writer Anthony Burgess, trying to free his mind up from the
same stale ideas, decided on several occasions to choose random words in a
reference book and use them to guide the plot of a novel, according to the
order and associations of the words. Once he had completely haphazard
starting points, his conscious mind took over and he worked them into
extremely well-crafted novels with surprising structures. The surrealist
artist Max Ernst did something similar in a series of paintings inspired by
the deep grooves in a wood floor that had been scrubbed too many times.
He laid pieces of paper rubbed with black lead on the floor at odd angles,
and made prints of them. Based on these prints, he proceeded to make
surreal and hallucinatory drawings. In these examples, a random idea was
used to force the mind to create novel associations and to loosen up the
creative urge. This mix of complete chance and conscious elaboration often
creates novel and exciting effects.
To help yourself to cultivate serendipity, you should keep a notebook
with you at all times. The moment any idea or observation comes, you note
it down. You keep the notebook by your bed, careful to record ideas that
come in those moments of fringe awareness—just before falling asleep, or
just upon waking. In this notebook you record any scrap of thought that
occurs to you, and include drawings, quotes from other books, anything at
all. In this way, you will have the freedom to try out the most absurd ideas.
The juxtaposition of so many random bits will be enough to spark various
associations.
In general you must adopt a more analogical way of thinking, taking
greater advantage of the associative powers of the mind. Thinking in terms
of analogies and metaphors can be extremely helpful to the creative
process. For instance, an argument people used in the sixteenth and
seventeenth centuries to prove that the earth does not move was to say that
a rock dropped from a tower lands at its base. If the earth were moving,
they argued, it would fall elsewhere. Galileo, a man who habitually thought
in terms of analogies, saw the earth in his mind as a kind of sailing ship in
space. As he explained to doubters of the earth’s movement, a rock dropped
from the mast of a moving ship still lands at its base.
These analogies can be tight and logical, such as Isaac Newton’s
comparison of the falling apple from a tree in his garden to the moon falling
in space. Or they can be loose and somewhat irrational, such as the jazz
artist John Coltrane’s thinking of his own compositions as cathedrals of
sound he was constructing. In any event, you must train yourself to look
constantly for such analogies to reframe and expand your ideas.
C. ALTERNATE THE MIND THROUGH “THE CURRENT”
In 1832, as Charles Darwin voyaged around the coastline of South America
and traveled into the interior, he began to take note of several strange
phenomena—bones of animals long extinct, marine fossils near the top of
mountains in Peru, and animals on islands that were similar and yet quite
different from their mainland counterparts. In his notebooks, he began to
speculate on what all this could mean. Clearly, the earth appeared to be
much older than indicated in the Bible, and it became increasingly difficult
for him to imagine that all of life was created at once. Based on these
continuing speculations, he began to look more closely at the plant and
animal life he was observing. In doing so, he took note of even more
anomalies in nature and tried to find a pattern among them. When he visited
the Galápagos Islands near the end of his voyage, he witnessed so much
variety of life in such a small area that he finally saw the pattern—the idea
of evolution itself.
For the next twenty years Darwin expanded upon the process that he
started as a young man. He speculated on how variety within species might
actually occur, and to test out his ideas he began to keep and breed different
types of pigeons. The theory of evolution he was developing depended on
the movement of plants and animals across wide expanses of the globe.
This was easier to imagine with animals than with plants—for instance,
how did such rich vegetation end up on relatively young volcanic islands?
Most believed it was from an act of God. And so Darwin began a series of
experiments, soaking various seeds in salt water to see how long they could
survive in such an element and still germinate. The results proved they
could last longer than he had imagined. Considering ocean currents, he
calculated that many varieties of seeds could travel more than 1,000 miles
in some forty days and still germinate.
As his ideas began to solidify, he decided to intensify his research by
spending eight years studying many species of one type of crustacean, the
barnacle, in order to prove or disprove his speculations. This research ended
up validating his ideas and adding some new wrinkles. Certain that he had
discovered something meaningful after all this work, he finally published
his results on an evolutionary process that he called natural selection.
The theory of evolution as formulated by Charles Darwin represents
one of the most astounding achievements of human creative thinking, and is
a testament to the powers of the mind. Evolution is not something that can
be seen with the eyes. It depends on a powerful use of the imagination—to
imagine what could happen on Earth in the course of millions upon millions
of years, a period of time that is so astoundingly long we have no way of
really conceptualizing it. It also required the ability to imagine a process
that could occur on its own, without the guidance of a spiritual force.
Darwin’s theory could only have been deduced by looking at evidence and
making connections in the mind about what his findings could mean. His
theory of evolution, devised in this way, has stood the test of time and has
come to have profound ramifications on almost all forms of science.
Through a mental process that we shall call the Current, Charles Darwin
made visible to us all what is completely invisible to the human eye.
The Current is like a mental electrical charge that gains its power
through a constant alternation. We observe something in the world that
strikes our attention and makes us wonder what it might mean. In thinking
about it, we devise several possible explanations. When we look at the
phenomenon again we see it differently as we cycle through the various
ideas we had imagined to account for it. Perhaps we conduct experiments to
verify or alter our speculations. Now when we look at the phenomenon yet
again, weeks or months later, we see more and more aspects of its hidden
reality.
If we had failed to speculate on the meaning of what we had observed,
we simply would have had an observation that led us nowhere. If we had
speculated without continuing to observe and verify, then we simply would
have had some random idea floating in our heads. But by continually
cycling between speculation and observation/experiment, we are able to
pierce deeper and deeper into reality, like a drill that penetrates a piece of
wood through its motion. The Current is a constant dialogue between our
thoughts and reality. If we go into this process deeply enough, we come into
contact with a theory that explains something far beyond the capability of
our limited senses.
The Current is merely an intensification of the most elementary
powers of human consciousness. Our most primitive ancestors would take
note of something unusual or out of place—broken twigs, chewed leaves,
the outline of a hoof or paw. Through an act of pure imagination, they
would deduce that this meant that an animal had passed by. This fact would
be verified by tracking the footprints. Through this process, what was not
immediately visible to the eyes (a passing animal) became visible. All that
has occurred since then is an elaboration of this power to increasingly
higher levels of abstraction, to the point of understanding hidden laws of
nature—like evolution and relativity.
Most often in culture we see people who short-circuit the Current.
They observe some phenomenon in culture or nature that makes them
emotional and they run rampant with speculations, never taking the time to
entertain possible explanations that could have been verified by further
observation. They disconnect themselves from reality and can then imagine
whatever they want. On the other hand, we see many people, particularly in
academia or in the sciences, who accumulate mountains of information and
data from studies and statistics but never venture to speculate on the larger
ramifications of this information or connect it all into a theory. They are
afraid to speculate because it seems unscientific and subjective, failing to
understand that speculation is the heart and soul of human rationality, our
way of connecting to reality and seeing the invisible. To them, it is better to
stick to facts and studies, to keep a micro view, rather than possibly
embarrassing themselves with a speculation that could be wrong.
Sometimes this fear of speculation masquerades as skepticism. We see
this in people who delight in shooting down any theory or explanation
before it gets anywhere. They are trying to pass off skepticism as a sign of
high intelligence, but in fact they are taking the easy route—it is quite
simple to find arguments against any idea and knock it down from the
sidelines. Instead, you must follow the route of all creative thinkers and go
in the opposite direction. You then not only speculate, but are bold and
audacious with your ideas, all of which forces you to work hard to confirm
or disconfirm your theories, piercing into reality in the process. As the great
physicist Max Planck put it, scientists “must have a vivid intuitive
imagination, for new ideas are not generated by deduction, but by an
artistically creative imagination.”
The Current has applications far beyond science. The great inventor
Buckminster Fuller was constantly coming up with ideas for possible
inventions and new forms of technology. Early in his career, Fuller noticed
that many people have great ideas, but are afraid to put them into action in
any form. They prefer to engage in discussions or critiques, writing about
their fantasies but never playing them out in the real world. To set himself
apart from these dreamers, he created a strategy of forging what he called
“artifacts.” Working off his ideas, which were sometimes quite wild, he
would make models of things he imagined, and if they seemed at all
feasible, he would proceed to invent prototypes of them. By actually
translating his ideas into tangible objects, he could gain a sense of whether
they were potentially interesting or merely ridiculous. Now his seemingly
outlandish ideas were no longer speculations, but realities. He would then
take his prototypes to another level, constructing artifacts for the public to
see how they would respond.
One artifact he made was the Dymaxion car, which he unveiled to the
public in 1933. It was meant to be much more efficient, maneuverable, and
aerodynamic than any vehicle in existence, featuring three wheels and an
unusual teardrop shape; in addition, it could be quickly and cheaply
assembled. In making this artifact public he realized several faults in its
design and reformulated it. Although it led nowhere, particularly as the auto
industry put all kinds of roadblocks before him, the Dymaxion car ended up
influencing future designers, and caused many to question the single-
minded approach people had to the design of the automobile. Fuller would
expand this artifact strategy to all of his ideas, including his most famous
one—the geodesic dome.
Fuller’s process of making artifacts is a great model for any kind of
new invention or idea in business and commerce. Let us say you have an
idea for a new product. You can design it on your own and then launch it,
but often you notice a discrepancy between your own level of excitement
for your product and the somewhat indifferent response of the public. You
have not engaged in a dialogue with reality, which is the essence of the
Current. Instead, it is better to produce a prototype—a form of speculation
—and see how people respond to it. Based on the assessments you gain,
you can redo the work and launch it again, cycling through this process
several times until you perfect it. The responses of the public will make you
think more deeply about what you are producing. Such feedback will help
make visible what is generally invisible to your eyes—the objective reality
of your work and its flaws, as reflected through the eyes of many people.
Alternating between ideas and artifacts will help you to create something
compelling and effective.
D. ALTER YOUR PERSPECTIVE
Consider thinking as an extended form of vision that allows us to see more
of the world, and creativity as the ability to expand that vision beyond
conventional boundaries.
When we perceive an object, our eyes relay only a portion or outline of
it to our brains, leaving our mind to fill in the rest, giving us a fast and
relatively accurate assessment of what we are seeing. Our eyes are not
paying deep attention to all of the details, but noticing patterns. Our thought
processes, modeled after visual perception, use a similar shorthand. When
an event occurs or when we meet a new person, we do not stop to consider
all aspects or details, but instead we see an outline or pattern that fits into
our expectations and past experiences. We fit the event or person into
categories. As with vision, for us to have to think deeply about every new
occurrence or perceived object would exhaust the brain. Unfortunately, we
transfer this mental shorthand to almost everything—it is the main
characteristic of the Conventional Mind. We might imagine that when we
are engaged in solving a problem or realizing an idea that we are being
highly rational and thorough, but just as with our eyes, we are not aware of
how deeply our thoughts fall into the same narrow grooves and the same
categorizing shorthand.
Creative people are those who have the capacity to resist this
shorthand. They can look at a phenomenon from several different angles,
noticing something we miss because we only look straight on. Sometimes,
after one of their discoveries or inventions is made public, we are surprised
at how obvious it seems and wonder why no one else had thought of it
before. This is because creative people are actually looking at what is
hidden in plain sight, and not rushing to generalize and label. Whether such
powers are natural or learned does not matter: the mind can be trained to
loosen itself up and move outside the grooves. To do this you must become
aware of the typical patterns your mind falls into and how you can break
out of these patterns and alter your perspective through conscious effort.
Once you engage in this process, you will be astonished at the ideas and
creative powers it will unleash. The following are several of the most
common patterns or shorthands, and how you can subvert them.
Looking at the “what” instead of the “how”:
Let us say that something goes wrong in a project of some sort. Our
conventional tendency is to look for a single cause or a simple explanation,
which then reveals to us how to fix the problem. If the book we are creating
is not working out, we focus on the uninspired writing or the misguided
concept behind it. Or if the company we work for is not performing well,
we look at the products we are designing and marketing. Although we think
we are being rational when we think in this way, most often problems are
more complicated and holistic; we are simplifying them, based on the law
that the mind always looks for shorthands.
To look at the “how” instead of the “what” means focusing on the
structure—how the parts relate to the whole. With the book, it may not be
working out because it is organized poorly, the faulty organization a
reflection of ideas that have not been thought out. Our minds are a jumble,
and this is reflected in the work. Thinking in this way, we are forced to go
more deeply into the parts and how they relate to the overall concept;
improving the structure will improve the writing. With the company, we
should look deeply at the organization itself—how well people
communicate with one another, how quickly and fluidly information is
passed along. If people are not communicating, if they are not on the same
page, no amount of changes in the product or marketing will improve
performance.
Everything in nature has a structure, a way that the parts relate to one
another, which is generally fluid and not so easy to conceptualize. Our
minds naturally tend to separate things out, to think in terms of nouns
instead of verbs. In general you want to pay greater attention to the
relationships between things, because that will give you a greater feel for
the picture as a whole. It was in looking at the relationship between
electricity and magnetism and the relativity of their effects that scientists
created a whole revolution in scientific thinking, leading from Michael
Faraday to Albert Einstein and the elaboration of field theories. This is a
revolution that is waiting to happen on a more mundane level, in our
everyday thinking.
Rushing to generalities and ignoring details:
Our minds are always hurrying to generalize about things, often based on
the most minimal amounts of information. We form opinions quickly, in
conformity with our previous opinions, and we do not pay great attention to
the details. To combat this pattern we must sometimes shift our focus from
the macro to the micro—placing much greater emphasis on the details, the
small picture. When Darwin wanted to make sure his theory was accurate,
he devoted eight long years of his life to the exclusive study of barnacles.
Looking at this intensely microscopic glimpse of nature, he saw a perfect
corroboration of his larger theory.
When Leonardo da Vinci wanted to create a whole new style of
painting, one that was more lifelike and emotional, he engaged in an
obsessive study of details. He spent endless hours experimenting with forms
of light hitting various geometrical solids, to test how light could alter the
appearance of objects. He devoted hundreds of pages in his notebooks to
exploring the various gradations of shadows in every possible combination.
He gave this same attention to the folds of a gown, the patterns in hair, the
various minute changes in the expression of a human face. When we look at
his work we are not consciously aware of these efforts on his part, but we
feel how much more alive and realistic his paintings are, as if he had
captured reality.
In general, try approaching a problem or idea with a much more open
mind. Let your study of the details guide your thinking and shape your
theories. Think of everything in nature, or in the world, as a kind of
hologram—the smallest part reflecting something essential about the whole.
Immersing yourself in details will combat the generalizing tendencies of the
brain and bring you closer to reality. Make sure, however, that you do not
become lost in the details and lose sight of how they reflect the whole and
fit into a larger idea. That is simply the other side of the same disease.
Confirming paradigms and ignoring anomalies:
In any field there are inevitable paradigms—accepted ways of explaining
reality. This is necessary; without such paradigms we would not be able to
make sense of the world. But sometimes these paradigms end up
dominating our way of thinking. We routinely look for patterns in the world
that confirm the paradigms we already believe in. The things that do not fit
the paradigm—the anomalies—tend to be ignored or explained away. In
truth, anomalies themselves contain the richest information. They often
reveal to us the flaws in our paradigms and open up new ways of looking at
the world. You must turn yourself into a detective, deliberately uncovering
and looking at the very anomalies that people tend to disregard.
In the late nineteenth century several scientists noted the strange
phenomenon of rare metals like uranium emitting luminescent rays of an
unknown nature, without any exposure to light. But nobody paid much
attention to this. It was assumed that someday a rational explanation for this
phenomenon would come up, one that fit with general theories of matter.
But to the scientist Marie Curie, this anomaly was precisely the subject that
needed to be investigated. She intuited that it contained the potential for
expanding our concept of matter. For four long years Marie, with the help
of her husband, Pierre, devoted her life to studying this phenomenon, which
she eventually named radioactivity. In the end her discovery completely
altered scientists’ view on matter itself, which had previously been seen as
containing static and fixed elements, but now was revealed to be much
more volatile and complex.
When Larry Page and Sergey Brin, the founders of Google, examined
the search engines that existed in the mid-1990s, they focused exclusively
on the seemingly trivial flaws in systems such as AltaVista, the anomalies.
These search engines, which were the hottest startups of the time, ranked
searches mostly based on the number of times the subject had been
mentioned in a given article. Although this method sometimes produced
results that were unhelpful or irrelevant, it was considered merely a quirk in
the system that would eventually be ironed out or simply accepted. By
focusing on this one anomaly, Page and Brin were able to see a glaring
weakness in the whole concept and to develop a much different ranking
algorithm—based on the number of times an article had been linked to—
which completely transformed the effectiveness and use of the search
engine.
For Charles Darwin, the crux of his theory came from looking at
mutations. It is the strange and random variation in nature that often sets a
species off in a new evolutionary direction. Think of anomalies as the
creative form of such mutations. They often represent the future, but to our
eyes they seem strange. By studying them, you can illuminate this future
before anyone else.
Fixating on what is present, ignoring what is absent:
In the Arthur Conan Doyle story “Silver Blaze,” Sherlock Holmes solves a
crime by paying attention to what did not happen—the family dog had not
barked. This meant that the murderer must have been someone the dog
knew. What this story illustrates is how the average person does not
generally pay attention to what we shall call negative cues, what should
have happened but did not. It is our natural tendency to fixate on positive
information, to notice only what we can see and hear. It takes a creative
type such as Holmes to think more broadly and rigorously, pondering the
missing information in an event, visualizing this absence as easily as we see
the presence of something.
For centuries, doctors considered diseases exclusively as something
stemming from outside the body attacking it—a contagious germ, a draft of
cold air, miasmic vapors, and so on. Treatment depended on finding drugs
of some sort that could counteract the harmful effects of these
environmental agents of disease. Then, in the early twentieth century, the
biochemist Frederick Gowland Hopkins, studying the effects of scurvy, had
the idea to reverse this perspective. What caused the problem in this
particular disease, he speculated, was not what was attacking from the
outside, but what was missing from within the body itself—in this case
what came to be known as vitamin C. Thinking creatively, he did not look
at what was present but precisely at what was absent, in order to solve the
problem. This led to his groundbreaking work on vitamins, and completely
altered our concept of health.
In business, the natural tendency is to look at what is already out there
in the marketplace and to think of how we can make it better or cheaper.
The real trick—the equivalent of seeing the negative cue—is to focus our
attention on some need that is not currently being met, on what is absent.
This requires more thinking and is harder to conceptualize, but the rewards
can be immense if we hit upon this unfulfilled need. One interesting way to
begin such a thought process is to look at new and available technology in
the world and to imagine how it could be applied in a much different way,
meeting a need that we sense exists but that is not overly apparent. If the
need is too obvious, others will already be working on it.
In the end, the ability to alter our perspective is a function of our
imagination. We have to learn how to imagine more possibilities than we
generally consider, being as loose and radical with this process as we can.
This pertains as much to inventors and businesspeople as it does to artists.
Look at the case of Henry Ford, a highly creative thinker in his own right.
In the early stages of the manufacturing of automobiles, Henry Ford
imagined a whole different kind of business than existed at the time. He
wanted to mass-produce the automobile, helping to create the consumer
culture he felt was coming. But the men in his factories would average
some twelve and a half hours to manufacture a single automobile, which
was far too slow to achieve his goal.
One day, trying to think of ways to speed up production, Ford watched
his men at work as they scrambled around as fast as they could to assemble
an automobile as it stood still on a platform. Ford did not focus on the tools
that could be improved, or how to get the men to move faster, or the need to
hire more workers—the kinds of small changes that would not have altered
the dynamic enough for mass-production. Instead, he imagined something
completely different. In his mind, he suddenly saw the cars moving and the
men standing still, each worker doing a small portion of the job as the car
moved from position to position. Within days he tried this out and realized
what he was on to. By the time it was fully instituted in 1914, the Ford
factory could now produce a car in ninety minutes. Over the years, he
would speed up this miraculous saving of time.
As you work to free up your mind and give it the power to alter its
perspective, remember the following: the emotions we experience at any
time have an inordinate influence on how we perceive the world. If we feel
afraid, we tend to see more of the potential dangers in some action. If we
feel particularly bold, we tend to ignore the potential risks. What you must
do then is not only alter your mental perspective, but reverse your
emotional one as well. For instance, if you are experiencing a lot of
resistance and setbacks in your work, try to see this as in fact something
that is quite positive and productive. These difficulties will make you
tougher and more aware of the flaws you need to correct. In physical
exercise, resistance is a way to make the body stronger, and it is the same
with the mind. Play a similar reversal on good fortune—seeing the potential
dangers of becoming soft, addicted to attention, and so forth. These
reversals will free up the imagination to see more possibilities, which will
affect what you do. If you see setbacks as opportunities, you are more likely
to make that a reality.
E. REVERT TO PRIMAL FORMS OF INTELLIGENCE
As discussed in the introduction (see here), our most primitive ancestors
developed various forms of intelligence that predated the invention of
language, which aided them in the harsh struggle for survival. They thought
mostly in terms of visual images, and became highly adept at noticing
patterns and discerning important details in their environment. Roaming
over vast spaces, they developed the ability to think spatially and learned
how to orient themselves in varied landscapes, using landmarks and the
position of the sun. They were able to think in mechanical terms, and
became supremely skilled at coordinating the hand and eye in making
things.
With the invention of language, the intellectual powers of our
ancestors were vastly enhanced. Thinking in words, they could imagine
more possibilities in the world around them, which they could then
communicate and act on. The human brain thus developed along these
evolutionary lines as a multiuse, immensely flexible instrument that is able
to think on various levels, combining many forms of intelligence with all of
the senses. But somewhere along the way a problem developed. We slowly
lost our previous flexibility and became largely dependent on words for our
thinking. In the process, we lost our connection to the senses—sight, smell,
touch—that once played such a vital role in our intelligence. Language is a
system largely designed for social communication. It is based on
conventions that everyone can agree upon. It is somewhat rigid and stable,
so that it allows us to communicate with minimum friction. But when it
comes to the incredible complexity and fluidity of life, it can often fail us.
The grammar of language locks us into certain forms of logic and
ways of thinking. As the writer Sidney Hook put it, “When Aristotle drew
up his table of categories which to him represented the grammar of
existence, he was really projecting the grammar of the Greek language on
the cosmos.” Linguists have enumerated the high number of concepts that
have no particular word to describe them in the English language. If there
are no words for certain concepts, we tend to not think of them. And so
language is a tool that is often too tight and constricting, compared to the
multilayered powers of intelligence we naturally possess.
In the last few hundred years, with the rapid development of the
sciences, technology, and the arts, we humans have had to use our brains to
solve increasingly complex problems, and those who are truly creative have
developed the ability to think beyond language, to access the lower
chambers of consciousness, to revert to those primal forms of intelligence
that served us for millions of years.
According to the great mathematician Jacques Hadamard, most
mathematicians think in terms of images, creating a visual equivalent of the
theorem they are trying to work out. Michael Faraday was a powerful visual
thinker. When he came up with the idea of electromagnetic lines of force,
anticipating the field theories of the twentieth century, he saw them literally
in his mind’s eye before he wrote about them. The structure of the periodic
table came to the chemist Dmitry Mendeleyev in a dream, where he literally
saw the elements laid out before his eyes in a visual scheme. The list of
great thinkers who relied upon images is enormous, and perhaps the
greatest of them all was Albert Einstein, who once wrote, “The words of the
language, as they are written or spoken, do not seem to play any role in my
mechanism of thought. The psychical entities which seem to serve as
elements in thought are certain signs and more or less clear images which
can be voluntarily reproduced and combined.”
Inventors such as Thomas Edison and Henry Ford thought not only in
visual terms, but also in three-dimensional models. The great electrical and
mechanical engineer Nikola Tesla could supposedly visualize in minute
detail a machine and all of its working parts, which he would then proceed
to invent according to what he had imagined.
The reason for this “regression” to visual forms of thinking is simple.
Human working memory is limited. We can only keep in mind several
pieces of information at the same time. Through an image we can
simultaneously imagine many things at once, at a glance. As opposed to
words, which can be impersonal and rigid, a visualization is something we
create, something that serves our particular needs of the moment and can
represent an idea in a way that is more fluid and real than simply words.
The use of images to make sense of the world is perhaps our most primitive
form of intelligence, and can help us conjure up ideas that we can later
verbalize. Words also are abstract; an image or model makes our idea
suddenly more concrete, which satisfies our need to see and feel things with
our senses.
Even if thinking in this way is not natural to you, using diagrams and
models to help further the creative process can be immensely productive.
Early in his research, Charles Darwin, who was normally not a visual
thinker, came up with an image to help him conceptualize evolution—an
irregularly branching tree. This signified that all of life started from one
seed; some branches of the tree ending, others still growing and sending off
new shoots. He literally drew such a tree in a notebook. This image proved
extremely helpful, and he returned to it time and again. The molecular
biologists James D. Watson and Francis Crick created a large three-
dimensional model of the DNA molecule with which they could interact
and alter; this model played an important role in their discovery and
description of DNA.
This use of images, diagrams, and models can help reveal to you
patterns in your thinking and new directions you can take that you would
find hard to imagine exclusively in words. With your idea exteriorized in a
relatively simple diagram or model, you can see your entire concept
projected at once, which will help you organize masses of information and
add new dimensions to your concept.
This conceptual image or model can be the result of hard thinking,
which is how Watson and Crick devised their three-dimensional DNA
model, or it can come in moments of fringe awareness—from a dream or a
daydream. In the latter case, such visualizations require a degree of
relaxation on your part. If you think too hard, you will come up with
something too literal. Let your attention wander, play around the edges of
your concept, loosen up your hold on consciousness, and allow images to
come to you.
Early in his career, Michael Faraday took lessons in drawing and
painting. He did this so he could recreate the experiments he had witnessed
at various lectures. But he discovered that drawing helped him think in
many ways. The hand-brain connection is something deeply wired within
us; when we attempt to sketch something we must observe it closely,
gaining a feel through our fingers of how to bring it to life. Such practice
can help you think in visual terms and free your mind from its constant
verbalizations. To Leonardo da Vinci, drawing and thinking were
synonymous.
One day, the writer and polymath Johann Wolfgang von Goethe made
a curious discovery about the creative process of his friend, the great
German writer Friedrich Schiller. Paying a visit to Schiller’s home, he was
told that the writer was not in but would return shortly. Goethe decided to
wait for him and sat down at Schiller’s writing desk. He began to be
assailed by a strange feeling of faintness, his head slowly spinning. If he
moved to the window, the sensation went away. Suddenly, he realized that
some kind of weird and nauseating smell was emanating from a drawer of
the desk. When he opened it he was shocked to see that it was full of rotten
apples, some in an extreme state of decay. When Schiller’s wife came into
the room, he asked her about the apples and the stench. She told Goethe that
she herself filled the drawers with these apples on a regular basis—her
husband delighted in the smell and he found he did his most creative work
while inhaling the fumes.
Other artists and thinkers have devised similar peculiar aids to their
creative process. When doing his deepest thinking about the theory of
relativity, Albert Einstein liked to hold on to a rubber ball that he would
periodically squeeze in tandem with the straining of his mind. In order to
work, the writer Samuel Johnson required that he had on his desk a cat,
which he would periodically stroke to make it purr, and a slice of orange.
Supposedly only these various sensual cues could properly stimulate him
for his work.
These examples are all related to the phenomenon of synesthesia—
moments in which the stimulation of one sense provokes another. For
instance, we hear a particular sound and it makes us think of a color.
Studies have indicated that synesthesia is far more prevalent among artists
and high-level thinkers. Some have speculated that synesthesia represents a
high degree of interconnectivity in the brain, which also plays a role in
intelligence. Creative people do not simply think in words, but use all of
their senses, their entire bodies in the process. They find sense cues that
stimulate their thoughts on many levels—whether it be the smell of
something strong, or the tactile feel of a rubber ball. What this means is that
they are more open to alternative ways of thinking, creating, and sensing
the world. They allow themselves a broader range of sense experience. You
must expand as well your notion of thinking and creativity beyond the
confines of words and intellectualizations. Stimulating your brain and
senses from all directions will help unlock your natural creativity and help
revive your original mind.
Step Three: The Creative Breakthrough—Tension and Insight
In the creative lives of almost all Masters, we hear of the following pattern:
They begin a project with an initial intuition and an excitement about its
potential success. Their project is deeply connected to something personal
and primal, and seems very much alive to them.
As their initial nervous excitement inspires them in certain directions,
they begin to give their concept shape, narrowing down its possibilities, and
channeling their energies into ideas that grow more and more distinct. They
enter a phase of heightened focus. But Masters inevitably possess another
quality that complicates the work process: They are not easily satisfied by
what they are doing. While able to feel excitement, they also feel doubt
about the worthiness of their work. They have high internal standards. As
they progress, they begin to detect flaws and difficulties in their original
idea that they had not foreseen.
As the process begins to become more conscious and less intuitive,
that idea once so alive in them starts to seem somewhat dead or stale. This
is a difficult feeling to endure and so they work even harder, trying to force
a solution. The harder they try, the more inner tension and frustration they
create. The sense of staleness grows. In the beginning, their mind teemed
with rich associations; now it seems condemned to a narrow track of
thought that does not spark the same connections. At certain points in this
process, lesser types would simply give up or settle for what they have—a
mediocre and half-realized project. But Masters are stronger. They have
been through this before, and on an unconscious level they understand that
they must plow forward, and that the frustration, or the feeling of being
blocked, has a purpose.
At a particular high point of tension, they let go for a moment. This
could be as simple as stopping work and going to sleep; or it could mean
deciding to take a break, or to temporarily work on something else. What
almost inevitably happens in such moments is that the solution, the perfect
idea for completing the work comes to them.
After ten long years of incessant thinking on the problem of general
relativity, Albert Einstein decided one evening to simply give up. He had
had enough. It was beyond him. He went to bed early, and when he awoke
the solution suddenly came to him. The composer Richard Wagner had
worked so hard on his opera Das Rheingold that he became completely
blocked. Beyond frustration, he took a long walk in the woods, lay down,
and fell asleep. In a sort of half dream, he felt himself sinking in swiftly
flowing water. The rushing sounds formed into musical chords. He awoke,
terrified by a feeling of drowning. He hurried home and noted down the
chords of his dream, which seemed to perfectly conjure up the sound of
rushing water. These chords became the prelude of the opera, a leitmotif
that runs throughout it, and one of the most astonishing pieces he had ever
written.
These stories are so common as to indicate something essential about
the brain and how it reaches certain peaks of creativity. We can explain this
pattern in the following way: If we remained as excited as we were in the
beginning of our project, maintaining that intuitive feel that sparked it all,
we would never be able to take the necessary distance to look at our work
objectively and improve upon it. Losing that initial verve causes us to work
and rework the idea. It forces us to not settle too early on an easy solution.
The mounting frustration and tightness that comes from single-minded
devotion to one problem or idea will naturally lead to a breaking point. We
realize we are getting nowhere. Such moments are signals from the brain to
let go, for however long a period necessary, and most creative people
consciously or unconsciously accept this.
When we let go, we are not aware that below the surface of
consciousness the ideas and the associations we had built up continue to
bubble and incubate. With the feeling of tightness gone, the brain can
momentarily return to that initial feeling of excitement and aliveness, which
by now has been greatly enhanced by all of our hard work. The brain can
now find the proper synthesis to the work, the one that was eluding us
because we had become too tight in our approach. Perhaps the idea for the
watery sounds in Das Rheingold had stirred before in different forms in
Wagner’s brain as he strained to find the right opening. Only by giving up
the chase and falling asleep in the woods was he able to access his
unconscious mind, and allow an idea that had been brewing there to surface
by way of a dream.
The key is to be aware of this process and to encourage yourself to go
as far as you can with your doubts, your reworkings, and your strained
efforts, knowing the value and purpose of the frustration and creative blocks
you are facing. Think of yourself as your own Zen Master. Such Masters
would often beat their pupils and deliberately lead them to points of
maximum doubt and inner tension, knowing such moments often precede
enlightenment.
Among the thousands of stories of great insights and discoveries,
perhaps the strangest one of all is that of Evariste Galois, a promising
student of mathematics in France who in his teens revealed exceptional
brilliance in algebra. In 1831, at the age of twenty, he became embroiled in
a quarrel over a woman, which resulted in his being challenged to a duel.
The night before the duel, certain he was going to die, Galois sat down and
tried to summarize all of the ideas on algebraic equations that had been
troubling him for several years. Suddenly, the ideas flowed, and even new
ones came to him. He wrote all night at a feverish pitch. The next day, as he
had foreseen, he died in the duel, but in the ensuing years his notes were
read and published, leading to a complete revolution in higher algebra.
Some of his scribbled notes indicated directions in mathematics that were
so far ahead of his time, it is hard to fathom where they came from.
This is a somewhat extreme example, but the story reveals something
elemental about the need for tension. The feeling that we have endless time
to complete our work has an insidious and debilitating effect on our minds.
Our attention and thoughts become diffused. Our lack of intensity makes it
hard for the brain to jolt into a higher gear. The connections do not occur.
For this purpose you must always try to work with deadlines, whether real
or manufactured. Faced with the slenderest amount of time to reach the end,
the mind rises to the level you require. Ideas crowd upon one another. You
don’t have the luxury of feeling frustrated. Every day represents an intense
challenge, and every morning you wake up with original ideas and
associations to push you along.
If you don’t have such deadlines, manufacture them for yourself. The
inventor Thomas Edison understood how much better he worked under
pressure. He would deliberately talk to the press about an idea before it was
ready. This would create some publicity and excitement in the public as to
the possibilities of the proposed invention. If he dropped the ball or let too
much time pass, his reputation would suffer, and so his mind would spark
into high gear and he would make it happen. In such cases your mind is like
the army that is now backed up against the sea or a mountain and cannot
retreat. Sensing the proximity of death, it will fight harder than ever.
Emotional Pitfalls
When we arrive at the Creative-Active phase in our career, we are
confronted by new challenges that are not simply mental or intellectual. The
work is more demanding; we are on our own and the stakes are higher. Our
work is now more public and highly scrutinized. We might have the most
brilliant ideas and a mind capable of handling the greatest intellectual
challenges, but if we are not careful, we will tumble into emotional pitfalls.
We will grow insecure, overly anxious about people’s opinions, or
excessively self-confident. Or we will become bored and lose a taste for the
hard work that is always necessary. Once we fall into these traps it is hard
to extricate ourselves; we lose the necessary perspective to see where we
have gone wrong. Better to be aware of these pitfalls in advance and never
step into them. The following are the six most common pitfalls that threaten
us along the way.
Complacency: In childhood, the world seemed like an enchanted
place. Everything that we encountered had an intensity to it, and sparked
feelings of wonder. Now, from our mature viewpoint, we see this
wonderment as naïve, a quaint quality we have outgrown with our
sophistication and vast experience of the real world. Such words as
“enchantment” or “wonder” cause us to snicker. But imagine for an instant
that the opposite is the case. The fact that life began on its own so many
billions of years ago, that a conscious species such as ours ever came about
and evolved into our present form, that we have visited the moon and come
to understand vital laws of physics, and so on—all of this should
continually fill us with awe. Our skeptical, cynical attitudes can actually cut
us off from so many interesting questions, and from reality itself.
After we pass through a rigorous apprenticeship and begin to flex our
creative muscles, we cannot help but feel satisfaction in what we have
learned and how far we have progressed. We naturally begin to take for
granted certain ideas we have learned and developed. Slowly, we stop
asking the same kinds of questions that plagued us earlier on. We already
know the answers. We feel ever so superior. Unknown to ourselves, the
mind slowly narrows and tightens as complacency creeps into the soul, and
although we may have achieved public acclaim for our past work, we stifle
our own creativity and never get it back. Fight this downhill tendency as
much as you can by upholding the value of active wonder. Constantly
remind yourself of how little you truly know, and of how mysterious the
world remains.
Conservatism: If you gain any kind of attention or success for your
work in this phase, you face the great danger of creeping conservatism. This
danger comes in several forms. You begin to fall in love with the ideas and
strategies that worked for you in the past. Why risk changing your style in
midstream, or adapting a new approach to your work? Better to stick to the
tried and true. You also will have a reputation to protect—better to not say
or do anything that might rock the boat. You become subtly addicted to the
material comforts you have acquired and before you know it, you uphold
ideas that you think you believe in, but that really are tied to your need to
please the audience or your sponsors, or whomever.
Creativity is by its nature an act of boldness and rebellion. You are not
accepting the status quo or conventional wisdom. You are playing with the
very rules you have learned, experimenting and testing the boundaries. The
world is dying for bolder ideas, for people who are not afraid to speculate
and investigate. Creeping conservatism will narrow your searches, tether
you to comfortable ideas, and create a downward spiral—as the creative
spark leaves you, you will find yourself clutching even more forcefully to
dead ideas, past successes, and the need to maintain your status. Make
creativity rather than comfort your goal and you will ensure far more
success for the future.
Dependency: In the Apprenticeship Phase you relied upon mentors
and those above you to supply you with the necessary standards of
judgment for your field. But if you are not careful, you will carry this need
for approval over into the next phase. Instead of relying on the Master for
evaluation of your work, you—ever insecure about your work and how it
will be judged—come to rely on the opinions of the public. It is not that you
must ignore these judgments, but that you must first work hard to develop
internal standards and a high degree of independence. You have the
capacity to see your own work with some distance; when the public reacts,
you can distinguish between what is worth paying attention to and what you
should ignore. What you want in the end is to internalize the voice of your
Master so that you become both teacher and pupil. If you fail to do so you
will have no internal gauge as to the value of your work, and you will be
blown here and there by the opinions of others, never to find yourself.
Impatience: This is perhaps the single greatest pitfall of them all. This
quality continually haunts you, no matter how disciplined you might think
you are. You will convince yourself that your work is essentially over and
well done, when really it is your impatience speaking and coloring your
judgment. You tend to lose the energy you had when you were younger and
hungrier. Unconsciously, you will veer toward repetition—reusing the same
ideas and processes as a kind of shortcut. Unfortunately, the creative
process requires continual intensity and vigor. Each exercise or problem or
project is different. Hurrying to the end or warming up old ideas will ensure
a mediocre result.
Leonardo da Vinci understood the dangers of such impatience. He
adopted as his motto the expression ostinato rigore, which translates as
“stubborn rigor” or “tenacious application.” For every project he involved
himself in—and by the end of his life they numbered in the thousands—he
repeated this to himself, so he would attack each one with the same vigor
and tenacity. The best way to neutralize our natural impatience is to
cultivate a kind of pleasure in pain—like an athlete, you come to enjoy
rigorous practice, pushing past your limits, and resisting the easy way out.
Grandiosity: Sometimes greater danger comes from success and
praise than from criticism. If we learn to handle criticism well, it can
strengthen us and help us become aware of flaws in our work. Praise
generally does harm. Ever so slowly, the emphasis shifts from the joy of the
creative process to the love of attention and to our ever-inflating ego.
Without realizing it, we alter and shape our work to attract the praise that
we crave. We fail to understand the element of luck that always goes into
success—we often depend on being in the right place at the right time.
Instead, we come to think that our brilliance has naturally drawn our
success and attention, as if it were indeed fated. Once the ego inflates it will
only come back to earth through some jarring failure, which will equally
scar us. To avoid this fate, you must have some perspective. There are
always greater geniuses out there than yourself. Luck certainly played a
role, as did the help of your mentor and all those in the past who paved the
way. What must ultimately motivate you is the work itself and the process.
Public attention is actually a nuisance and a distraction. Such an attitude is
the only defense against falling into the traps set by our ego.
Inflexibility: Being creative involves certain paradoxes. You must
know your field inside and out, and yet be able to question its most
entrenched assumptions. You must be somewhat naïve to entertain certain
questions, and optimistic that you will solve the problem at hand; at the
same time, you must regularly doubt that you have achieved your goal and
subject your work to intensive self-criticism. All of this requires a great deal
of flexibility, which means you must not get too hung up on any single
frame of mind. You must bend to the moment and adopt the attitude
appropriate to the moment.
Flexibility is not an easy or natural quality to develop. Once you spend
a period of time being excited and hopeful about an idea, you will find it
hard to shift to a more critical position. Once you look at your work with
intensity and doubt, you will lose your optimism and your love of what you
do. Avoiding these problems takes practice and often some experience—
when you have pushed past the doubt before, you will find it easier the next
time. In any event, you must avoid emotional extremes and find a way to
feel optimism and doubt at the same time—a difficult sensation to describe
in words, but something all Masters have experienced.
We are all in search of feeling more connected to reality—to other people,
the times we live in, the natural world, our character, and our own
uniqueness. Our culture increasingly tends to separate us from these
realities in various ways. We indulge in drugs or alcohol, or engage in
dangerous sports or risky behavior, just to wake ourselves up from the sleep
of our daily existence and feel a heightened sense of connection to reality.
In the end, however, the most satisfying and powerful way to feel this
connection is through creative activity. Engaged in the creative process we
feel more alive than ever, because we are making something and not merely
consuming, Masters of the small reality we create. In doing this work, we
are in fact creating ourselves.
Although it involves much pain, the pleasure that comes from the
overall process of creativity is of an intensity that makes us want to repeat
it. That is why creative people return again and again to such endeavors,
despite all of the anxiety and doubt they stir up. It is nature’s way of
rewarding us for the effort; if we had no such rewards, people would not
engage in such activity, and mankind would suffer irreparably from this
loss. This pleasure will be your reward as well, to whatever degree you
pursue the process.
STRATEGIES FOR THE CREATIVE-ACTIVE PHASE
Don’t think about why you question, simply don’t stop questioning. Don’t worry about what
you can’t answer, and don’t try to explain what you can’t know. Curiosity is its own reason.
Aren’t you in awe when you contemplate the mysteries of eternity, of life, of the marvelous
structure behind reality? And this is the miracle of the human mind—to use its constructions,
concepts, and formulas as tools to explain what man sees, feels and touches. Try to
comprehend a little more each day. Have holy curiosity.
—ALBERT EINSTEIN
As future Masters emerge from their apprenticeships, they all face the same
dilemma: no one has ever really instructed them about the creative process,
and there are no real books or teachers to turn to. Struggling on their own to
become more active and imaginative with the knowledge they have gained,
they evolve their own process—one that suits their temperament and the
field they are working in. And in these creative evolutions we can detect
some basic patterns and lessons for us all. The following stories of nine
Masters reveal nine different strategic approaches to the same goal. The
methods they employ may be applied to any field because they are
connected to the creative powers of the brain that we all possess. Try to
absorb each one of them, enriching your own knowledge of the process of
mastery and widening your creative arsenal.
1. The Authentic Voice
As a boy growing up in North Carolina, John Coltrane (1926–67) took up
music as a kind of hobby. He was an anxious young man who needed an
outlet for all of his pent-up energy. He started with the alto horn, moved to
the clarinet, and finally settled on the alto saxophone. He played for his
school band, and to those who heard him play back then he was a
completely insignificant member of the group.
Then in 1943 his family moved to Philadelphia. One evening shortly
after the move Coltrane happened to catch a performance of the great bebop
saxophonist Charlie Parker, and he was instantly transfixed. (See here.) He
had never heard such playing, had never imagined such possibilities in
music. Parker had a way of lilting and singing through his saxophone as if
the instrument had melded with his own voice, and in hearing him play it
seemed possible to feel what he was feeling. From that moment on, John
Coltrane was a man possessed. Following in Parker’s footsteps, in his own
way, would now be his Life’s Task.
Coltrane was not sure how he could reach such heights, but he knew
that Parker was an intense student of all types of music and practiced the
instrument harder than anyone. This fit in nicely with Coltrane’s own
inclinations—always being somewhat of a loner, he loved nothing more
than to study and expand his knowledge. He started taking theory lessons at
a local music school. And he began to practice night and day, with such
assiduity that his reeds would become red from blood. In the time in
between practicing, he went to the public library and listened to classical
music, hungry to absorb every conceivable harmonic possibility. He
practiced scales like a fiend, driving his family insane. He took scale-book
exercises designed for the piano and used them for the saxophone, going
through all of the keys in Western music. He began to get gigs in bands in
Philadelphia, getting his first real break in Dizzy Gillespie’s orchestra.
Gillespie made him change to the tenor sax to get more of the Charlie
Parker sound, and within a few months Coltrane had mastered the new
instrument—through endless hours of practice.
Over the next five years Coltrane would bounce around from one band
to another, each with its different style and repertoire of songs. This
wandering existence suited him well—he felt as if he needed to internalize
every conceivable style of music. But this also caused him some problems.
When it came time for him to perform a solo, he was quite awkward and
halting. He had an unusual sense of rhythm, a hopping and skipping style
that was peculiar to him and not quite right for the bands he was playing
for. Feeling self-conscious, when it came time for a solo he would resort to
imitating someone else’s way of playing. Every few months he would
suddenly experiment with a new sound that he had heard. To some, it
seemed like young Coltrane had gotten lost in all of his studying and
roaming about.
In 1955 Miles Davis—leader of the most famous jazz quartet at the
time—decided to take a chance and invite Coltrane into his group. Like
everyone else, he knew that the young man was the most technically
brilliant player around, the result of so many hours of practice. But he also
detected in his work something strange, a new kind of voice straining to
come out. He encouraged Coltrane to go his own way and never look back.
In the months to come, Davis would have moments of regret—he had let
loose something that was hard to integrate into his group. Coltrane had a
way of starting chords in the strangest places. He would alternate fast
passages with long tones, giving the impression that several voices were
coming through the saxophone at once. No one had ever heard such a
sound. His tone was equally peculiar; he had his own way of tightly
clenching the mouthpiece, making it seem as if it were his own gravelly
voice that was emerging from the instrument. His playing had an
undercurrent of anxiety and aggression, which gave his music a sense of
urgency.
Although many were put off by this strange new sound, some critics
began to recognize something exciting in it. One writer described what
came out of Coltrane’s saxophone as “sheets of sound,” as if he were
playing groups of notes at once and sweeping the listener away with his
music. Although he was now gaining recognition and attention, Coltrane
continued to feel restless and uncertain. Through all of his years of
practicing and playing he had been searching for something he could hardly
put into words. He wanted to personalize his sound to the extreme, to make
it the perfect embodiment of how he was feeling—often emotions of a
spiritual and transcendental nature, and thus hard to verbalize. At moments
his playing would come alive, but at other times the sensation of his own
voice would elude him. Perhaps all of his knowledge was in fact cramping
and inhibiting him. In 1959 he left Miles Davis to form his own quartet.
From now on, he would experiment and try almost anything until he found
the sound that he had been looking for.
His song “Giant Steps,” on his first major album of the same name,
was an exercise in unconventional music. Using peculiar chord
progressions that moved in thirds, with constant key and chord changes, the
music was impelled frantically forward. (Its third-related chord
progressions became known as Coltrane changes, and are still used by
musicians as a template for jazz improvisation.) The album was a huge
success; several pieces from it went on to become jazz standards, but the
experiment left Coltrane cold. He now wanted to return to melody, to
something freer and more expressive, and he found himself going back to
the music of his early childhood—Negro spirituals. In 1960 he created his
first huge popular hit, an extended version of the song “My Favorite
Things,” from the smash Broadway musical The Sound of Music. He played
it on the soprano saxophone in a style that seemed almost East Indian,
blending in as well a touch of Negro spirituals, all with his strange
propensity for chord changes and rapid scales. It was a weird blend of
experimental and popular music, unlike anything anyone else had done.
Coltrane was now like an alchemist, involved in an almost impossible
quest to discover the essence of music itself, to make it express more deeply
and directly the emotions he was feeling, to connect it to the unconscious.
And slowly, it seemed he was getting closer to his goal. His ballad
“Alabama,” written in response to the 1963 bombing by the Ku Klux Klan
of a church in Birmingham, Alabama, seemed to capture something
essential about the moment and the mood of the time. It seemed to be the
incarnation of sadness and despair. A year later, his album A Love Supreme
appeared. It was recorded in one day, and making the music was like a
religious experience for him. It had everything he was aiming for—
extended movements that went as long as it felt natural to do so (something
novel in jazz), and a trance-like effect on listeners, while still containing the
hard-driving sound and technical brilliance he was known for. It was an
album that expressed that spiritual element he could not put into words. It
became a sensation, drawing a whole new audience to his music.
People who saw his live performances in this period proclaimed the
uniqueness of the experience. As the saxophonist Joe McPhee described it,
“I thought I was going to die from the emotion…I thought I was just going
to explode right in the place. The energy level kept building up, and I
thought, God almighty, I can’t take it.” Audiences would go wild, some
people screaming at the intensity of the sound. It seemed as if the music
from Coltrane’s saxophone was a direct translation of some deep mood or
feeling of his, and that he could move the audience in whatever direction he
wanted with it. No other jazz artist had such an effect on audiences.
As part of the Coltrane phenomenon, every change he introduced into
jazz was suddenly adopted as the latest trend—extended songs, larger
groups, tambourines and bells, Eastern sounds, and so on. The man who
had spent ten long years absorbing the styles of all forms of music and jazz
now had become the trendsetter for others. Coltrane’s meteoric career,
however, was cut short in 1967, when he died at the age of forty of liver
cancer.
In Coltrane’s era jazz had become a celebration of individuality. Players like
Charlie Parker made the jazz solo the centerpiece of any work. In the solo,
the player would pour out his own unique voice. But what is this voice that
comes through so clearly in the work of the greats? It is not something we
can exactly put into words. Musicians are expressing something deep about
their nature, their particular psychological makeup, even their unconscious.
It comes out in their style, their unique rhythms and phrasings. But this
voice does not emerge from just being oneself and letting loose. A person
who would take up an instrument and try to express this quality right away
would only produce noise. Jazz or any other musical form is a language,
with conventions and vocabulary. And so the extreme paradox is that those
who impress the most with their individuality—John Coltrane at the top—
are the ones who first completely submerge their character in a long
apprenticeship. In Coltrane’s case, this process can be broken up neatly—
just over ten years of an intense apprenticeship, followed by ten years of
perhaps the most amazing creative explosion in modern music, up until his
death.
By spending so long learning structure, developing technique, and
absorbing every possible style and way of playing, Coltrane built up a vast
vocabulary. Once all of this became hardwired into his nervous system, his
mind could focus on higher things. At an increasingly rapid pace, he could
bend all of the techniques he had learned into something more personal. In
being so open to exploring and trying things out, he could discover in a
serendipitous fashion those musical ideas that suited him. With all that he
had learned and mastered, he could combine ideas and styles in unique
ways. By being patient and following the process, individual expression
flowed out of him naturally. He personalized every genre he worked in,
from blues to Broadway show tunes. His authentic voice—with its anxious,
urgent tone—was a reflection of his uniqueness at birth, and came to him in
a lengthy, organic process. By expressing his deepest self and his most
primal emotions, he created a visceral effect on listeners.
Understand: the greatest impediment to creativity is your impatience,
the almost inevitable desire to hurry up the process, express something, and
make a splash. What happens in such a case is that you do not master the
basics; you have no real vocabulary at your disposal. What you mistake for
being creative and distinctive is more likely an imitation of other people’s
style, or personal rantings that do not really express anything. Audiences,
however, are hard to fool. They feel the lack of rigor, the imitative quality,
the urge to get attention, and they turn their backs, or give the mildest praise
that quickly passes. The best route is to follow Coltrane and to love learning
for its own sake. Anyone who would spend ten years absorbing the
techniques and conventions of their field, trying them out, mastering them,
exploring and personalizing them, would inevitably find their authentic
voice and give birth to something unique and expressive.
2. The Fact of Great Yield
For as long as he can remember, V. S. Ramachandran (b. 1951) has been
fascinated by any kind of strange phenomenon in nature. As narrated in
chapter 1 (see here), at a very young age he began collecting seashells from
beaches near his home in Madras. In researching the subject, his attention
was drawn to the most peculiar varieties of seashells, such as the
carnivorous murex. Soon he added these unusual specimens to his
collection. As he got older, he transferred this interest to abnormal
phenomena in chemistry, astronomy, and human anatomy. Perhaps he
intuited that these anomalies fulfilled some kind of purpose in nature, that
what does not fit the pattern has something interesting to tell us. Perhaps he
felt that he himself—with his passion for science when other boys were
attracted to sports or games—was a bit of an anomaly as well. In any event,
as he matured his attraction to the bizarre and abnormal only grew.
In the 1980s, as a professor of visual psychology at the University of
California at San Diego, he came upon a phenomenon that appealed to his
interest in anomalies in the deepest way—the so-called phantom limb
syndrome. In this case, people who have had a limb amputated continue to
experience sensation and pain where the limb used to be. In his research as
a visual psychologist, Ramachandran had specialized in optical illusions—
instances in which the brain would incorrectly fill in information from what
the eyes had processed. Phantom limbs represented an optical illusion on a
much larger scale, with the brain supplying sensation where there could be
none. Why would the brain send such signals? What does such a
phenomenon tell us about the brain in general? And why were there so few
people interested in this truly bizarre condition? He became obsessed with
these questions, and read everything he could about the subject.
One day in 1991, he read about an experiment conducted by Dr.
Timothy Pons of the National Institute of Health that astounded him with its
possible ramifications. Pons’s experiment was based on research from the
1950s in which the Canadian neurosurgeon, Wilder Penfeld, had been able
to map the areas of the human brain that regulate sensation in various body
parts. This map ended up being applicable to primates as well.
In Pons’s experiment, he worked with monkeys whose nerve fibers
from the brain to one arm had been severed. In testing out the map of their
brains, Pons discovered that when he touched the hand of the dead arm,
there was no activity in the corresponding part of the brain, as expected. But
when he touched their faces, suddenly the cells in the brain that
corresponded to the dead hand began to fire rapidly, in addition to those of
the face. The nerve cells in the brain that govern sensation in the hand had
somehow migrated to the area of the face. It was impossible to know for
sure, but it seemed that these monkeys were experiencing sensation in the
dead hand when their faces were touched.
Inspired by this discovery, Ramachandran decided to conduct an
experiment that was astonishing for its simplicity. He brought into his office
a young man who, because of a recent car accident, had had his left arm
amputated from just above the elbow, and was now experiencing
considerable sensation in his phantom limb. Using a cotton swab,
Ramachandran proceeded to touch the man’s legs and stomach. He reported
completely normal sensations. But when Ramachandran swabbed a
particular part of his cheek, the man experienced a sensation both in the
cheek and in the thumb of his phantom hand. Moving around the face with
the Q-tip, Ramachandran found other areas corresponding to other parts of
the missing hand. The results were remarkably similar to those of Pons’s
experiment.
The implications of this one simple test were profound. It had been
largely assumed in neuroscience that the connections in the brain are
hardwired at birth or in the earliest years, and are essentially permanent.
The results of this experiment contradicted this assumption. In this case,
after a traumatic accident, it appeared that the brain had altered itself in a
dramatic fashion, creating whole new networks of connections in a
relatively short amount of time. This meant that the human brain is
potentially far more plastic than had been imagined. In this case the brain
had altered itself in an odd and seemingly inexplicable way. But what if this
power to alter itself could be harnessed for positive, therapeutic uses?
Based on this experiment, Ramachandran decided to shift fields,
moving into the neuroscience department at UCSD and devoting his time
and research to anomalous neurological disorders. He decided to take his
phantom limb experiment a step further. Many patients with a severed limb
experience an odd kind of paralysis that is highly painful. They feel the
phantom limb, they want to move it but cannot, and they feel a cramping
and sometimes an excruciating ache. Ramachandran speculated that before
the limb had been amputated the brain had learned to experience the arm or
leg as paralyzed, and once it had been amputated it continued to feel it that
way. Would it be possible, considering the plasticity of the brain, to unlearn
this paralysis? And so he came up with yet another incredibly simple
experiment to test out his idea.
Using a mirror that he had in his office, he proceeded to construct his
own apparatus. He took a cardboard box with the lid removed, and made
two armholes in the front of the box. He then positioned the upright mirror
inside of it. Patients were instructed to place their good arm through one
hole and their severed arm right up to the other hole. They were to
maneuver the mirror until the image of their good arm was seen in the
position where their other arm should be. In moving their good arm and
seeing it move in the position of the severed one, almost instantly, these
patients experienced an alleviation of the feeling of paralysis. Most of the
patients who took the box home with them and practiced with it were able
to unlearn the paralysis, much to their relief.
Once again, the meaning of this discovery was profound. Not only was
the brain more plastic, but the senses were also much more interconnected
than previously imagined. The brain did not consist of modules for each
sense; instead they overlapped. In this case, pure visual stimuli had altered
the sense of touch and sensation. But beyond that, this experiment also
called into question the whole notion of pain. Pain, it seemed, was a kind of
opinion the body rendered on what it was experiencing, on its own health.
This opinion could be tricked or manipulated, as the mirror experiment had
shown.
In further experiments, Ramachandran arranged it so that patients
would see a student’s arm instead of their own, superimposed over the
phantom limb. They would not be aware that this had been done, and when
the student moved the arm, they experienced the same relief from paralysis.
It was merely the sight of the movement that created the effect. This made
the sensation of pain seem increasingly more subjective and subject to
alteration.
Over the ensuing years, Ramachandran would perfect this creative
style of investigation into an art, transforming himself into one of the
leading neuroscientists in the world. He developed certain guidelines for his
strategy. He would look for any evidence of anomalies in neuroscience or in
related fields, ones that brought up questions that had the potential to
challenge conventional wisdom. His criteria were that he had to be able to
show it was a real phenomenon (something like telepathy would not fall
into this category), that it could be explained in terms of current science,
and that it had important implications stretching beyond the confines of his
own field. If others were ignoring it because it seemed too weird, so much
the better—he would have the research field all to himself.
Furthermore, he looked for ideas that he could verify through simple
experiments—no heavy or expensive equipment. He had noticed that those
who got large grants for their research, which would include all of the
technological gadgetry that went with it, would become embroiled in
political games in order to justify the money being spent on them. They
would rely on technology instead of on their own thinking. And they would
become conservative, not wanting to rock the boat with their conclusions.
He preferred to do his work with cotton swabs and mirrors, and by
engaging in detailed conversations with his patients.
For instance, he became intrigued by the neurological disorder known
as apotemnophilia—the desire of perfectly healthy people to have a limb
amputated, with many of them actually going through with the surgery.
Some had speculated that this well-known disorder is a cry for attention, or
stems from a form of sexual perversion, or that patients had seen in
childhood an amputee and the image had somehow become imprinted as an
ideal to them. In all of these speculations, people seemed to doubt the
reality of the actual sensation—it was all in their heads, they implied.
Through simple interviews with several such patients, Ramachandran
made some discoveries that dispelled these notions. In all cases they
involved the left leg, which was curious enough. In talking to them, it
seemed clear to Ramachandran that they were not after attention, nor were
they sexually perverse, but rather they were experiencing a very real desire,
because of some very real sensation. With a pen, they all marked the exact
spot where they wanted the amputation.
When he did simple galvanic skin response tests on their bodies (tests
that record the registering of slight amounts of pain), he discovered that
everything was normal, except when he pricked the part of the leg the
patient wanted amputated. The response was through the roof. The patient
was experiencing that part of the limb as if it were too present, too intense,
and this overactive sensation could only be done away with through
amputation.
In subsequent work he was able to locate neurological damage to the
part of their brains that create and control our sense of body image. This
damage had occurred at birth, or very early on. This meant that the brain
could create a body image in a perfectly healthy person that was highly
irrational. It seemed as well that our sense of self is far more subjective and
fluid than we had thought. If our experience of our own body is something
constructed in the brain and can go haywire, then perhaps our sense of self
is also something of a construction or illusion, one that we create to suit our
purposes, and one that can malfunction. The implications here go beyond
neuroscience, and into the realm of philosophy.
The animal world can be divided into two types—specialists and
opportunists. Specialists, like hawks or eagles, have one dominant skill
upon which they depend for their survival. When they are not hunting, they
can go into a mode of complete relaxation. Opportunists, on the other hand,
have no particular specialty. They depend instead on their skill to sniff out
any kind of opportunity in the environment and seize upon it. They are in
states of constant tension and require continual stimulation. We humans are
the ultimate opportunists in the animal world, the least specialized of all
living creatures. Our entire brain and nervous system is geared toward
looking for any kind of opening. Our most primitive ancestors did not begin
with an idea in their heads for creating a tool to help them in scavenging
and killing. Instead they came upon a rock, perhaps one that was unusually
sharp or elongated (an anomaly), and saw in this a possibility. In picking it
up and handling it, the idea came to them to use it as a tool. This
opportunistic bent of the human mind is the source and foundation of our
creative powers, and it is in going with this bent of the brain that we
maximize these powers.
And yet when it comes to creative endeavors, so often we find people
going at them from the wrong end. This generally afflicts those who are
young and inexperienced—they begin with an ambitious goal, a business,
or an invention or a problem they want to solve. This seems to promise
money and attention. They then search for ways to reach that goal. Such a
search could go in thousands of directions, each of which could pan out in
its own way, but in which they could also easily end up exhausting
themselves and never find the key to reaching their overarching goal. There
are too many variables that go into success. The more experienced, wiser
types, such as Ramachandran, are opportunists. Instead of beginning with
some broad goal, they go in search of the fact of great yield—a bit of
empirical evidence that is strange and does not fit the paradigm, and yet is
intriguing. This bit of evidence sticks out and grabs their attention, like the
elongated rock. They are not sure of their goal and they do not yet have in
mind an application for the fact they have uncovered, but they are open to
where it will lead them. Once they dig deeply, they discover something that
challenges prevailing conventions and offers endless opportunities for
knowledge and application.
In looking for facts of great yield, you must follow certain guidelines.
Although you are beginning within a particular field that you understand
deeply, you must not allow your mind to become tethered to this discipline.
Instead you must read journals and books from all different fields.
Sometimes you will find an interesting anomaly in an unrelated discipline
that may have implications for your own. You must keep your mind
completely open—no item is too small or unimportant to escape your
attention. If an apparent anomaly calls into question your own beliefs or
assumptions, so much the better. You must speculate on what it could mean,
this speculation guiding your subsequent research but not determining your
conclusions. If what you have discovered seems to have profound
ramifications, you must pursue it with the utmost intensity. Better to look
into ten such facts, with only one yielding a great discovery, than to look
into twenty ideas that bring success but have trivial implications. You are
the supreme hunter, ever alert, eyes scanning the landscape for the fact that
will expose a once-hidden reality, with profound consequences.
3. Mechanical Intelligence
From their earliest years the brothers Wilbur Wright (1867–1912) and
Orville Wright (1871–1948) displayed a rather unusual interest in the
working parts of any kind of device, particularly the elaborate toys their
father often brought home to them from his travels as a bishop in the United
Brethren Church. They would take these toys apart in a state of extreme
excitement, avid to figure out what made them tick. Then they would
reassemble them, always with some modification.
Although the boys were reasonably good at schoolwork, neither of
them received a high school diploma. They wanted to live in a world of
machines, and the only knowledge that really interested them was that
which related to the design and construction of some new device. They
were extremely practical.
In 1888 their father needed to quickly print out a pamphlet for his
work. To help him, the brothers cobbled together their own small job press,
using the hinge from a folding buggy top in the backyard, rusty springs, and
other pieces of scrap. The press worked brilliantly. Inspired by their
success, they improved the design, using better parts, and opened their own
printing shop. Those who knew the business marveled at the peculiar press
the brothers had concocted, which managed to spit out 1,000 pages per
hour, double the usual rate.
The brothers, however, had a restless spirit. They needed constant
challenges, and in 1892 Orville discovered the perfect new outlet for them.
With the invention of the safety bicycle (the first bicycle featuring two
wheels of the same size), America had become seized with a biking craze.
The brothers purchased their own bicycles, entered races, and became
fanatics in the sport. Soon they were taking their bicycles apart and making
minor adjustments. Seeing them at work in the backyard, friends and
acquaintances would bring them their own bicycles for repairs. Within
months they knew bicycle technology from the inside out, and decided to
open their own shop in their native Dayton, Ohio, where they sold, repaired
and even modified the latest models.
This seemed to be the perfect match for their skills. They could make
various changes on a bicycle, take it out for a test ride, feel what worked
and didn’t work, and then make further improvements. They were
constantly striving to make the bicycles more maneuverable and
aerodynamic, changes that would qualitatively alter the experience of riding
and give the rider a feeling of being in complete control. Dissatisfied with
the latest designs, they decided that the next logical step was to build their
own aluminum frames and design their own custom-built bicycle. This
represented a steep challenge—it would require months of on-the-job
learning to be able to properly build frames. The slightest flaw could cause
all kinds of horrifying accidents. In the process of learning this skill, they
purchased a slew of the latest tools, built their own one-cylinder engine to
power them, and steadily became master bicycle craftsmen. Those who
rode the Wright brothers’ bicycles could feel right away the superiority of
their version, which included technological improvements that would soon
become industry standards.
In 1896, while convalescing from an injury, Wilbur read an article that
would haunt him for years. It concerned the death of Otto Lilienthal, the
leading designer of gliders and an expert in the growing field of aviation.
He had died in a crash with his latest glider design. The photographs of the
various gliders he had built, all in flight, astounded Wilbur—they looked
like the wings of a giant prehistoric bird. As someone with a powerful sense
of visualization, Wilbur could imagine the sensation of flying itself, and it
thrilled him. But what surprised him in the article was that over many years
of test flights, perhaps numbering in the hundreds, Lilienthal had never
been able to maintain the flight long enough to get a feel for the necessary
improvements, and had probably died because of this.
Several years later, newspapers were filled with stories about the latest
pioneers in aviation, many of whom appeared to be getting closer to the
goal of creating a motored flying machine. It was now turning into a race to
be the first to succeed. His curiosity on the subject getting deeper, Wilbur
decided to write to the Smithsonian Institution in Washington, D.C.,
requesting all of their available information on aeronautics and flying
machines. For the next few months he pored over the materials, reading
about the physics and mathematics behind flight, the designs of Leonardo
da Vinci, and the gliders of the nineteenth century. He added to his reading
list books about birds, which he now began to observe and study. And the
more he read, the more he had the strange sensation that he and his brother
could actually be the ones to win such a race.
At first glance this would seem an absurd idea. The men in the field
were all experts with incredible technical knowledge, some with impressive
college degrees. They had an enormous head start over the Wright brothers.
Designing and building a flying machine was an expensive venture that
could total thousands of dollars and lead to yet another crash. The favorite
to win the race was Samuel Langley, the secretary of the Smithsonian
Institution, who had an enormous government grant to pursue his work and
had already successfully flown a steam-powered, unmanned model. The
brothers came from a modest background, and the only money they had was
the slender profits from their bicycle shop. But what all of these men
lacked, in Wilbur’s mind, was some basic common sense when it came to
any kind of machine.
These aviators had begun with the premise that what mattered was to
get the machine in the air using a powerful engine of some sort, figuring the
rest out once flight had been achieved. Getting in the air would impress the
public, gain attention, and attract financial backing. This led to many
crashes, constant redesigns, the search for the perfect engine, new materials,
and more crashes. They were getting nowhere, and the reason was simple.
As Wilbur knew, the key to building anything right is repetition. It was only
by getting their hands on bicycles, fiddling and tinkering with them, then
riding them and gaining a feel for what worked, that the brothers had been
able to design a superior variety of bicycle. Because the designers of the
flying machines could not fly for more than a minute, they were locked into
a vicious cycle—they were never airborne long enough to learn how to fly
and properly test out their designs, or get a feel for what might work. They
were doomed to failure.
Wilbur discovered another great flaw in their thinking that shocked
him: they all overvalued the importance of stability. They thought in terms
of a ship floating through the air. A ship is designed to maintain balance,
and to move in as stable and straight a manner as possible; tipping from
side to side is far too dangerous. Based on this analogy, they decided to
design the wings of their flying machines in a slight V shape, to compensate
for any sudden gusts of wind and to keep the cruising aircraft in a straight
line. But Wilbur felt that thinking in terms of ships was the wrong analogy.
Instead, it was far wiser to think in terms of a bicycle. A bicycle is
inherently unstable. It is the rider who learns quickly enough how to keep
the bike in a secure position, and to steer it properly by leaning to the side.
A pilot of a flying machine, as he imagined it, should be able to safely bank
and turn, or tilt up or down, and not be locked into a rigid horizontal line,
like a ship. Trying to free the machine from the effects of the wind was
actually quite dangerous, because it would remove the ability of the pilot to
adjust.
Armed with this knowledge, it was easy enough for Wilbur to
convince his brother that a flying machine should be their next and ultimate
challenge. They would have to use their limited profits from the bicycle
shop to fund the project. This would force them to be creative, using scrap
parts and never trying anything beyond their means. Instead of beginning
with a grandiose device to test out their ideas, they would have to slowly
evolve the perfect design, just as they had done with the printing press and
the bicycle.
They decided to begin as modestly as possible. They designed various
kites to help them determine the perfect overall shape for a test glider. Then,
based on what they had learned, they fashioned the glider itself. They
wanted to teach themselves how to fly. The usual method of launching a
glider off the crest of a hill was too dangerous. Instead, they decided to
move operations to Kitty Hawk, North Carolina, the site of the strongest
winds in the United States. There, on the sand dunes of the beaches at Kitty
Hawk, they could get airborne from small elevations, fly close to the
ground, and land in a soft bed of sand. In the year 1900 alone they were
able to perform more test flights than Lilienthal had attempted over many
years. They slowly perfected the design, and improved the materials and
configuration—for instance, they learned to make the wings longer and
thinner to improve the lift. By 1903 they had a glider they could fly for
considerable distances, with remarkable control over turning and banking. It
was indeed like a flying bicycle.
Now it was time to take the final step—adding the engine and
propellers to their design. As before, they looked at the designs of their
rivals and noticed another weakness: they had modeled their propellers on
those of boats, once again opting for stability. Based on their own research,
the brothers decided that the blades should be cambered, like the wings of a
bird—that would give the plane more thrust. Looking to purchase the
lightest engine to power the machine, they found it was far beyond their
budget. So with the help of a mechanic in their shop, they built their own
engine. In total, the cost of their flying apparatus would come in under
$1,000—considerably less than any of the designs of their competitors.
On December 17, 1903, Wilbur piloted their flying machine at Kitty
Hawk for an impressive fifty-nine seconds—the first manned, controlled,
and powered flight in history. Over the years they would improve the
design, and the flight times would increase. For the other competitors in the
race it was a complete mystery how two men without any engineering or
aeronautic experience or financial backing had managed to get there first.
The development of the airplane represents one of the greatest
technological achievements in our history, with profound ramifications for
the future. There simply was no real precedent or model to base the flying
machine on. It was a genuine puzzle, and it required the highest degree of
ingenuity to solve it. In the history of its invention, we can observe two
radically different approaches. On the one side was a large group of
engineers and designers with backgrounds in the sciences who saw the
problem in abstract terms: how to get the plane launched and propelled,
how to overcome wind resistance, and so on. They focused largely on the
technology and worked to create the most efficient parts—the most
powerful engines, the best-designed wings, all of this based on elaborate lab
research. Money was no object. This process depended on specialization—
individuals who focused on different parts and who specialized in different
materials. In many cases, the designer would not end up being the pilot;
someone else would do the test flights.
On the other side were two men from a completely different
background. For them, the pleasure and excitement of design was in doing
everything themselves. They designed the machine, built it, and flew it.
Their model depended not on superior technology, but on the highest
number of test runs, creating an optimal learning curve. This revealed flaws
to be worked on and gave them a feel for the product that could never be
had in the abstract. The emphasis was not on the parts, but on the overall
flying experience; not on power, but on control. Since money was a factor,
supreme importance was placed on ingenuity in getting the most out of the
least. The differences between the two approaches can be seen in the
analogies they chose to base their designs on. The abstract thinkers opted
for the ship analogy, working on the similarity of navigating an alien
medium (water or air), which made them place importance on stability. The
Wright brothers chose the bicycle, which emphasized the rider or pilot, the
user-friendliness of the machine, and its overall functionality. Focusing on
the pilot instead of the medium ended up being the right answer to the
puzzle, because it led to the design of something that could be maneuvered.
From that starting point, a more complex airplane could be easily evolved.
Understand: mechanical intelligence is not a degraded form of
thinking, as compared to abstract reasoning. It is in fact the source of many
of our reasoning skills and creative powers. Our brain developed to its
present size because of the complex operations of our hands. In working
with resistant materials to create tools, our ancestors developed a pattern of
thinking that transcends manual labor itself. The principles behind
mechanical intelligence can be summarized as follows: whatever you are
creating or designing, you must test and use it yourself. Separating out the
work will make you lose touch with its functionality. Through intense labor
on your part, you gain a feel for what you are creating. In doing this work,
you see and feel the flaws in the design. You do not look at the parts
separately but at how they interact, experiencing what you produce as a
whole. What you are trying to create will not magically take off after a few
creative bursts of inspiration, but must be slowly evolved through a step-by-
step process as you correct the flaws. In the end, you win through superior
craftsmanship, not marketing. This craftsmanship involves creating
something with an elegant, simple structure, getting the most out of your
materials—a high form of creativity. These principles work with the natural
bent of your brain, and are to be violated at your own peril.
4. Natural Powers
After graduating from architecture school in Spain in 1973, Santiago
Calatrava experienced some anxiety at the thought of rushing into an
architecture practice. (For more on Calatrava, see here.) He had ambitions
early in life of becoming an artist, but gravitated toward architecture as a
more expansive form of expression—something functional yet sculptural,
something that could be realized on a large public scale. Architecture is a
strange profession. It involves so many constraints when it comes to
actually realizing a structure—the desires of the client, the budget, the
materials available, the landscape, and even political issues. In the works of
great architects in history, such as Le Corbusier, we can see a lot of their
personal style in the finished product, but with many others their work
becomes overwhelmed by the various constraints and interferences.
Calatrava felt that he had not developed a sufficiently large vocabulary or
mastered enough elements to be able to assert himself. If he went to work at
a firm, his creative energies would be buried beneath all of the commercial
pressures, and he would never recover.
And so he made an unusual decision: he would attend the Federal
Institute of Technology in Zurich to gain a degree in civil engineering. He
wanted to become an engineer so that he could understand the limits of
what was possible in designing buildings and structures. He had the idea of
someday attempting the construction of buildings that could move,
transgressing some of the most fundamental principles of architecture. For
such a purpose, he studied designs by NASA in which various devices had
been made that could fold up and expand, making them practical for space
missions. Such designs required mastering new engineering principles that
Calatrava immersed himself in at the Institute.
After graduating in 1981 with an engineering degree, he finally began
his practice as an architect and engineer. He was now well versed in the
technical aspects of his job and in the basic requirements for completing a
work, but no one had instructed him in the creative process itself. He would
have to learn and invent such a process for himself.
His first big project came in 1983, when he was asked to design the
façade of an already existing structure—an enormous warehouse for
Ernsting, a well-known clothing manufacturer in Germany. He decided to
cover the structure with untreated aluminum. This would tie the entire
building together, but on each side the sunlight would create different,
sometimes dazzling effects. To Calatrava the key part of the design was that
of the three loading bay doors, each on different sides of the warehouse.
Here he could experiment with his ideas of movement and foldability. And
so, not certain where or how to begin the actual process, he started to sketch
out various possibilities for these doors. As a child he had loved to draw,
and he was constantly sketching. He had become so proficient with a pencil
or brush that he could draw almost anything with great speed and accuracy.
He could sketch as fast as he could think, his innermost visions translated
with ease onto paper.
Without any sense of where he was headed, he began to draw in
watercolors, putting everything that came to him on paper, almost in a free-
associative manner. For some reason, the image of a beached whale
occurred to him and so he drew it. He took it further and metamorphosed
the whale into the warehouse, the teeth and mouth of the whale opening
into the bay door. Now he understood the image. It was as if the warehouse
had become Jonah’s whale, disgorging trucks and materials from its mouth.
On the margin of the drawing he wrote, “the building as a living organism.”
As he stared at the sketch, his attention was drawn to the rather large whale
eye he had painted to the side of the mouth/bay door. It seemed like an
interesting metaphor all by itself, and indicated a new direction to take.
He began to do different drawings of eyes on the sides of the
warehouse, with the eyes turning into the doors. Now his drawings took on
more detail and became more architectural as he began to sketch out the
actual sides of the building and the doors in a more realistic rendering, but
still based on the opening and closing of an enormous eye. In the end, this
would turn into the actual design of the folding doors that would raise
themselves up in the curved shape of an eyelid.
By the end of the design process Calatrava had generated a large
number of sketches, and as he thumbed through them in sequential order, he
could see a most interesting progression—from the loose imaginings of his
unconscious to more and more precise renderings. Even in the most
accurate sketches of the façade, however, there was still apparent some kind
of artistic and playful element. To look at the drawings was almost to see
the gradual development of a photograph in a chemical tray. Taking this
form of attack was immensely satisfying. It gave him the feeling of creating
something that was alive. Working in this way, his emotions were deeply
engaged as he played upon all kinds of metaphors, both mythical and
Freudian.
In the end, his design had a strange and powerful effect. Working with
only the façade of the building, he had created the look of a Greek temple,
the aluminum undulating like silver columns. The bay doors added a surreal
touch, and when folded up, looked even more like the entranceway to a
temple. All of this blended perfectly with the functionality of the structure.
It was a great success, and garnered him immediate attention.
As the years went by, one important commission followed another.
Working on increasingly larger projects, Calatrava could see clearly the
dangers ahead of him. Completing a design could often take ten years or
more, from the initial sketch to the actual construction. In that time, all
kinds of problems and conflicts could arise, which could end up spoiling the
initial vision. With larger budgets would come more constraints, and the
need to please many different people. If he were not careful, his desire to
transgress the rules and to express a personal vision would get lost in the
process. And so, as his career progressed, something inside him made him
return to the method he had developed for the Ernsting warehouse, and to
elaborate it even further.
He would always begin with the drawings. Drawing by hand had
become increasingly unusual in the era of computer graphics that had come
to dominate so many aspects of architectural design in the 1980s. As a
trained engineer, Calatrava knew the tremendous advantages the computer
provided for running models and testing the soundness of a structure. But
working exclusively on a computer, he could not create in the same way as
he could with pencil or brush and paper. The intervention of the computer
screen cut off the dreamlike process of sketching, the direct contact it gave
him with his unconscious. His hand and his mind seemed to work together
in a way that was primal and real, and that could not be duplicated through
a computer.
Now his drawings for a single project would number in the hundreds.
He would start out in the same loose manner, building up all kinds of
associations. He would begin with a feeling or an emotion that the idea of
the design sparked in him. This would lead to an image, however vague.
For instance, when asked to design an elaborate addition to the Milwaukee
Art Museum, what first came to mind and then to paper was the image of a
bird about to take flight. This image would go through the mill of his
sketching process, but in the end the roof of the building he designed
featured two enormous, ribbed panels that would open and close according
to the sunlight, giving the impression of an enormous prehistoric bird about
to fly over Lake Michigan.
Most of these early, free associations would revolve around nature—
plants, trees, human figures in various poses, skeletal ribbing—and would
be intimately tied to the landscape. Slowly, the shape of the overall
structure would come into focus through this process, as he would make the
idea increasingly rational and architectural. As an adjunct to this process he
would build models, sometimes beginning with a completely abstract
sculptural shape that in subsequent versions would become the design for
the structure itself. All of these drawings and sculptures were like
exteriorizations of his unconscious and nonverbal thought processes.
Inevitably, as he moved closer to the construction phase, he would
come up against constraints, such as the materials to be used and budgetary
considerations. But working from this initial strategy, he experienced these
factors merely as creative challenges: for instance, how could he
incorporate certain materials into the vision he had sketched out and make it
all work? If it were a train or subway station, how could he make the
platforms and the movement of the trains fit into the overall vision, even
enhancing their functionality? Such challenges excited him.
The greatest danger he faced was that his energy would go flat over
time as the design dragged on into years, and he would lose touch with his
original vision. To combat this, Calatrava would maintain an attitude of
constant dissatisfaction. The drawings were never quite right. They had to
be continually improved and perfected. By pushing for perfection and
holding on to this constant feeling of uncertainty, the project never froze
into something rigid and lifeless. It had to feel alive in the moment, as his
brush touched the paper. If what he was designing began to feel dead in any
way, it was time to start over. This not only required tremendous patience
on his part, but a good deal of courage, as he wiped out the work of several
months. Maintaining the edge and feeling of aliveness, however, was more
important.
As the years went by and Calatrava was able to look back on all of his
projects, he had a strange sensation. The process he had evolved felt as if it
had come from outside of him. It was not something he had created through
his own imagination, but rather it was nature itself that had led him to this
perfectly organic and beautifully effective process. The projects would take
root in his mind with some emotion or idea, and slowly grow through the
drawings, always alive and as fluid as life itself, like the stages of a plant
leading to a flower. Feeling such vitality during the work, he would
translate this sensation into the structures themselves, evoking awe and
wonder in the public that saw and used them.
Because the creative process is an elusive subject and one for which we
receive no training, in our first creative endeavors we are most often left to
our own devices, to sink or swim. And in these circumstances we have to
evolve something that suits our individual spirit and our profession. Often,
however, we can go quite wrong in evolving this process, particularly with
the pressure to produce results and the fear this instills in us. In the process
Calatrava developed for his work, we can discern an elemental pattern and
principles that have wide application, built as they are on the natural
inclinations and strengths of the human brain.
First, it is essential to build into the creative process an initial period
that is open-ended. You give yourself time to dream and wander, to start out
in a loose and unfocused manner. In this period, you allow the project to
associate itself with certain powerful emotions, ones that naturally come out
of you as you focus on your ideas. It is always easy to tighten up your ideas
later on, and to make your project increasingly realistic and rational. But if
you begin with a feeling of tightness and pressure, focusing on the funding,
the competition, or people’s opinions, you will stifle the associative powers
of the brain and quickly turn the work into something without joy or life.
Second, it is best to have wide knowledge of your field and other fields,
giving your brain more possible associations and connections. Third, to
keep this process alive, you must never settle into complacency, as if your
initial vision represents the endpoint. You must cultivate profound
dissatisfaction with your work and the need to constantly improve your
ideas, along with a sense of uncertainty—you are not exactly sure where to
go next, and this uncertainty drives the creative urge and keeps it fresh. Any
kind of resistance or obstacle that crosses your path should be seen as yet
another chance to improve your work.
Finally, you must come to embrace slowness as a virtue in itself. When
it comes to creative endeavors, time is always relative. Whether your
project takes months or years to complete, you will always experience a
sense of impatience and a desire to get to the end. The single greatest action
you can take for acquiring creative power is to reverse this natural
impatience. You take pleasure in the laborious research process; you enjoy
the slow cooking of the idea, the organic growth that naturally takes shape
over time. You do not unnaturally draw out the process, which will create
its own problems (we all need deadlines), but the longer you can allow the
project to absorb your mental energies, the richer it will become. Imagine
yourself years in the future looking back at the work you have done. From
that future vantage point, the extra months and years you devoted to the
process will not seem painful or laborious at all. It is an illusion of the
present that will vanish. Time is your greatest ally.
5. The Open Field
Martha Graham’s father, Dr. George Graham, was one of the few
pioneering doctors in the 1890s to specialize in the treatment of mental
illness. (For more on Martha Graham, see here and here.) Around the
family he did not talk much about his work, but one subject he would
discuss openly with Martha completely fascinated her. In working with his
patients, Dr. Graham had developed the ability to judge much about their
states of mind from their body language. He could read their level of
anxiety in how they walked or moved their arms or fixed their eyes on
something. “The body does not lie,” he would often tell her.
In high school in Santa Barbara, California, Martha developed an
interest in theater. But one evening in 1911, Dr. Graham took his seventeen-
year-old daughter to Los Angeles to see a performance of the famous
dancer Ruth St. Denis, and from then on all she could think about was
becoming a dancer. Influenced by her father, she was intrigued by the
ability to express emotions without any words, strictly through the
movement of the body. As soon as St. Denis opened up her own dance
school (along with her partner, Ted Shawn) in 1916, Martha enrolled as one
of its first pupils. Much of the choreography was a kind of free-form ballet,
with an emphasis on making everything seem easy and natural. There was a
lot of posing and moving about with scarves, similar to the work of Isadora
Duncan.
At first, Graham was not considered a promising dancer. She was shy,
always staying toward the back of the class. She was not particularly built
for the art (she did not have a lithe ballerina’s body), and she was slow to
pick up the choreography. But when she was given her first solo, St. Denis
and Shawn saw something that surprised them: she exploded with an energy
they had not suspected in her. She had charisma. St. Denis compared her to
“a young tornado” when she took the stage. Everything they taught her she
had a way of transforming into something sharper and more aggressive.
After several years she became one of their leading students, a major
performer in their troupe and a teacher of the Denishawn method, as it came
to be known. But soon she began to tire of this form of dancing. It did not
suit her temperament. To get some distance from the school she moved to
New York, and to support herself she taught classes in the Denishawn
method. Then one day in 1926, perhaps upset at her leaving the troupe, Ted
Shawn surprised her with an ultimatum—she would have to pay $500 for
the right to teach Denishawn exercises and dance material. If not, she was
strictly forbidden, under penalty of a lawsuit, ever to use any of their
methods in her classes or personal work.
For Graham, this precipitated a crisis of sorts. She was now thirty-two
years old, no longer young for a career in dance. She had barely $50 to her
name, which meant that she could never pay Shawn even if she had wanted
to. To earn extra money she had already tried working in popular dance
shows on Broadway and had hated it, vowing never to go back. But as she
weighed her options, one idea kept recurring to her. In her mind she had
always been able to envision a kind of dance that did not exist in the world
but that spoke to her innermost desires, both as a performer and a spectator.
This dance was the polar opposite of the Denishawn method, which now
seemed to her like empty, arty gesturing. It was more related to what she
had seen of modern art—somewhat jagged and occasionally dissonant, full
of power and rhythm. It was a visceral form of dance that she envisioned,
and as she imagined it her thoughts kept returning to her father and their
discussions about the body, about the language that all animals express
through their movement.
This dance she could visualize was rigorous, based on a new kind of
discipline—not at all free-floating and spontaneous like the Denishawn
style. It would have its own vocabulary. She could not shake the image of
the beauty of this nonexistent dance. She would never have this chance
again. With age comes conservatism and the need for comfort. To create
what was not out there, she would have to start her own school and dance
troupe, building up the technique and discipline on her own. To support
herself, she would have to give classes, teaching the new dance movements
she would be in the process of creating. It would entail a tremendous risk,
and money would be a constant problem, but her desperation to create what
she could imagine would fuel her past any obstacles.
Within weeks of Ted Shawn’s ultimatum, she made her first move. She
rented out a studio, and to show her pupils that this was a new kind of dance
they were going to learn, she covered the walls in burlap. Unlike other
dance studios, her studio would have no mirrors. The dancers would have to
focus intensely on what she was teaching and learn how to correct
themselves by feeling the movement in their bodies, not becoming fixated
on their images. Everything she wanted in this new form of dance was
outwardly directed at the audience, without self-consciousness.
At first, it all seemed rather impossible. She had only a few students,
just enough to cover rent. They would often have to wait for her as she
slowly invented some new kind of movement or exercise, which they would
then practice together and refine. A few early performances, although
awkward, managed to attract more recruits, enough for Graham to think of
creating a small troupe. From this group, she demanded the utmost
discipline. They were creating a new language and would have to work
hard. Week by week she built up a set of exercises that would bring the
dancers more control, along with an entirely new mechanics of movement.
She and her recruits would spend an entire year working on and perfecting
one simple new technique, until it became second nature.
To distinguish her method from other forms of dance, she placed all of
the emphasis on the torso. She called the torso “the house of the pelvic
truth.” She had determined that the most expressive part of the human body
came from the contractions of the diaphragm and the sharp movements of
the torso. This would be the center of focus, not the face and arms that
made dance too romantic. She created endless exercises to build up this
area, and she encouraged her dancers to feel the deep well of emotions that
came from using these muscles.
Much of what stimulated her in this early phase was the desire to
create something that had never been seen before on the stage. In Western
dance, for instance, it was taboo for a dancer to fall—that would be a sign
of a mistake and loss of control. The ground was something to resist and
never surrender to. She decided to turn this around by creating a new
sequence of controlled falls in which the dancer would melt into the ground
and reascend, ever so slowly. This required building up a whole new series
of muscles. She took this concept further, using the ground itself as a space
upon which the dancer could move like a coiled snake. In her new system,
suddenly the knee became a different instrument of expression—a hinge
upon which the dancer could balance and move, giving the effect of
weightlessness.
Slowly, as the work progressed, she could see coming to life the new
form of dance that she had visualized. To add to the effect of newness,
Graham decided to design and sew her own costumes. These costumes,
often made out of stretch materials, would turn the dancers into almost
abstract shapes, accentuating their sharp movements. Unlike the usual fairy-
tale decor that was used for ballets, her sets would be minimal and stark.
The dancers would wear little makeup. Everything would be designed to set
them off from the stage and make their movements explode.
The response to her first series of performances was electrifying. The
public had never seen anything remotely like it before. Many were
disgusted and repulsed. Others found the work strangely emotional, giving
dance an expressive quality they had never suspected it could possess. The
work elicited extremes of reaction, a sign of its power. Over the years, what
had seemed initially so harsh and ugly began to be accepted, as Martha
Graham had indeed single-handedly created a new genre—modern dance as
we know it today. To avoid this dance turning into yet another convention,
she would constantly struggle to upset people’s expectations, never going
over old ground, and constantly changing the subject matter of the dances,
from Greek myths to Americana and depictions from literature. For close to
sixty years after the formation of her troupe, she continued to drive herself
to create that feeling of newness and immediacy she had always wanted.
Perhaps the greatest impediment to human creativity is the natural decay
that sets in over time in any kind of medium or profession. In the sciences
or in business, a certain way of thinking or acting that once had success
quickly becomes a paradigm, an established procedure. As the years go by,
people forget the initial reason for this paradigm and simply follow a
lifeless set of techniques. In the arts, someone establishes a style that is new
and vibrant, speaking to the particular spirit of the times. It has an edge
because it is so different. Soon imitators pop up everywhere. It becomes a
fashion, something to conform to, even if the conformity appears to be
rebellious and edgy. This can drag on for ten, twenty years; it eventually
becomes a cliché, pure style without any real emotion or need. Nothing in
culture escapes this deadening dynamic.
We may not be aware of it, but we suffer from the dead forms and
conventions that clutter our culture. This problem, however, sets up a
tremendous opportunity for creative types, one epitomized by the example
of Martha Graham. The process goes as follows: You begin by looking
inward. You have something you want to express that is unique to yourself
and related to your inclinations. You must be sure it is not something that is
sparked by some trend or fashion, but that it comes from you and is real.
Perhaps it is a sound you are not hearing in music, a type of story not being
told, a type of book that does not fit into the usual tidy categories. Perhaps it
is even a new way of doing business. Let the idea, the sound, the image take
root in you. Sensing the possibility of a new language or way of doing
things, you must make the conscious decision to play against the very
conventions that you find dead and want to get rid of. Martha Graham did
not create her work out of a vacuum; her vision corresponded to what ballet
and modern dance of the time were not giving her. She took their
conventions and turned them upside down. Following this strategy will give
your work a kind of reverse reference point and a way to shape it.
Like Graham, you must not mistake newness with wild spontaneity.
There is nothing that becomes repetitive and boring more quickly than free
expression that is not rooted in reality and discipline. You must bring to
your new idea all of the knowledge you have acquired in your field, but for
the purpose of reversing it, as Graham did with the Denishawn method. In
essence, what you are doing is creating some space in a cluttered culture,
claiming for yourself an open field in which you can finally plant
something new. People are dying for the new, for what expresses the spirit
of the time in an original way. By creating something new you will create
your own audience, and attain the ultimate position of power in culture.
6. The High End
Yoky Matsuoka (see chapter 1, here) always had the feeling that she was
different from others. It wasn’t so much how she dressed or looked, but her
interests that set her apart. As a teenager in Japan in the early 1980s, she
was expected to focus on a particular subject that she would transform into
a career. But as she got older, her interests only widened. She had a love for
physics and mathematics, but was attracted to biology and physiology as
well. She was also a talented athlete with a future as a professional tennis
player, until an injury cut this short. On top of it all, she loved working with
her hands and tinkering with machines.
Much to her relief, when she began her undergraduate studies at the
University of California at Berkeley, she fell upon a subject that seemed to
open up all sorts of larger questions that would satisfy her voracious, wide-
ranging interests—the relatively new field of robotics. After completing her
undergraduate studies, curious to explore this subject further, she entered
the masters program in robotics at MIT. As part of her work in the
department, she was to help in the design of the large-scale robot they were
building, and soon she chose to work exclusively on the design of the
robot’s hands. She had always been fascinated by the complexity and power
of the human hand, and with the chance to combine so many of her interests
(mathematics, physiology, and building things), it seemed she had finally
found her niche.
As she began her work on the hands, however, she realized yet again
how different she was in her way of thinking. The other students in the
department were mostly men, and they tended to reduce everything to
questions of engineering—how to pack the robot with as many mechanical
options as possible so it could move and act in reasonably human ways.
They thought of their robot as intrinsically a machine. To build it meant
solving a series of technical issues and creating a kind of moving computer
that could mimic some basic thought patterns.
Matsuoka had a much different approach. She wanted to create
something as lifelike and anatomically correct as possible. That was the real
future of robotics, and to reach such a goal meant engaging in questions that
were on a much higher level—what makes anything alive and organically
complex? To her, it was as important to study evolution, human physiology,
and neuroscience as it was to immerse oneself in engineering. Perhaps it
would complicate her career path, but she would follow her own
inclinations and see where they led.
In going about her design, Matsuoka made a key decision: she would
begin by building a model of a robotic hand that would replicate the human
hand as closely as possible. In attempting such an enormous task, she would
be forced to truly understand how each part functioned. For instance, in
trying to recreate all of the various bones of the hand, she came upon all
kinds of seemingly irrelevant bumps and grooves. The bone at the knuckle
of the index finger has a bump that makes it larger on one side. In studying
this one detail, she discovered its function—giving us the ability to grasp
objects in the center of the hand with more power. It seemed odd that such a
bump would evolve expressly for that purpose. Probably it was some
mutation that ended up becoming a part of our evolution, as the hand
became increasingly important in our development.
Continuing in this line she worked on the palm of her robotic hand,
which she had determined was in many ways the key to the design. For
most engineers, robotic hands were designed for optimal power and
maneuverability. They would build in all kinds of mechanical options, but
to make it work they would have to pack all of the motors and cables in the
most convenient place, the palm, rendering it completely rigid. After
designing hands like this, they would then fob them off to software
engineers to try to figure out to how bring back maneuverability. Because of
the built-in rigidity, however, the thumb would never be able to touch the
pinky, and engineers would inevitably end up with the same highly limited
robotic hand.
Matsuoka started from the other end. Her goal was to discover what
makes the hand dexterous, and it was clear that one critical requisite was to
have a flexible, curved palm. Thinking on this higher level, it then became
clear that the motors and cables had to be placed somewhere else. Instead of
jamming the hand with motors everywhere so that everything could move,
she determined that the most important maneuverable part of the hand was
the thumb, the key to our grasping skills. That is where she would put more
power.
She continued on this path, uncovering more and more of the details
that went into the marvelous mechanics of the human hand. As she worked
in this peculiar way, other engineers would scoff at her and her strange
biological approach. What a waste of time, they would tell her. In the end,
however, what she called her anatomically correct test-bed hand soon
became the model for the industry, revealing whole new possibilities for
prosthetic hands, vindicating her approach, and gaining her fame and
recognition for her engineering skills.
This, however, was only the beginning of her quest to get at the
organic nature of the hand and to literally recreate it. After graduating with
a master’s degree in robotics, she returned to MIT to pursue a PhD in
neuroscience. Currently, armed with deep knowledge about the neuro-
signals that make the hand-brain connection so unique, she is pursuing the
goal of creating a prosthetic hand that can actually connect to the brain,
operating and feeling as if it were real. To reach such a goal, she continues
to work on high-end concepts, such as the influence of the hand-brain
connection on our thinking in general.
In her lab she has done tests to see how people manipulate ambiguous
objects with their eyes closed. She studies how they explore them with their
hands, and records the elaborate neuro-signals that are generated in the
process. She wonders if there could be a connection between such
exploration and abstract thought processes (perhaps involving similar
neuro-signals), such as when we are confronted with a problem that seems
difficult to solve. She is interested in building such exploratory sensations
into the prosthetic hand. In other experiments, in which subjects move a
virtual-reality hand, she has discovered that the more people are made to
feel that the hand is literally a part of their bodies, the greater the degree of
control they have. Creating such sensations will be a part of the ultimate
prosthetic hand she is working on. Although its realization is years away,
the design of such a neurologically connected hand will have technological
consequences far beyond robotics.
In many fields we can see and diagnose the same mental disease, which we
shall call technical lock. What this means is the following: in order to learn
a subject or skill, particularly one that is complex, we must immerse
ourselves in many details, techniques, and procedures that are standard for
solving problems. If we are not careful, however, we become locked into
seeing every problem in the same way, using the same techniques and
strategies that became so imprinted in us. It is always simpler to follow
such a route. In the process we lose sight of the bigger picture, the purpose
of what we are doing, how each problem we face is different and requires a
different approach. We adopt a kind of tunnel vision.
This technical lock afflicts people in all fields as they lose a sense of
the overall purpose of their work, of the larger question at hand, of what
impels them to do their work in the first place. Yoky Matsuoka hit upon a
solution to this that propelled her to the forefront of her field. It came as a
reaction against the engineering approach that prevailed in robotics. Her
mind naturally works better on a larger scale, continually pondering the
connections between things on high levels—what makes the human hand so
weirdly perfect, how the hand has influenced who we are and how we think.
With these large questions governing her research, she avoids becoming
narrowly focused on technical issues without understanding the bigger
picture. Thinking on such a high level frees the mind up to investigate from
all different angles: Why are the bones of the hand this way? What makes
the palm so malleable? How does the sense of touch influence our thinking
in general? It allows her to go deeply into the details without losing a sense
of the why.
You must make this a model for your own work as well. Your project
or the problem you are solving should always be connected to something
larger—a bigger question, an overarching idea, an inspiring goal. Whenever
your work begins to feel stale, you must return to the larger purpose and
goal that impelled you in the first place. This bigger idea governs your
smaller paths of investigation, and opens up many more such paths for you
to look into. By constantly reminding yourself of your purpose, you will
prevent yourself from fetishizing certain techniques or from becoming
overly obsessed with trivial details. In this way you will play into the
natural strengths of the human brain, which wants to look for connections
on higher and higher levels.
7. The Evolutionary Hijack
In the summer of 1995, Paul Graham (see chapter 2, here) heard a story on
the radio promoting the endless possibilities of online commerce, which at
the time hardly existed. The promotion came from Netscape, which was
trying to drum up interest in its business on the eve of its IPO. The story
sounded so promising, yet so vague. At the time, Graham was at a bit of a
crossroads. After graduating from Harvard with a PhD in computer
engineering, he had fallen into a pattern: he would find some part-time
consulting job in the software business; then, with enough money saved, he
would quit the job and devote his time to his real love—art and painting—
until the money ran out, and then he would scramble for another job. Now
thirty-one-years old, he was getting tired of the pattern, and he hated
consulting. The prospect of making a lot of money quickly by developing
something for the Internet suddenly seemed very appealing.
He called up his old programming partner from Harvard, Robert
Morris, and interested him in the idea of collaborating on their own startup,
even though Graham had no clue where they would start or what they
would develop. After a few days of discussing this, they decided they
would try to write software that would enable a business to generate an
online store. Once they were clear about the concept, they had to confront a
very large obstacle in their way. In those days, for a program to be popular
enough it would have to be written for Windows. As consummate hackers,
they loathed everything about Windows and had never bothered to learn
how to develop applications for it. They preferred to write in Lisp and have
the program run on Unix, the open-source operating system.
They decided to postpone the inevitable and wrote the program for
Unix anyway. To translate this later into Windows would be easy, but as
they contemplated doing this, they realized the terrible consequences it
would lead to—once the program was launched in Windows, they would
have to deal with users and perfect the program based on their feedback.
This would mean they would be forced to think and program in Windows
for months, perhaps years. This was too awful a prospect, and they
seriously considered giving up.
One morning Graham, who had been sleeping on a mattress on the
floor in Morris’s Manhattan apartment, woke up repeating certain words
that must have come to him from a dream: “You could control the program
by clicking on links.” He suddenly sat bolt upright, as he realized what
these words could mean—the possibility of creating a program to set up an
online store that would run on the web server itself. People would download
and use it through Netscape, clicking various links on the web page to set it
up. This would mean he and Morris would bypass the usual route of writing
a program that users would download to their desktop. It would cut out the
need ever to have to dabble in Windows. There was nothing out there like
this, and yet it seemed like such an obvious solution. In a state of
excitement he explained his epiphany to Morris, and they agreed to give it a
try. Within a few days they finished the first version, and it functioned
beautifully. Clearly, the concept of a web application would work.
Over the next few weeks they refined the software, and found their
own angel investor who put up an initial $10,000 for a 10 percent share in
the business. In the beginning, it was quite hard to interest merchants in the
concept. Their application server provider was the very first Internet-run
program for starting a business, at the very frontier of online commerce.
Slowly, however, it began to take off.
As it panned out, the novelty of their idea, which Graham and Morris
had come upon largely because of their distaste for Windows, proved to
have all kinds of unforeseen advantages. Working directly on the Internet,
they could generate a continuous stream of new releases of the software and
test them right away. They could interact directly with consumers, getting
instant feedback on their program and improving it in days rather than the
months it could take with desktop software. With no experience running a
business, they did not think to hire salespeople to do the pitching; instead,
they made the phone calls to potential clients themselves. But as they were
the de facto salespeople, they were also the first to hear complaints or
suggestions from consumers, and this gave them a real feel for the
program’s weaknesses and how to improve it. Because it was so unique and
came out of left field, they had no competitors to worry about; nobody
could steal the idea because they were the only ones who were insane
enough to attempt it.
Naturally, they made several mistakes along the way, but the idea was
too strong to fail; and in 1998 they sold their company, named Viaweb, to
Yahoo! for $50 million.
As the years went by and Graham looked back at the experience, he
was struck by the process he and Morris had gone through. It reminded him
of so many other inventions in history, such as microcomputers. The
microprocessors that made the microcomputer possible had originally been
developed to run traffic lights and vending machines. They had never been
intended to power computers. The first entrepreneurs to attempt this were
laughed at; the computers they had created looked hardly worthy of the
name—they were so small and could do so little. But they caught on with
just enough people for whom they saved time, and slowly, the idea took off.
The same story had occurred with transistors, which in the 1930s and ’40s
were developed and used in electronics for the military. It was not until the
early 1950s that several individuals had the idea of applying this technology
to transistor radios for the public, soon hitting upon what would become the
most popular electronic device in history.
What was interesting in all of these cases was the peculiar process that
led to these inventions: generally, the inventors had a chance encounter with
the available technology; then the idea would come to them that this
technology could be used for other purposes; and finally they would try out
different prototypes until the right one fell into place. What allows for this
process is the willingness of the inventor to look at everyday things in a
different light and to imagine new uses for them. For people who are stuck
in rigid ways of seeing, the familiarity of an old application hypnotizes
them into not seeing its other possibilities. What it all really comes down to
is the possession of a flexible, adaptable mind—something that is often
enough to separate a successful inventor or entrepreneur from the rest of the
crowd.
After cashing in on Viaweb, Graham hit upon the idea of writing
essays for the Internet—his rather peculiar form of blogging. These essays
made him a celebrity among young hackers and programmers everywhere.
In 2005 he was invited by undergraduates in the computer science
department at Harvard to give a talk. Instead of boring them and himself by
analyzing various programming languages, he decided to discuss the idea of
technology startups themselves—why some work, why some fail. The talk
was so successful, and Graham’s ideas so illuminating, that the students
began to besiege him with questions about their own startup ideas. As he
listened, he could sense that some of their concepts were not far off the
mark, but that they badly needed shaping and guidance.
Graham had always intended to try his hand at investing in other
people’s ideas. He had been the beneficiary of an angel investor in his
project, and it was only right to return the favor by helping others. The
problem was where to begin. Most angel investors had some related
experience before they began investing, and they tended to start out on a
small scale to get their feet wet. Graham had no such business experience.
Based on this weakness, he hit upon an idea that at first glance seemed
ridiculous—he would synchronously invest $15,000 in ten startups all at
once. He would find these ten prospects by advertising his offer and
choosing the best among the applicants. Over the course of a few months he
would shepherd these novices and help guide them to the point of launching
their idea. For this he would take 10 percent from any successful startup. It
would be like an apprenticeship system for tech founders, but it really had
another purpose—it would serve as a crash course for him in the investing
business. He would be a lousy first investor and his pupils would be lousy
entrepreneurs, making them a perfect match.
Yet again he recruited Robert Morris to join him in the business. A
couple of weeks into the training, however, he and Morris realized that they
were actually on to something powerful. Because of their experience with
Viaweb they were able to give clear and effective advice. The startup ideas
they were shepherding looked quite promising. Perhaps this system they
had adopted as a way to learn quickly was an interesting model in itself.
Most investors only handle a few startups a year; they are too overwhelmed
with their own businesses to handle much more. But what if Graham and
Morris were to devote their time exclusively to this apprenticeship system?
They could mass-produce the service. They could fund hundreds instead of
dozens of such startups. In the process they would learn in leaps and
bounds, and this exponentially increasing knowledge would lead to
increasing numbers of successful startups.
If it really took off, not only would they make a fortune, but they
would also have a decided impact on the economy, unleashing into the
system thousands of savvy entrepreneurs. They called their new company Y
Combinator and considered it their ultimate hack to change the shape of the
world’s economy.
They coached their apprentices in all of the principles they had learned
along the way—the benefit in looking for new applications of existing
technology and needs that are not being met; the importance of maintaining
the closest possible relationship with customers; the need to keep ideas as
simple and realistic as possible; the value of creating a superior product and
of winning through craftsmanship, as opposed to fixating on making
money.
As their apprentices learned, they learned as well. Oddly enough, they
discovered that what really makes successful entrepreneurs is not the nature
of their idea, or the university they went to, but their actual character—their
willingness to adapt their idea and take advantage of possibilities they had
not first imagined. This is precisely the trait—fluidity of mind—that
Graham had identified in himself and in other inventors. The other essential
character trait was supreme tenacity.
Over the years, evolving in its own way, Y Combinator has continued
to grow at an astounding rate. It is valued now at $500 million, with the
clear potential for further growth.
We generally have a misconception about the inventive and creative powers
of the human mind. We imagine that creative people have an interesting
idea, which they then proceed to elaborate and refine in a somewhat linear
process. The truth, however, is much messier and more complex. Creativity
actually resembles a process known in nature as evolutionary hijacking. In
evolution, accidents and contingencies play an enormous role. For instance,
feathers evolved from reptilian scales, their purpose being to keep birds
warm. (Birds evolved from reptiles.) But eventually, those existing feathers
became adapted for the purpose of flying, transforming into wing feathers.
For our own primate ancestors living in trees, the form of the hand largely
evolved out of the need to grasp branches with speed and agility. Our early
hominid ancestors, walking on the ground, found this intricately developed
hand quite useful for manipulating rocks, making tools, and gesturing in
communication. Perhaps language itself developed as a strictly social tool
and became hijacked as a means of reasoning, making human
consciousness itself the product of an accident.
Human creativity generally follows a similar path, perhaps indicating a
kind of organic fatality to the creation of anything. Ideas do not come to us
out of nowhere. Instead, we come upon something by accident—in the case
of Graham, a radio announcement that he hears, or questions from the
audience after a lecture. If we are experienced enough and the moment is
ripe, this accidental encounter will spark some interesting associations and
ideas in us. In looking at the particular materials we can work with, we
suddenly see another way to use them. All along the way, contingencies pop
up that reveal different paths we can take, and if they are promising, we
follow them, not sure of where they will lead. Instead of a straight-line
development from idea to fruition, the creative process is more like the
crooked branching of a tree.
The lesson is simple—what constitutes true creativity is the openness
and adaptability of our spirit. When we see or experience something we
must be able to look at it from several angles, to see other possibilities
beyond the obvious ones. We imagine that the objects around us can be
used and co-opted for different purposes. We do not hold on to our original
idea out of sheer stubbornness, or because our ego is tied up with its
rightness. Instead, we move with what presents itself to us in the moment,
exploring and exploiting different branches and contingencies. We thus
manage to turn feathers into flying material. The difference then is not in
some initial creative power of the brain, but in how we look at the world
and the fluidity with which we can reframe what we see. Creativity and
adaptability are inseparable.
8. Dimensional Thinking
In 1798 Napoleon Bonaparte invaded Egypt in an attempt to transform it
into a colony, but the invasion bogged down as the British, seeking to block
the French, became involved. A year later, as the war dragged on, a soldier
working on the reinforcement of a French fort near the town of Rosetta dug
into the ground and hit a rock. In extracting the rock, he discovered that it
was some kind of relic from ancient Egypt—a slab of basalt covered in
writing. Napoleon had been motivated to invade Egypt partially by his
intense curiosity for all things Egyptian, and had taken along with his troops
French scientists and historians to help analyze the relics he hoped to find.
In looking at the slab of basalt, which came to be known as the Rosetta
stone, the French savants grew excited. It contained text written out in three
different scripts—on the top, Egyptian hieroglyphs; in the middle, what is
known as demotic (the language and script of the common people of
ancient Egypt), and on the bottom, ancient Greek. In translating the ancient
Greek, they discovered that the text was a mundane proclamation
celebrating the reign of Ptolemy V (203–181 B.C.). At the end of the text,
however, it stated that the proclamation was to be written out in three
versions, meaning that the content was the same in the demotic and the
hieroglyphic. With the ancient Greek text as the key, it suddenly seemed
possible to decipher the other two versions. Since the last known
hieroglyphs had been written in A.D. 394, anyone who could read them had
long died off, making it a completely dead and untranslatable language and
leaving a seemingly unsolvable mystery as to the content of so many of the
writings in temples and on papyri. Now, perhaps, these secrets could finally
be revealed.
The stone was carted off to an institution in Cairo, but in 1801 the
English defeated the French in Egypt and threw them out. Knowing of the
extremely high value of the Rosetta stone, they hunted it down in Cairo and
shipped it off to London, where it remains to this day in the British
Museum. As drawings of the stone began to be passed around, intellectuals
from all parts of Europe became involved in a competition to be the first to
decipher the hieroglyphs and unlock the mysteries. As they began to tackle
the puzzle, some progress was made. Certain hieroglyphs were outlined in a
rectangle, known as cartouches. It was determined that these cartouches
contained the names of various royal figures. One Swedish professor had
been able to make out the name of Ptolemy in the demotic, and speculated
on the sound values the characters might have. But the initial enthusiasm
for deciphering the hieroglyphs eventually died out, and many worried that
they would remain undecipherable. The further anyone got with the puzzle,
the more questions that were raised about the kind of writing system
represented by the symbols themselves.
In 1814 a new figure entered the fray—an Englishman named Dr.
Thomas Young—who quickly became the leading candidate to be the first
to decipher the Rosetta stone. Although a medical doctor, he was a man
who had dabbled in all the sciences and was considered something of a
genius. He had the blessing of the English establishment and full access to
all of the various papyri and relics the English had confiscated, including
the stone itself. Furthermore, he was independently wealthy and could
devote all of his time to the study. And so, throwing himself into the work
with great enthusiasm, Young began to make some progress.
He had a computational approach to the problem. He counted the
number of times a particular word, such as “god,” appeared in the Greek
text, then found a word that appeared the same number of times in the
demotic, assuming they were the same word. He did everything he could to
make the letters in demotic fit his scheme—if the apparent equivalent word
of “god” seemed too long, he would simply deduce that certain letters were
meaningless. He assumed that the three texts went in the same order, and
that he could match words by their location. Sometimes he guessed right;
most often he got nowhere. He made some key discoveries—that demotic
and hieroglyphs were related, the one being a kind of loose handwritten
form of the other; and that demotic used a phonetic alphabet to spell out
foreign names, but that it was mostly a system of pictograms. But he kept
hitting dead ends, and he never got close to trying his hand at the
hieroglyphs. After a few years, he essentially gave up.
In the meantime, there appeared on the scene a young man who
seemed to be an unlikely candidate to succeed in this race—Jean-Francois
Champollion (1790–1832). He came from a small town near Grenoble. His
family was relatively poor, and until the age of seven Champollion had no
formal education. But he had one advantage over all the others: from his
earliest years he had been drawn to the history of ancient civilizations. He
wanted to discover new things about the origins of mankind, and for this
purpose he took up the study of ancient languages—Greek, Latin, and
Hebrew, as well as several other Semitic languages—all of which he
mastered with remarkable speed by the age of twelve.
Quickly his attention was drawn to ancient Egypt. In 1802 he heard
about the Rosetta stone, and he told his older brother that he would be the
one to decipher it. The moment he began to study the ancient Egyptians, he
experienced a vivid identification with everything that had to do with the
civilization. As a child, he had a powerful visual memory. He could draw
with exceptional skill. He tended to see the writings in books (even books
in French) as if they were drawings instead of an alphabet. When he first
laid eyes on hieroglyphs they seemed almost familiar to him. Soon his
relationship to hieroglyphs bordered on a fanatical obsession.
To really make progress, he decided he would have to learn the
language known as Coptic. After Egypt became a Roman colony in 30
B.C., the old language, demotic, slowly died out, and was replaced by
Coptic—a mix of Greek and Egyptian. After the Arabs conquered Egypt
and converted it to Islam, making Arabic the official idiom, the remaining
Christians in the land retained Coptic as their language. By Champollion’s
time only a few Christians remained who still spoke the ancient language,
mostly monks and priests. In 1805 just such a monk passed through
Champollion’s small town, and he quickly befriended him. The monk
taught him the rudiments of Coptic, and when he returned a few months
later, he brought Champollion a grammar book. The boy worked at the
language day and night, with a fervor that others saw as madness. He wrote
his brother: “I do nothing else. I dream in Coptic…. I am so Coptic, that for
fun, I translate into Coptic everything that comes into my head.” When he
later went to Paris for schooling he found more monks, and he practiced to
the point where he was told that he spoke the dying language as well as any
native.
With only a poor reproduction of the Rosetta stone at his disposal, he
began to attack it with various hypotheses, all of which were later proven
quite wrong. Unlike the others, however, Champollion’s enthusiasm never
dampened. The problem for him was the political turmoil of his time. An
avowed son of the French Revolution, he finally came to support the cause
of Napoleon just as the emperor lost power. When King Louis XVIII came
to the throne as the new French king, Champollion’s Napoleonic
sympathies cost him his job as a professor. Years of grinding poverty and ill
health forced him to abandon his interest in the Rosetta stone. But in 1821,
finally rehabilitated by the government and living in Paris, Champollion
returned to the quest with a renewed energy and determination.
Having been away from the study of hieroglyphics for some time, he
came back with a fresh perspective. The problem, he decided, was that
others were approaching decipherment as if it involved some kind of
mathematical code. But Champollion, who spoke dozens of languages and
could read many dead languages, understood that languages evolve in a
haphazard manner, influenced by the influx of new groups into a society
and shaped by the passage of time. They are not mathematical formulas, but
living, evolving organisms. They are complex. He now approached the
hieroglyphs in a more holistic fashion. His goal was to figure out exactly
what kind of script it was—pictograms (literally the picture representing the
thing), ideograms (the picture representing ideas), some kind of phonetic
alphabet, or perhaps a mix of all three.
With this in mind, he tried something that strangely enough no one had
thought of—he made a comparison of the number of words in the Greek
and hieroglyphic sections. He counted 486 words in the Greek text, and
1,419 hieroglyphic signs. Champollion had been operating under the
assumption that hieroglyphs were ideograms, each symbol representing an
idea or word. With such a discrepancy in number, this assumption was no
longer possible. He then tried to identify groups of hieroglyphic symbols
that would constitute words, but this numbered only 180. He could find no
clear numerical relationship between the two, and so the only possible
conclusion from all of this was that hieroglyphic writing is a mixed system
of ideograms, pictograms, and a phonetic alphabet, making it more complex
than anyone had imagined.
He next decided to attempt something that anyone else would have
thought insane and useless—to apply his visual powers to the demotic and
hieroglyphic texts, looking exclusively at the shapes of the letters or signs.
In doing so he began to see patterns and correspondences—for instance, a
particular sign in the hieroglyph, such as the depiction of a bird, had a
rough equivalent in demotic, the image of the bird becoming less realistic
and more like an abstract shape. Because of his incredible photographic
memory, he could identify hundreds of these equivalences between
symbols, although he could not say what any one of them meant. They
remained merely images.
Armed with this knowledge, he went on the attack. On the Rosetta
stone, he examined the royal cartouche in the demotic that had been
previously identified as containing the name of Ptolemy. Knowing now
many equivalent signs between hieroglyphs and demotic, he transposed the
demotic symbols into what they should look like in the hieroglyphic
version, to create what should be the word for Ptolemy. To his surprise and
delight, he found such a word—making this the first successful
decipherment of a hieroglyph. Knowing that this name was probably
written out in phonetics (as would be all foreign names), he deduced the
sound equivalences in both demotic and hieroglyph for Ptolemy. With the
letters P T L now identified, he found another cartouche in a papyrus
document that he was certain would have to be that of Cleopatra, now
adding new letters to his knowledge. Ptolemy and Cleopatra had two
different letters for T. For others this might prove baffling, but to
Champollion he understood that it merely represented homophones—much
as the f sound in “phone” and “fold.” With growing knowledge of letters he
proceeded to decipher the names of all of the royal cartouches he could
find, giving him a treasure trove of alphabetic information.
Then in September 1822 it all became unlocked in the most surprising
way, in the course of one day. A temple had been discovered in a desolate
part of Egypt whose walls and statues were covered in hieroglyphs.
Accurate drawings of the hieroglyphs fell into Champollion’s hands, and in
looking at them he was struck by something curious—none of the
cartouches corresponded to the names he had already identified. He decided
to apply the phonetic alphabet he had developed to one of them, but could
only see the letter S at the end. The first symbol reminded him of the image
of the sun. In Coptic, which was a distant relative of ancient Egyptian, the
word for sun is Re. In the middle of the cartouche was a trident symbol with
three prongs that looked eerily like an M. With great excitement he realized
this could be the name Ramses. Ramses was a pharaoh of the thirteenth
century B.C., and this would mean that the Egyptians had a phonetic
alphabet dating back who knows how far in time—an earth-shattering
discovery. He needed more proof to assert this.
Another cartouche in the temple drawing had the same M-shaped
symbol. The first symbol in the cartouche was that of an ibis. With his
knowledge of ancient Egyptian history, he knew that the bird was the
symbol of the god Thoth. This cartouche could now spell out Thot-mu-sis,
or Thuthmose, yet another name of an ancient pharaoh. In another part of
the temple he saw a hieroglyphic word that consisted entirely of the
equivalent letters of M and S. Thinking in Coptic, he translated the word as
mis, which means to “give birth.” Sure enough, in the Greek text of the
Rosetta stone he found a phrase referring to a birthday, and identified the
equivalent of it in the hieroglyph section.
Overwhelmed by what he had found, he ran through the streets of Paris
to find his brother. He shouted upon entering the room, “I’ve got it!” and
then fainted, falling to the floor. After nearly twenty years of a continuous
obsession, through endless problems and poverty and setbacks,
Champollion had uncovered the key to the hieroglyphs in a few short
months of intense labor.
In the aftermath of his discovery, he would continue to translate one
word after another and figure out the exact nature of the hieroglyphs. In the
process he would completely transform our knowledge and concept of
ancient Egypt. His earliest translations revealed that hieroglyphs, as he
suspected, were a sophisticated combination of all three forms of symbols,
and had the equivalent of an alphabet far before anyone had imagined the
invention of an alphabet. This was not a backward civilization of priests
dominating a slave culture and keeping secrets through mysterious symbols,
but a vibrant society with a complicated and beautiful written language, one
that could be considered the equal of ancient Greek.
When his discovery was broadcast, Champollion became an instant
hero in France. But Dr. Young, his main rival in the field, could not accept
defeat. He spent the ensuing years accusing Champollion of fraud and
plagiarism, unable to conceive of the idea that someone from such a modest
background could pull off such an amazing intellectual feat.
The story of Champollion versus Dr. Young contains an elemental lesson
about the learning process, and illustrates two classic approaches to a
problem. In the case of Young, he came to the hieroglyphic puzzle from the
outside, fueled by the ambition to be the first to decipher the hieroglyphs
and gain fame in the process. To expedite matters, he reduced the writing
system of the ancient Egyptians into tidy mathematical formulas, assuming
that they represented ideograms. In such a way, he could approach
decipherment as if it were a computational feat. To do so, he had to simplify
what ended up being revealed as an extremely complex and layered system
of writing.
For Champollion, it was the opposite. He was fueled by a genuine
hunger to understand the origins of mankind, and by a deep love of ancient
Egyptian culture. He wanted to get at the truth, not gain fame. Because he
saw the translation of the Rosetta stone as his Life’s Task, he was willing to
devote twenty or more years to the job, or whatever it took to solve the
riddle. He did not attack the problem from the outside and with formulas,
but rather went through a rigorous apprenticeship in ancient languages and
Coptic. It ended up that his knowledge of Coptic proved the decisive key to
unraveling the secret. His knowledge of languages made him understand
how complex they can be, reflecting the complexity of any great society.
When he finally returned to the Rosetta stone with undistracted attention in
1821, his mind shifted to the Creative-Active. He reframed the problem in
holistic terms. His decision to first look at the two scripts—demotic and
hieroglyph—as purely visual was a stroke of creative genius. In the end, he
thought in greater dimensions and uncovered enough aspects of the
language to unlock it.
Many people in various fields tend to follow the Young method. If they
are studying economics, or the human body and health, or the workings of
the brain, they tend to work with abstractions and simplifications, reducing
highly complex and interactive problems into modules, formulas, tidy
statistics, and isolated organs that can be dissected. This approach can yield
a partial picture of reality, much in the way that dissecting a corpse can tell
you some things about the human body. But with these simplifications the
living, breathing element is missing. You want to follow instead the
Champollion model. You are not in a hurry. You prefer the holistic
approach. You look at the object of study from as many angles as possible,
giving your thoughts added dimensions. You assume that the parts of any
whole interact with one another and cannot be completely separated. In
your mind, you get as close to the complicated truth and reality of your
object of study as possible. In the process, great mysteries will unravel
themselves before your eyes.
9. Alchemical Creativity and the Unconscious
The artist Teresita Fernández (b. 1968) has long been fascinated by alchemy
—an early form of science whose goal was to transform base materials into
gold. (For more on Fernández, see here.) Alchemists believed that nature
itself operates through the constant interaction of opposites—earth and fire,
sun and moon, male and female, dark and light. By somehow reconciling
these opposites, the alchemist believed he could discover the deepest secrets
of nature, gain the power to create something out of nothing, and turn dust
into gold.
To Fernández, the art of alchemy resembles in many ways the artistic
and creative process itself. First, a thought or idea stirs in the mind of the
artist. Slowly he or she transforms this idea into a material work of art,
which creates a third element, a response in the viewer—an emotion of
some sort that the artist wishes to provoke. This is a magical process, the
equivalent of creating something out of nothing, a kind of transmutation of
dirt into gold—in this case, the artist’s idea becoming realized, and leading
to the stirring of powerful emotions in the spectator.
Alchemy depends on the reconciliation of various opposite qualities,
and in thinking about herself, Fernández can identify many contrary
impulses that are reconciled in her work. She is personally drawn to
minimalism—a form of expression that communicates through the most
minimal amount of material. She likes the discipline and rigor this paring
down of materials imposes on her thinking process. At the same time she
has a streak of romanticism, and an interest in work that produces strong
emotional reactions in viewers. In her work, she likes to mix the sensual
with the austere. She has noticed that expressing this and other tensions
within herself gives her work a particularly disorienting and dreamlike
effect upon viewers.
Since childhood, Fernández has always had a peculiar sense of scale.
She would find it odd and disturbing that a relatively small space or room
could evoke a much larger and even a vast space by its layout or the
arrangement of windows. Children are generally obsessed with scale,
playing with miniaturized versions of the adult world, yet feeling as if these
miniatures represent real objects that are much larger. We generally lose this
interest as we get older, but in Fernández’s piece Eruption (2005), she
brings us back to an awareness of the potentially disturbing emotions that
can be evoked by playing with our sense of scale. The piece is a relatively
small floor sculpture in the shape of a blob that resembles an artist’s palette.
It consists of thousands of clear glass beads layered on the surface. Below
the beads lies an enlarged image of an abstract painting, which makes the
beads reflect various colors, giving the piece the distinct look of the mouth
of a bubbling volcano. We cannot see the underlying image, and we are not
aware that the beads themselves are clear. Our eye is simply drawn into the
effect, as we imagine much more than is actually there. In the smallest of
spaces she has thus created a feeling of a deep and vast landscape. We know
it is an illusion, but are moved by the sensations and tensions that the piece
creates.
In making work for an outdoor public space, artists generally go in one
of two directions—creating something that blends into the landscape in an
interesting way, or instead making something that stands out from the
surroundings and calls attention to itself. In creating her piece Seattle Cloud
Cover (2006)—at the Olympic Sculpture Park in Seattle, Washington—
Fernández navigated a space between these two opposite approaches. Along
the length of an outdoor pedestrian bridge spanning railroad tracks, she
placed large colored glass panes, laminated with photographic images of
clouds. The panes, which also extend overhead, are semitransparent and are
marked with hundreds of clear polka dots at equal lengths that reveal bits of
the sky above. As people walk along the bridge, they see above them
realistic photographic images of clouds, often standing out against the usual
grey skies of Seattle, or sometimes brightened by the sun, or turning
kaleidoscopic at sunset. Moving over the bridge, the alternation between
real and unreal makes it hard for us to distinguish between the two—a
surreal effect that causes powerful feelings of disorientation in the viewer.
Perhaps the ultimate expression of Fernández’s alchemy can be
experienced in her piece Stacked Waters (2009) at the Blanton Museum of
Art in Austin, Texas. For this commission, she was confronted with the
challenge of creating a striking piece for the vast open space of the
museum’s multi-layered atrium, an entryway to the rest of the museum. The
atrium is generally bathed in bright light from the large skylights on the
ceiling. Instead of struggling to create a sculpture for such a space,
Fernández attempted to invert our whole experience of art. When people
enter a museum or gallery space, it is most often with a sense of distance
and coldness; they stand back and view something for a few moments, then
move on. Aiming for a more visceral contact with the viewer than a
traditional sculpture could provide, she decided to use the cold white walls
of the atrium and its constant flow of patrons as the basis for her alchemical
experiment.
She covered the walls with bands of thousands of highly reflective
acrylic strips, saturated in swirls of color from shades of blue to white. The
overall effect from standing in the atrium is that of being immersed in an
enormous pool of blue water that shimmers from the sunlight above. As
people ascend the stairs, they can see in the acrylic strips their own
reflections, which are oddly distorted, similar to the effect of seeing things
through water. Viewing the strips from up close, it is clear that it is all an
illusion created by the most minimal amount of material, and yet the feel of
water, the sense of being immersed, remains palpable and strange. The
spectators thus become actual parts of the artwork itself, with their own
reflections helping to create the illusion. The experience of moving through
this dreamlike space makes us conscious once more of the tensions between
art and nature, illusion and reality, coldness and warmth, wet and dry, and
provokes a powerful intellectual and emotional response.
Our culture depends in many ways on the creation of standards and
conventions that we all must adhere to. These conventions are often
expressed in terms of opposites—good and evil, beautiful and ugly, painful
and pleasurable, rational and irrational, intellectual and sensual. Believing
in these opposites gives our world a sense of cohesion and comfort. To
imagine that something can be intellectual and sensual, pleasurable and
painful, real and unreal, good and bad, masculine and feminine is too
chaotic and disturbing for us. Life, however, is more fluid and complex; our
desires and experiences do not fit neatly into these tidy categories.
As the work of Teresita Fernández demonstrates, the real and the
unreal are concepts that exist for us as ideas and constructions, and thus can
be played with, altered, commanded, and transformed at will. Those who
think in dualities—believing that there is such a thing as “real” and such a
thing as “unreal,” and that they are distinct entities that can never become
blended into a third, alchemical element—are creatively limited, and their
work can quickly become dead and predictable. To maintain a dualistic
approach to life requires that we repress many observable truths, but in our
unconscious and in our dreams we often let go of the need to create
categories for everything, and are able to mix seemingly disparate and
contradictory ideas and feelings together with ease.
Your task as a creative thinker is to actively explore the unconscious
and contradictory parts of your personality, and to examine similar
contradictions and tensions in the world at large. Expressing these tensions
within your work in any medium will create a powerful effect on others,
making them sense unconscious truths or feelings that have been obscured
or repressed. You look at society at large and the various contradictions that
are rampant—for instance, the way in which a culture that espouses the
ideal of free expression is charged with an oppressive code of political
correctness that tamps free expression down. In science, you look for ideas
that go against the existing paradigm, or that seem inexplicable because
they are so contradictory. All of these contradictions contain a rich mine of
information about a reality that is deeper and more complex than the one
immediately perceived. By delving into the chaotic and fluid zone below
the level of consciousness where opposites meet, you will be surprised at
the exciting and fertile ideas that will come bubbling up to the surface.
REVERSAL
In Western culture, a particular myth has evolved that drugs or madness can
somehow lead to creative bursts of the highest order. How else to explain
the work that John Coltrane did while hooked on heroin, or the great works
of the playwright August Strindberg, who seemed clinically insane? Their
work is so spontaneous and free, so far beyond the powers of the rational,
conscious mind.
This is a cliché, however, that is easily debunked. Coltrane himself
admitted that he did his worst work during the few years he was addicted to
heroin. It was destroying him and his creative powers. He kicked the habit
in 1957 and never looked back. Biographers who later examined the letters
and journals of Strindberg discovered a man who was quite histrionic in
public, but who in private life was extremely disciplined. The effect of
madness created in his plays is very consciously crafted.
Understand: to create a meaningful work of art or to make a discovery
or invention requires great discipline, self-control, and emotional stability.
It requires mastering the forms of your field. Drugs and madness only
destroy such powers. Do not fall for the romantic myths and clichés that
abound in culture about creativity—offering us the excuse or panacea that
such powers can come cheaply. When you look at the exceptionally creative
work of Masters, you must not ignore the years of practice, the endless
routines, the hours of doubt, and the tenacious overcoming of obstacles
these people endured. Creative energy is the fruit of such efforts and
nothing else.
Our vanity, our passions, our spirit of imitation, our abstract intelligence, our habits have
long been at work, and it is the task of art to undo this work of theirs, making us travel back in
the direction from which we have come to the depths where what has really existed lies
unknown within us.
—MARCEL PROUST
VI
FUSE THE INTUITIVE
WITH THE RATIONAL:
MASTERY
All of us have access to a higher form of intelligence, one that can allow us
to see more of the world, to anticipate trends, to respond with speed and
accuracy to any circumstance. This intelligence is cultivated by deeply
immersing ourselves in a field of study and staying true to our inclinations,
no matter how unconventional our approach might seem to others. Through
such intense immersion over many years we come to internalize and gain
an intuitive feel for the complicated components of our field. When we fuse
this intuitive feel with rational processes, we expand our minds to the outer
limits of our potential and are able to see into the secret core of life itself.
We then come to have powers that approximate the instinctive force and
speed of animals, but with the added reach that our human consciousness
brings us. This power is what our brains were designed to attain, and we
will be naturally led to this type of intelligence if we follow our inclinations
to their ultimate ends.
THE THIRD TRANSFORMATION
For the writer Marcel Proust (1871–1922), his fate seemed set at birth. He
was born incredibly small and frail; for two weeks he hovered near death,
but finally pulled through. As a child, he had frequent bouts of illness that
kept him at home for months at a time. When he was nine years old, he
suffered his first asthma attack and nearly died. His mother, Jeanne,
continuously worried about his health, doted on Marcel and accompanied
him on his regular trips to the countryside to convalesce.
And it was on such trips that the pattern of his life became set. Often
alone, he developed a passion for reading books. He loved to read about
history, and he devoured all forms of literature. His main physical outlet
was taking long walks in the country, and here certain sights seemed to
captivate him. He would stop and stare for hours at apple blossoms or
hawthorn flowers, or at any kind of slightly exotic plant; he found the
spectacle of marching ants or spiders working on their webs particularly
compelling. He would soon add books on botany and entomology to his
reading list. His closest companion in these early years was his mother, and
his attachment to her soon went beyond all bounds. They looked alike and
shared similar interests in the arts. He could not stand to be away from her
for more than a day, and in the few hours in which they were separated he
would write her endless letters.
In 1886 he read a book that would forever change the course of his
life. It was an historical account of the Norman conquest of England written
by Augustin Thierry. The narration of events was so vivid that Marcel felt
himself transported back in time. The writer alluded to certain timeless laws
of human nature that were revealed in this story, and the possibility of
uncovering such laws made Marcel’s head spin with excitement.
Entomologists could discover the hidden principles that governed the
behavior of insects. Could a writer do the same with humans and their
complicated nature? Captivated by Thierry’s ability to make history come
to life, it came to Marcel in a flash that this would be his Life’s Task—to
become a writer and illuminate the laws of human nature. Haunted by the
sense that he would not live long, he would have to hurry this process and
do all that he could to develop his writing powers.
At school in Paris, where he lived, Marcel impressed his classmates
with his strangeness. He had read so much that his head was teeming with
ideas; he would talk about history, ancient Roman literature, and the social
life of bees all in the same conversation. He would mix the past and the
present, talking about a Roman writer as if he were alive, or describing a
friend of theirs as if he were a character from history. His large eyes, which
a friend later compared to that of a fly, would seem to bore right into the
person he was talking to. In his letters to friends, he could dissect their
emotions and problems with such exactitude that it was unnerving, but then
he would direct his attention to himself as well, mercilessly exposing his
own weaknesses. Despite his propensity for being alone, he was incredibly
sociable and a real charmer. He knew how to flatter and ingratiate himself.
No one could quite figure him out or gain any sense of what the future
might hold for such an oddball.
In 1888 Marcel met a thirty-seven-year-old courtesan named Laure
Hayman, who was the mistress of his uncle, among many others, and for
him it was instant infatuation. She was like a character out of a novel. Her
clothes, her coquettish manner, her power over men fascinated him.
Charming her with his witty conversation and polite manners, they quickly
became close friends. In France there had long been the tradition of salons
—gatherings where people of like mind discussed literary and philosophical
ideas. In most cases women ran these various salons, and depending on the
social status of the hostess, they could attract important artists, thinkers, and
political figures. Laure had her own infamous salon, frequented by artists,
bohemians, actors, and actresses. Soon Marcel became a regular.
He found the social life in these upper echelons of French society
endlessly fascinating. It was a world full of subtle signs—an invitation to a
ball, or the particular seating position at a dinner table would indicate the
status of an individual, whether they were on the rise or the decline. Clothes
and gestures and certain phrases of conversation would lead to endless
critiques and judgments about people. He wanted to explore this realm and
learn all of its intricacies. The attention he used to direct toward history and
literature he now directed toward the world of high society. He inveigled his
way into other salons, and was soon mingling with upper aristocracy.
Although he was determined to become a writer, Marcel had never
been able to figure out what he wanted to write about, and this had troubled
him to no end. Now, however, he had his answer: this social world would be
the ant colony that he would analyze as ruthlessly as an entomologist. For
this purpose he began to collect characters for novels. One such character
was the Count Robert de Montesquiou, a poet, aesthete, and notorious
decadent who had a pronounced weakness for handsome young men.
Another was Charles Haas, the epitome of high-society chicness and an
expert art collector who couldn’t help falling in love with lower-class
women. He studied these characters, listened intently to their way of
talking, followed their mannerisms, and in his notebooks he would try to
bring them to life in small literary sketches. In his writing, Marcel was a
master mimic.
Everything he wrote about had to be something real, something he had
witnessed or experienced firsthand; otherwise, his writing came out lifeless.
His own fear of intimate personal relationships, however, presented him
with a problem. Attracted to both men and women, he tended to keep his
distance when it came to any type of close physical and emotional
relationship. This made it hard for him to write about romance and love
from the inside. So he initiated a practice that served him well. If he were
attracted to a particular woman, he would befriend her fiancé or boyfriend
and, gaining his trust, would probe him for the most intimate details about
their relationship. Since he was such an acute psychologist he could give
excellent advice. Later, in his own mind, he would completely reconstruct
the affair, feeling as deeply as possible the ups and downs, the bouts of
jealousy, as if it were all happening to him. He would do this with either
gender.
Marcel’s father, a prominent doctor, began to despair for his son.
Marcel would attend parties all night, return late in the morning, and sleep
through the day. To fit in with high society, he was spending vast amounts
of money. He seemed to have no discipline and no real career aspirations.
With his health problems and his mother always spoiling him, his father
feared Marcel would be a failure and a continuous burden. He tried to push
him into a career. Marcel placated him as best he could—one day he told
his father he would study law; the next day he talked of getting a job as a
librarian. But in truth, he was banking everything on the publication of his
first book, Pleasures and Days. It would be a collection of stories and
sketches of the society he had infiltrated. Like Thierry with the Norman
Conquest, he would make this world come to life. With the success of this
book, he would win over his father and all the other doubters. To ensure its
success and make it into more than a book, Pleasures and Days would
feature the beautiful drawings of a high-society lady he had befriended, and
it would be printed on the finest paper.
After numerous delays, the book was finally published in 1896.
Although many of the reviews were positive, they kept referring to the
writing as exquisite and delicate, implying a sort of superficiality to the
work. More disturbing, the book hardly sold. Considering the printing costs
it was an enormous financial fiasco, and the public image of Marcel Proust
became permanently cemented—he was an elegant dandy, a snob who
wrote of the only world he knew, a young man who had no practical sense,
a social butterfly who dabbled in literature. It was an embarrassment and it
demoralized him.
The family pressures to finally choose a career now grew intense. Still
confident in his skills, he decided the only answer was to write another
novel, but one that would be the opposite of Pleasures and Days. It would
be much longer and weightier than the first book. In it he would mix
childhood memories and recent social experiences. It would depict the lives
of all classes of people and an entire period in French history. It could not
be seen as superficial. But as the novel became longer and longer, he could
not figure out how to make it cohere into something logical, or even into
something resembling a story. He found himself getting lost in the
immensity of his ambition, and despite having written hundreds of pages,
by the end of 1899 he gave up the project.
He began to grow increasingly depressed and despondent. He was tired
of the salons and mingling with the rich. He had no career, no position to
rely upon; nearing thirty years of age, he was still living at home, dependent
on his parents for money. He felt constantly anxious about his health,
certain he was doomed to die within a few years. He heard endless stories
of his friends from school becoming prominent members of society, with
growing families of their own. In comparison he felt like a total failure. All
that he had accomplished was a few articles in newspapers about high
society and a book that had made him the laughingstock of Paris. The only
thing he could rely on was the continued devotion of his mother.
In the midst of his despair he had an idea. For several years he had
been devouring the works of the English art critic and thinker John Ruskin.
He would teach himself English and translate Ruskin’s work into French.
This would require years of scholarly research into the various topics
Ruskin specialized in, such as gothic architecture. It would consume much
of his time, and he would have to put off any ideas of writing a novel. But it
would show his parents that he was serious about making a living and that
he had chosen a career. Clinging to this as his last hope, he poured himself
into the task with all of his energy.
After several years of intense labor, a few of his translations of Ruskin
were published to great acclaim. His introductions and the essays that
accompanied the translations finally erased the reputation of the idle
dilettante that had haunted him since Pleasures and Days. He was seen as a
serious scholar. Through his work, he had managed to hone his own style of
writing; internalizing the work of Ruskin, he could now write essays that
were thoughtful and precise. He had finally gained some discipline,
something to build on. But in the midst of this modest success, his network
of emotional support suddenly teetered and then vanished. In 1903 his
father died. Two years later his mother, unable to get over the loss, passed
away as well. They had hardly ever been apart from each other, and he had
dreaded the moment of her death since childhood. He felt completely alone,
and he feared that he had nothing left to live for.
In the months to come he slowly withdrew from society, and as he
took stock of his life up to that point he discerned a pattern that actually
gave him the faintest amount of hope. To compensate for his physical
weakness he had taken to reading, and in the process had discovered his
Life’s Task. Over the course of the last twenty years he had accumulated a
vast amount of knowledge about French society—an incredibly wide
variety of real-life characters of all types and classes lived inside of his
head. He had written thousands of pages—including the failed novel, short
sketches for newspapers, and various essays. Using Ruskin as a mentor, in
translating his works he had developed discipline and some organizing
skills. He had long thought of life as an apprenticeship in which we are all
slowly instructed in the ways of the world. Some people learn to read the
signs and heed the lessons from this apprenticeship, developing themselves
in the process; others do not. He had served an elaborate twenty-year
apprenticeship in writing and in human nature, and it had altered him
deeply. Despite his ill health and his failures, he had never given up. This
must mean something—perhaps a destiny of sorts. All of his failures had a
purpose, he decided, if he knew how to exploit them. His time had not been
wasted.
What he needed to do was to put all of this knowledge to work. This
meant returning to the novel that had continually eluded him. What it would
be about—the plot, the narrator’s voice—he still had no idea. The material
was all there in his head. If in his loneliness he could not bring back his
mother or his childhood or his youth, he would somehow re-create these
things in their entirety, here in the study of his apartment where he now
holed himself up. What mattered was to get to work. Something would
come of it.
In the fall of 1908 he purchased dozens of notebooks, the kind he used
to use in school, and began to fill them with notes. He wrote essays on
aesthetics, sketches of characters, childhood memories that he strained to
recall. And as he went deep into this process, he felt a change within
himself. Something clicked. He did not know where it came from, but a
voice emerged, his own voice, which would be that of the narrator himself.
The story would revolve around a young man who becomes too neurotically
attached to his mother and cannot forge his own identity. He discovers that
he wants to be a writer, but he cannot figure out what he should write about.
As he grows up, he starts to explore the two social realms of bohemia and
landed aristocracy. He dissects the various people he meets, uncovering the
essence of their characters that lies underneath their superficial social
personalities. He has several failed love affairs in which he suffers the
extremes of jealousy. After numerous adventures and a creeping sense of
failure as he advances in life, at the very end of the novel he discovers what
he wants to write—it will be the book that we have just been reading.
The novel would be called In Search of Lost Time, and in the end it
would recount much of Proust’s own life, all of the various characters he
knew disguised under different names. In the course of the narration he
would cover the entire history of France from the moment he was born to
the present, whatever the present was. It would be a portrait of society as a
whole; he would be the entomologist uncovering the laws that governed the
behavior of all the inhabitants of the anthill. His only concern now was his
health. The task ahead of him was immense. Would he live long enough to
complete it?
Over the course of several years, he finished the first part of the book,
known as Swann’s Way. It was published in 1913, and the reviews were
extremely positive. No one had ever read a novel quite like it. It seemed
that Proust had created his own genre—part novel, part essay. But as he was
making plans for the final half of the book, war broke out across Europe
and the publishing business essentially ground to a halt. Proust continued
working on the novel unremittingly, but as he did so, something strange
happened—the book kept expanding in size and scope, one volume after the
next. His method of working was partially responsible for this increase. He
had collected over the years thousands of bits of stories, characters, lessons
on life, laws of psychology that he slowly pieced together in the novel, like
tiles of a mosaic. He could not foresee the end.
And as the book grew in size, it suddenly assumed a different form—
real life and the novel became inextricably interwoven. When he needed a
new character, a wealthy debutante for instance, he would hunt down her
equivalent in society and get himself invited to balls and soirées where he
could study her. Phrases she used would find their way into the book. One
evening, he reserved several boxes at the theater for his friends. In these
boxes he gathered the real-life people upon whom he had based his
characters. Later they attended a dinner, and around the table he could
observe, like a chemist, the various elements of his book, there before his
eyes. None of them of course knew what was going on. Everything became
material for him—not only the past, but present events and encounters
would suddenly suggest a new idea or direction.
When he wished to write about the particular plants and flowers that
had obsessed him as a boy, he would drive to the country and spend hours
lost in observation, trying to get at the essence of their uniqueness and at
what had fascinated him, so he could recreate the original sensation for the
reader. Fictionalizing the Count de Montesquiou as a character named
Charlus, a notorious homosexual, he visited the most secretive male
brothels in Paris that the count was known to frequent. His book had to be
as real as possible, including graphic sex scenes. For things he could not
personally witness, he would pay others to supply him gossip, information,
even do some spying. As the book grew in length and intensity, he had the
sensation that this social realm he was depicting had come alive within him,
and feeling it from the inside, it would flow out of him with increasing ease.
He had a metaphor to explain this sensation, which he included in the novel
—he was like a spider sitting on its web, feeling the slightest vibration,
knowing it so deeply as the world he had created and mastered.
After the war Proust’s book continued to be published, one volume
after another. Critics were completely astounded at the depth and breadth of
his work. He had created, or rather recreated, an entire world. But this was
not simply a realistic novel, for much of the work included discourses on
art, psychology, the secrets of memory, and the workings of the brain itself.
Proust had delved so deeply into his own psychology that he had made
discoveries about memory and the unconscious that seemed uncannily
accurate. Going through volume after volume, readers would have the
sensation that they were actually living and experiencing this world from
within, the narrator’s thoughts becoming one’s own thoughts—the
boundaries between narrator and reader disappearing. It was a magical
effect; it felt like life itself.
Straining to finish the final volume, the point at which the narrator
would be finally able to write the novel we have been reading, Proust was
in a hurry. He could feel his energy waning and death approaching. All
through the publishing process, he would make the publishers stop the
printing, as some new incident he had personally witnessed had to be
included in the book. Now, sensing himself near death, he made his female
attendant take some final notes. He finally understood how it felt to be
dying, and he had to rewrite a previous deathbed scene—it was not
psychologically real enough. He died two days later, never to see the full
seven volumes in print.
KEYS TO MASTERY
Cook Ting was cutting up an ox for Lord Wen-hui…. “Ah, this is marvelous!” said Lord Wen-
hui. “Imagine skill reaching such heights!” Cook Ting laid down his knife and replied, “What
I care about is the Way, which goes beyond skill. When I first began cutting up oxen, all I
could see was the ox itself. After three years I no longer saw the whole ox. And now—now I go
at it by spirit and don’t look with my eyes. Perception and understanding have come to a stop
and spirit moves where it wants.”
—CHUANG TZU, ANCIENT CHINESE
WRITER, FOURTH CENTURY B.C.
Throughout history we read of Masters in every conceivable form of human
endeavor describing a sensation of suddenly possessing heightened
intellectual powers after years of immersion in their field. The great chess
Master Bobby Fischer spoke of being able to think beyond the various
moves of his pieces on the chessboard; after a while he could see “fields of
forces” that allowed him to anticipate the entire direction of the match. For
the pianist Glenn Gould, he no longer had to focus on notes or parts of the
music he was playing, but instead saw the entire architecture of the piece
and could express it. Albert Einstein suddenly was able to realize not just
the answer to a problem, but a whole new way of looking at the universe,
contained in a visual image he intuited. The inventor Thomas Edison spoke
of a vision he had for illuminating an entire city with electric light, this
complex system communicated to him through a single image.
In all of these instances, these practitioners of various skills described
a sensation of seeing more. They were suddenly able to grasp an entire
situation through an image or an idea, or a combination of images and
ideas. They experienced this power as intuition, or a fingertip feel.
Considering the power such intelligence can bring us, and the
tremendous contributions to culture made by Masters who possess it, it
would seem logical that such high-level intuition would be the subject of
countless books and discussions, and that the form of thinking that goes
with it would be elevated into an ideal for all of us to aim at. But oddly
enough, this is not at all the case. This form of intelligence is either ignored,
relegated to the inexplicable realms of the mystical and occult, or ascribed
to genius and genetics. Some even try to debunk this type of power in
general, claiming that these Masters are exaggerating their experiences, and
that their so-called intuitive powers are nothing more than extended forms
of normal thinking, based on superior knowledge.
The reason for this overall disregard is simple: we humans have come
to recognize only one form of thinking and intelligence—rationality.
Rational thinking is sequential by nature. We see a phenomenon A, and we
deduce a cause B, and maybe anticipate a reaction C. In all cases of rational
thinking, we can reconstruct the various steps that were taken to arrive at
some kind of conclusion or answer. This form of thinking is extremely
effective and has brought us great powers. We developed it to help make
sense of our world and to gain some control over it. The process that people
go through when they arrive at an answer through rational analysis can
generally be examined and verified, which is why we esteem it so highly.
We prefer things that can be reduced to a formula and described in precise
words. But the types of intuitions discussed by various Masters cannot be
reduced to a formula, and the steps they took to arrive at them cannot be
reconstructed. We cannot go inside the mind of Albert Einstein and
experience his sudden grasp of the nature of the relativity of time. And
because we recognize rationality as the only legitimate form of intelligence,
these experiences of “seeing more” must either be forms of rational
thinking that just happen faster, or are simply miraculous by nature.
The problem we are facing here is that high-level intuition, the
ultimate sign of mastery, involves a process that is qualitatively different
from rationality, but is even more accurate and perceptive. It accesses
deeper parts of reality. It is a highly legitimate type of intelligence, but one
that has to be understood in its own right. And in understanding it, we can
begin to see that such power is not miraculous, but intrinsically human and
accessible to us all.
Let us try to make sense of this form of thinking by examining how it
might operate in two very different forms of knowledge—the life sciences
and warfare.
If we were to study a particular animal in order to understand it, we
would break up our analysis into several parts. We would study its various
organs, brain, and anatomical structure in order to see how it has adapted
differently from other animals to its environment. We would study its
behavior patterns, how it gathers food, and its mating rituals. We would
look at how it functions within an ecosystem. In this way, we would be able
to piece together an accurate picture of this animal, covering it from all
angles. With warfare, we would go through a similar process, breaking it up
into parts—field maneuvers, weaponry, logistics, strategy. Having deep
knowledge of these subjects, we could analyze the results of a battle and
come to some interesting conclusions; or, with some field experience, we
could lead an army into battle and do an effective job.
In taking these analyses as far as possible, however, something is
inevitably missing. An animal is not merely the sum of its parts that we can
understand by adding them up. It has its own experience and emotions,
which play an enormous role in its behavior, but which are elements we
cannot see or measure. It has its own highly complex interactions with the
environment that become distorted when we break them up into parts. The
animal’s continuously fluid, dimensional interaction with its environment is
also something that is not visible to our eyes. With warfare, once battle is
engaged, we become susceptible to what is known as the fog of war—the
highly unpredictable element that comes into play when two opposing
forces square up and nothing can be precisely anticipated. The situation is
continuously fluid, as one side reacts to the other and the unexpected
intervenes. This battle in real time has an interactive, changing element that
cannot be reduced to its parts or to simple analysis, and is not something we
can see and measure.
This unseen element that constitutes the animal’s entire experience,
and that makes battle a fluid, organic entity, can be called various things. To
the ancient Chinese, who understood this very well, it was known as the
Tao or Way, and this Way inhabits everything in the world and is embedded
in the relationships between things. The Way is visible to the expert—in
cooking, carpentry, warfare, or philosophy. We shall call it the dynamic, the
living force that inevitably operates in anything we study or do. It is how
the whole thing functions, and how the relationships evolve from within. It
is not the moves of the pieces on the chessboard but the entire game,
involving the psychologies of the players, their strategies in real time, their
past experiences influencing the present, the comfort of the chairs they are
sitting in, how their energies affect each other—in a word, everything that
comes into play, all at once.
Through intense absorption in a particular field over a long period of
time, Masters come to understand all of the parts involved in what they are
studying. They reach a point where all of this has become internalized and
they are no longer seeing the parts, but gain an intuitive feel for the whole.
They literally see or sense the dynamic. In the living sciences, we have the
example of Jane Goodall, who studied chimpanzees in the wilds of East
Africa for years as she lived among them. Interacting with them constantly,
she reached a point where she began to think like a chimpanzee, and could
see elements of their social life that no other scientist had come close to
fathoming. She gained an intuitive feel for not only how they functioned as
individuals but as a group, which is an inseparable part of their lives. She
made discoveries about the social life of chimpanzees that forever altered
our conception of the animal, and that are no less scientific for depending
on this deep level of intuition.
In warfare, we can point to the great German general Erwin Rommel,
who was said to possess the highest form of the fingertip feel ever
chronicled in the history of battle. He could sense exactly where the enemy
was thinking of striking and foil their plans; he could launch an offensive at
precisely the weak point in their lines of defense. He seemed to have eyes in
the back of his head, and oracular powers for reading the future. He did all
of this in the deserts of North Africa where it was nearly impossible to get
any clear sense of the terrain. Rommel’s power, however, was not occult in
nature. He simply had a much deeper knowledge than other generals of all
of the aspects of battle. He constantly flew over the desert in his own plane,
gaining a bird’s-eye feel for the terrain. He was a trained mechanic, and so
had a complete knowledge of his tanks and what he could expect of them.
He studied in depth the psychology of the opposing army and its generals.
He interacted with almost all of his soldiers, and had a clear sense of how
far he could push them. Whatever he studied, he did so with incredible
intensity and depth. A point was reached where all of these details became
internalized. They fused together in his brain, giving him a feel for the
whole picture and a sense of this interactive dynamic.
The ability to have this intuitive grasp of the whole and feel this
dynamic is simply a function of time. Since it has been shown that the brain
is literally altered after approximately 10,000 hours of practice, these
powers would be the result of a transformation that happens in the brain
after some 20,000 hours and beyond. With this much practice and
experience, all kinds of connections have been formed in the brain between
different forms of knowledge. Masters thus have a sense of how everything
interacts organically, and they can intuit patterns or solutions in an instant.
This fluid form of thinking does not occur through a step-by-step process,
but rather comes in flashes and insights as the brain makes sudden
connections between disparate forms of knowledge, causing us to sense the
dynamic in real time.
Some people like to imagine that such intuitions do operate
sequentially, but simply happen too fast for the thinker to see the steps. This
reasoning comes from the desire to reduce every form of intelligence to the
same rational level. But with a discovery like the theory of simple relativity,
if Albert Einstein himself could not begin to reconstruct the steps in
retrospect that led to his insight on the relativity of time, then why should it
be imagined that such steps exist? We must trust the experience and
descriptions of these Masters, all people with high levels of self-awareness
and analytical skills.
It would be a misconception, however, to imagine that Masters are
simply following their intuitions and moving beyond rational thinking.
First, it is through all of their hard work, the depth of their knowledge, and
the development of their analytical skills that they reach this higher form of
intelligence. Second, when they experience this intuition or insight, they
invariably subject it to a high degree of reflection and reasoning. In science,
they must spend months or years verifying their intuitions. In the arts, they
must work out the ideas that come to them intuitively and rationally shape
them into a form. This is hard for us to imagine, because we find intuition
and rationality mutually exclusive, but in fact at this high level they operate
together in a seamless fashion. The reasoning of Masters is guided by
intuition; their intuition springs from intense rational focus. The two are
fused.
Although time is the critical factor in attaining Mastery and this
intuitive feel, the time we are talking about is not neutral or simply
quantitative. An hour of Einstein’s thinking at the age of sixteen does not
equal an hour spent by an average high school student working on a
problem in physics. It is not a matter of studying a subject for twenty years,
and then emerging as a Master. The time that leads to mastery is dependent
on the intensity of our focus.
The key, then, to attaining this higher level of intelligence is to make
our years of study qualitatively rich. We don’t simply absorb information—
we internalize it and make it our own by finding some way to put this
knowledge to practical use. We look for connections between the various
elements we are learning, hidden laws that we can perceive in the
apprenticeship phase. If we experience any failures or setbacks, we do not
quickly forget them because they offend our self-esteem. Instead we reflect
on them deeply, trying to figure out what went wrong and discern whether
there are any patterns to our mistakes. As we progress, we start to question
some of the assumptions and conventions we have learned along the way.
Soon, we begin to experiment and become increasingly active. At all points
in the various moments leading to mastery, we attack with intensity. Every
moment, every experience contains deep lessons for us. We are
continuously awake, never merely going through the motions.
The person who best exemplifies this usage of time for mastery is
Marcel Proust, whose great novel, In Search of Lost Time, concerns this
very subject. In French the word for “lost” is perdu, which equally means
“wasted.” And to Proust, and to many of those who knew him as a young
man, he seemed the least likely person ever to attain mastery, because on
the surface he appeared to waste so much valuable time. All he ever seemed
to do was read books, take walks, write interminable letters, attend parties,
sleep during the day, and publish frothy society articles. When he finally
applied himself to translating Ruskin, he took an incredibly long time and
involved himself in seemingly irrelevant tasks, like traveling to locations
Ruskin described, something no other translator would think of doing.
Proust himself complained endlessly about the time that he had wasted
as a young man and how little he had accomplished, but these complaints
cannot be taken at face value, because he never gave up. Despite his
physical weakness and bouts of depression, he continued to try new
endeavors and kept widening the scope of his knowledge. He was tireless
and tenacious. These moments of self-doubt were his way of propelling
himself forward and reminding himself of the short amount of time
remaining to him. He had a deep awareness of a sense of destiny, of an
overall purpose for his strangeness, that he was called to fulfill through his
writing.
What made those twenty years qualitatively different from those of an
ordinary person was the intensity of his attention. He did not simply read
books—he took them apart, rigorously analyzed them, and learned valuable
lessons to apply to his own life. All of this reading implanted in his brain
various styles that would enrich his own writing style. He did not merely
socialize—he strained to understand people at their core and to uncover
their secret motivations. He did not just analyze his own psychology, but
went so deeply into the various levels of consciousness he found within
himself that he developed insights about the functioning of memory that
foreshadowed many discoveries in neuroscience. He did not merely
translate, but strove to inhabit the mind of Ruskin himself. In the end, he
even used the death of his mother to intensify his development. With her
gone, he would have to write himself out of his depression, and find a way
to re-create the feelings between them in the book he was to write. As he
later described it, all of these experiences were like seeds, and once he had
started his novel he was like a gardener tending and cultivating the plants
that had taken root so many years before.
Through his own efforts, he transformed himself from an apprentice to
a mature writer and translator, and from there to a novelist who figured out
what to write about, which voice to assume, and how to attack his subject.
At some point after he began writing his novel, he underwent a third
transformation. Memories and ideas came flooding into his mind. Even as
the book kept expanding, he could intuit its overall shape and the
relationships between the many tiles of the mosaic. This immense novel had
a living, breathing dynamic that was now completely alive within him. He
was inside his characters and the whole slice of French society he was
writing about. More important, he was completely inside the narrator (who
is Proust himself), and in his novel it’s as if we are literally, from the inside,
experiencing the thoughts and sensations of another person. He was able to
achieve this effect through the intuitive powers he had gained from close to
thirty years of perpetual work and analysis.
Like Proust, you must also maintain a sense of destiny, and feel
continuously connected to it. You are unique, and there is a purpose to your
uniqueness. You must see every setback, failure, or hardship as a trial along
the way, as seeds that are being planted for further cultivation, if you know
how to grow them. No moment is wasted if you pay attention and learn the
lessons contained in every experience. By constantly applying yourself to
the subject that suits your inclinations and attacking it from many different
angles, you are simply enriching the ground for these seeds to take root.
You may not see this process in the present, but it is happening. Never
losing your connection to your Life’s Task, you will unconsciously hit upon
the right choices in your life. Over time, mastery will come to you.
The high-level intuitive powers we are talking about have roots in our
development as the thinking animal; they have an evolutionary purpose that
is extremely helpful to understand, and one that is highly relevant to the
times in which we live.
The Roots of Masterly Intuition
For nearly all animals, speed is the critical factor in survival. A few seconds
can spell the difference between avoiding a predator or meeting death. And
for the purposes of such speed, organisms have evolved elaborate instincts.
An instinctual response is immediate and is generally triggered by certain
stimuli. Sometimes organisms possess instincts that are so finely calibrated
to circumstances that they seem to have uncanny abilities.
Take, for instance, the Ammophila wasp. With incredible speed the
female Ammophila is able to sting her various victims—spiders, beetles,
caterpillars—in precisely the right place to paralyze but not kill them. Into
the paralyzed flesh she lays her eggs, providing her larvae with fresh meat
to feast upon for several days. In each of these victims the stinging points
are different—for instance, with the caterpillar, she must hit at three
separate points to paralyze the entire creature. Because it is such a delicate
operation, sometimes the Ammophila misses and kills the victim, but
generally, her success rate is high enough to ensure the survival of her
offspring. In this process there is no time for calculating the kind of victim
and the exact spot to hit. It is instant, as if the wasp has a feel for the nerve
centers of her various victims, and can sense them from the inside.
Our primitive ancestors had their own sets of instincts, many of which
remain buried within us to this day. But as these ancestors slowly developed
reasoning powers, they had to detach themselves from their immediate
circumstances and depend less on instinct. To notice behavior patterns in
the animals they were tracking, they had to connect them to other actions
that were not immediately apparent. They had to make similar calculations
when it came to locating food sources, or to navigating the long distances
they traveled on foot. With this ability to detach themselves from the
environment and see patterns, they gained tremendous mental powers, but
this development also presented a great danger—increasing amounts of
information for the brain to process and a consequent loss of speed in
reacting to events.
Such slowness could have spelled doom for us as a species if not for a
compensatory power that the human brain developed. Years of tracking
particular animals and observing their surroundings gave our ancestors a
feel for their environment in all of its complexity. Knowing the behavior
patterns of various animals, they could anticipate where predators might
strike, and sense where prey might lie. They came to know so well the long
distances they traveled that they could negotiate these spaces quickly and
effectively, without having to calculate. In other words, they developed a
primitive form of intuition. Through continual experience and practice, our
ancestors recovered some of the immediacy and speed they had lost. They
could respond intuitively instead of instinctually. On this level, intuition
was more powerful than instinct in that it was not tied to very specific
circumstances or stimuli, but could be applied to a much wider arena of
action.
These ancestors’ brains were not yet burdened by all of the
information that comes through language or the complexities of living in
large groups. Interacting so directly with their environment, they could
develop an intuitive feel over the course of a handful years. But for us,
living in a much more complex environment, this process can take fifteen to
twenty years. Our high-level intuition, however, has its roots firmly in the
primitive version.
Intuition, primitive or high level, is essentially driven by memory.
When we take in information of any kind, we store it in mnemonic
networks in the brain. The stability and durability of these networks
depends on repetition, intensity of experience, and how deeply we pay
attention. If we are half listening to a vocabulary lesson in a foreign
language, we are not likely to retain it on any level. But if we are in the
country where the language is spoken, we will hear the same words
repeated in context; we will tend to pay deeper attention because we need
to, and the memory trace will be that much more stable.
According to the model developed by the psychologist Kenneth
Bowers, whenever we encounter a problem—a face we need to recognize, a
word or phrase we need to recall—mnemonic networks within the brain
become activated as the search for the answer is guided along certain
pathways. All of this occurs below the level of consciousness. When a
particular network is sufficiently activated, we suddenly become conscious
of a possible name for the face, or a phrase that might be appropriate. These
are low-level forms of intuition that come to us in our everyday life; we
cannot reconstruct the steps that went into recognizing a person’s face and
remembering their name.
People who spend years studying a particular subject or field develop
so many of these memory networks and pathways that their brains are
constantly searching for and discovering connections between various
pieces of information. When confronted with a high-level problem, the
search goes in a hundred directions below conscious awareness, guided by
an intuitive sense of where the answer might lie. All kinds of networks
become activated, ideas and solutions suddenly rising to the surface. Those
that seem particularly fruitful and appropriate stick in the memory and are
acted upon. Instead of having to reason an answer through a step-by-step
process, the answer comes to consciousness with a feeling of immediacy.
The extremely high number of experiences and memory networks that
become hardwired allow the brains of Masters to explore an area that is so
wide that it has the dimensions and feel of reality itself, of the dynamic.
For someone like the chess Master Bobby Fischer, the number of times
he experienced similar sets of circumstances and witnessed the various
movements and reactions of different opponents created powerful memory
traces. He internalized incredible numbers of patterns. At some point in his
development, all of these memories fused into a feel for the overall dynamic
of the game. He was no longer seeing simple moves on the chessboard and
recalling various countermoves he had made in the past, but rather was able
to see and recollect long sequences of potential moves that presented
themselves as fields of force, sweeping the board as a whole. With such a
sense for the game, he could entrap his opponents well before they were
aware of what was happening, and could finish them off as quickly and
precisely as the Ammophila delivered her sting.
In fields such as sports or warfare, or any competitive endeavor where
time is of the essence, Masters’ decisions based on intuition will be much
more effective than if they had tried to analyze all of the components and
figure out the best answer. There is too much information to consider in too
short a time. Although the power of intuition was originally developed for
the rapidity it brought, it has become something that can be applied to the
sciences or the arts, or to any field in which there are complex elements and
time is not necessarily the critical factor.
This high-level intuition, like any skill, requires practice and
experience. At first, our intuitions might be so faint that we do not pay
attention to them or trust them. All Masters talk of this phenomenon. But
over time they learn to notice these rapid ideas that come to them. They
learn to act on them and verify their validity. Some lead nowhere, but others
lead to tremendous insights. Over time, Masters find that they can call up
more and more of these high-level intuitions, which are now sparking all
over the brain. Accessing this level of thinking on a more regular basis, they
can fuse it even more deeply with their rational forms of thinking.
Understand: this intuitive form of intelligence was developed to help
us process complex layers of information and gain a sense of the whole.
And in the world today, the need to attain such a level of thinking is more
critical than ever before. To follow any career path is difficult, and requires
the cultivation of much patience and discipline. We have so many elements
to master that it can be intimidating. We must learn to handle the technical
aspects, the social and political gamesmanship, the public reactions to our
work, and the constantly changing picture in our field. When we add to this
already-daunting quantity of study the vast amounts of information now
available to us, and that we must keep on top of, it all seems beyond our
capability.
What happens to many of us when faced with such complexity is that
we feel subtly discouraged before we even try anything. More and more
people in this overheated environment will be tempted to opt out. They will
develop a greater taste for ease and comfort; they will increasingly settle on
simplified ideas of reality and conventional ways of thinking; they will fall
prey to seductive formulas that offer quick and easy knowledge. They will
lose a taste for developing skills that require time and a resilient ego—it can
hurt our self-esteem in the initial phases of learning a skill, as we are made
so aware of our awkwardness. Such people will rail against the world and
blame others for their problems; they will find political justifications for
opting out, when in truth they simply cannot handle the challenges of
engaging with complexity. In trying to simplify their mental lives, they
disconnect themselves from reality and neutralize all of the powers
developed by the human brain over so many millions of years.
This desire for what is simple and easy infects all of us, often in ways
we are mostly unaware of. The only solution is the following: We must
learn how to quiet the anxiety we feel whenever we are confronted with
anything that seems complex or chaotic. In our journey from apprenticeship
to mastery we must patiently learn the various parts and skills that are
required, never looking too far ahead. In moments of perceived crisis, we
must develop the habit of maintaining our cool and never overreacting. If
the situation is complex and others are reaching for simple black-and-white
answers, or for the usual conventional responses, we must make a point of
resisting such a temptation. We maintain our Negative Capability and a
degree of detachment. What we are doing is gaining a tolerance and even a
taste for chaotic moments, training ourselves to entertain several
possibilities or solutions. We are learning to manage our anxiety, a key skill
in these chaotic times.
To go along with this self-control, we must do whatever we can to
cultivate a greater memory capacity—one of the most important skills in
our technologically oriented environment. The problem that technology
presents us is that it increases the amount of information at our disposal, but
slowly degrades the power of our memory to retain it. Tasks that used to
exercise 
the 
brain—remembering 
phone 
numbers, 
doing 
simple
calculations, navigating and remembering streets in a city—are now
performed for us, and like any muscle the brain can grow flabby from
disuse. To counteract this, in our spare time we should not simply look for
entertainment and distractions. We should take up hobbies—a game, a
musical instrument, a foreign language—that bring pleasure but also offer
us the chance to strengthen our memory capacities and the flexibility of our
brain. In doing so, we can train ourselves to process large amounts of
information without feeling anxious or overtaxed.
Faithfully pursuing this course over enough time, we will eventually
be rewarded with intuitive powers. That whole living, breathing, changing
beast that is our field will become internalized and live within us.
Possessing even a part of such power will instantly separate us from all of
the others who find themselves overwhelmed and straining to simplify what
is inherently complex. We will be able to respond faster and more
effectively than others. What seemed chaotic to us before will now seem to
be simply a fluid situation with a particular dynamic that we have a feel for
and can handle with relative ease.
What is interesting to note is that many Masters who come to possess
this high-level intuitive power seem to become younger in mind and spirit
with the passing years—something that should be encouraging to us all.
They do not need to expend a great deal of energy in order to understand
phenomena, and can think creatively with increasing speed. Unless
debilitated by disease, they can maintain their spontaneity and mental
fluidity well into their seventies and beyond. Among such types are the Zen
Master and artist Hakuin, who made paintings in his sixties that are now
considered among the greatest works of his time, remarkable for the
spontaneity of expression they reveal. Another example is the Spanish
filmmaker Luis Buñuel, whose surrealist films seemed to get richer and
more startling as he reached his sixties and seventies. But the quintessence
of this phenomenon would have to be Benjamin Franklin.
Franklin had always been an acute observer of natural phenomena, but
these powers only increased with the years. In his seventies and on into his
eighties he continued with a series of speculations that are now considered
uncannily ahead of his time—including advanced ideas on health and
medicine, weather, physics, geophysics, evolution, the use of aircraft for
military and commercial purposes, and more. As he aged, he applied his
renowned inventiveness to his growing physical weaknesses. Trying to
improve his eyesight and quality of life, he invented bifocals. Unable to
reach books on the tops of his shelves, he invented an extendible
mechanical arm. Needing copies of his own work and not wanting to leave
his house, he invented a rolling press that could make an accurate copy of a
document in less than two minutes. In his last years, he had insights into
politics and the future of America that made people think of him as a seer,
as someone with magical abilities. William Pierce, a delegate to the
Constitutional Convention, met Franklin near the end of his life and wrote:
“Dr. Franklin is well known to be the greatest philosopher of the present
age; all the operations of nature he seems to understand…. He is eighty-two
years old, and possesses an activity of mind equal to a youth of twenty-five
years of age.”
It is interesting to speculate what depths of understanding such
Masters could have reached if they had lived even longer. Perhaps in the
future, with life expectancy increasing, we will witness examples of the
Benjamin Franklin variety stretching to even more advanced ages.
The Return to Reality
People can argue endlessly about what constitutes reality, but let us start our
definition with a simple, undeniable fact: some 4 billion years ago, life
began on this planet in the shape of simple cells. These cells, perhaps even
one cell in particular, were the common ancestors to all life forms that
followed. From that single source, various branches of life emerged. Some
1.2 billion years ago there appeared the first multicellular creatures; 600
million years ago there emerged perhaps the greatest development of all—
organisms with a central nervous system, the starting point that eventually
led to the brains we now possess. From the Cambrian explosion of life
some 500 million years ago came the first simple animals, followed by the
first vertebrates. Some 360 million years ago we see the first traces on land
of amphibious creatures, and 120 million years ago the first mammals.
Branching off in a new mammalian direction about 60 million years ago,
we see signs of the earliest primates from whom we are directly descended.
The earliest human ancestors arrived some 6 million years ago, and 4
million years later our most recent ancestor, Homo erectus. And just
200,000 years ago the anatomically modern human emerged, with more or
less the same brain size that we now possess.
In this remarkably complex chain of circumstances, we can identify, at
certain turning points, a single ancestor from whom we humans have
evolved (the first cells, simple animals, mammals, then primates). Some
archeologists have speculated about a single female ancestor from whom all
modern humans have descended. Moving up the chain, backwards in time,
it is clear that who we are today—our particular physiological makeup—is
intimately connected to each one of these original ancestors, as far back as
the first cells of life. Since all life forms are descended from this common
beginning, they are all interconnected in some way, and we humans are
intimately implicated in this network. This is undeniable.
Let us call this interrelatedness of life the ultimate reality. And in
relation to this reality, the human mind tends to go in one of two directions.
On the one hand, the mind tends to move away from this
interconnectedness and focus instead on the distinctions between things,
taking objects out of their contexts and analyzing them as separate entities.
At the extreme this tendency leads to highly specialized forms of
knowledge. In the world today, we can see many signs of this tendency—
the microscopic divisions between fields in our universities, the narrowest
of specializations in the sciences. In the culture at large, people will make
the finest distinctions between closely related or overlapping subjects, and
argue endlessly about the differences. They will distinguish between
military and civilian society, even though in a democracy such a distinction
is not so easy to make. (Perhaps keeping people and fields of study so
rigorously separated can be considered the ultimate ploy of those in power,
a version of divide and conquer.) At this level of thinking, a sense of the
interrelatedness of life and phenomena is lost, and in becoming so
specialized ideas can become quite weird and disconnected from reality.
On the other hand, there is the opposing tendency of the brain to want
to make connections between everything. This generally occurs among
individuals who pursue knowledge far enough that these associations come
to life. Although this tendency is easier to spot in Masters, we can see in
history certain movements and philosophies in which this return to reality
becomes widespread in a culture, part of the zeitgeist. For instance, in the
ancient world there was Taoism in the East, and Stoicism in the West, both
movements that endured for centuries. In Taoism, there is the concept of the
Way, and in Stoicism, that of the Logos—the ordering principle of the
universe that connects all living things. As Marcus Aurelius expresses it,
“Keep reminding yourself of the way things are connected, of their
relatedness. All things are implicated in one another and in sympathy with
each other. This event is the consequence of some other one. Things push
and pull on each other, and breathe together, and are one.”
Perhaps the greatest example of this was the Renaissance, a cultural
movement for which the ideal was the Universal Man—a person who has
managed to connect all branches of knowledge and approximate the
intellectual reach of the Creator.
Perhaps today we are witnessing the early signs of a return to reality, a
Renaissance in modern form. In the sciences, the first seeds of this began
with Faraday, Maxwell, and Einstein, who focused on the relationships
between phenomena, fields of force instead of individual particles. In the
larger sense, many scientists are now actively seeking to connect their
various specializations to others—for instance, how neuroscience intersects
so many other disciplines. We see signs of this also in the growing interest
in theories of complexity applied to such disparate fields as economics,
biology, and computers. We can see it in the broadening of our thinking to
ecosystems, as a way to truly conceptualize the dynamic interactions in
nature. We can see it in health and medicine, in the sane approach many are
taking to consider the body as a whole. This trend is the future, because the
purpose of consciousness itself has always been to connect us to reality.
As individuals, we can participate in this trend simply by pursuing
mastery. In our apprenticeships, we naturally begin by learning the parts
and making various distinctions—the right and wrong way to proceed, the
individual skills to master and their particular techniques, the various rules
and conventions that govern the group. In the Creative-Active we begin to
melt these distinctions as we experiment with, shape, and alter these
conventions to suit our purposes. And in mastery we come full circle,
returning to a sense of the whole. We intuit and see the connections. We
embrace the natural complexity of life, making the brain expand to the
dimensions of reality instead of shrinking it to the narrowest of
specializations. This is the inevitable outcome of deep immersion in a field.
We can define intelligence as moving toward thinking that is more
contextual, more sensitive to the relationships between things.
Think of it this way: the ultimate distinction you make is between
yourself and the world. There is the inside (your subjective experience) and
there is the outside. But every time you learn something, your brain is
altered as new connections are formed. Your experience of something that
occurs in the world physically alters your brain. The boundaries between
you and the world are much more fluid than you might imagine. When you
move toward mastery, your brain becomes radically altered by the years of
practice and active experimentation. It is no longer the simple ecosystem of
years gone by. The brain of a Master is so richly interconnected that it
comes to resemble the physical world, and becomes a vibrant ecosystem in
which all forms of thinking associate and connect. This growing similarity
between the brain and complex life itself represents the ultimate return to
reality.
STRATEGIES FOR ATTAINING MASTERY
The intuitive mind is a sacred gift and the rational mind is a faithful servant. We have created
a society that honors the servant and has forgotten the gift.
—ALBERT EINSTEIN
Mastery is not a function of genius or talent. It is a function of time and
intense focus applied to a particular field of knowledge. But there is another
element, an X factor that Masters inevitably possess, that seems mystical
but that is accessible to us all. Whatever field of activity we are involved in,
there is generally an accepted path to the top. It is a path that others have
followed, and because we are conformist creatures, most of us opt for this
conventional route. But Masters have a strong inner guiding system and a
high level of self-awareness. What has suited others in the past does not suit
them, and they know that trying to fit into a conventional mold would only
lead to a dampening of spirit, the reality they seek eluding them.
And so inevitably, these Masters, as they progress on their career
paths, make a choice at a key moment in their lives: they decide to forge
their own route, one that others will see as unconventional, but that suits
their own spirit and rhythms and leads them closer to discovering the
hidden truths of their objects of study. This key choice takes self-confidence
and self-awareness—the X factor that is necessary for attaining mastery.
The following are examples of this X factor in action and the strategic
choices it leads to. The examples given are meant to show the importance
of this quality and how we might adapt it to our own circumstances.
1. Connect to your environment—Primal Powers
Among the many feats of human navigation of the sea, perhaps none are
more remarkable and mysterious than the voyages of the indigenous
peoples in the area known as Oceania—comprising the islands of
Micronesia, Melanesia, and Polynesia. In an area that is 99.8 percent water,
the inhabitants of this region were able for many centuries to deftly
navigate the vast spaces between the islands. Some 1,500 years ago they
managed to travel the several thousand miles to Hawaii, and perhaps at one
point even voyaged as far as parts of North and South America, all in
canoes with the same design and technology as those of the Stone Age.
During the nineteenth century, mostly because of Western interference and
the introduction of charts and compasses, these ancient navigating skills
died out, and the source of their uncanny skill remained mostly a mystery.
But in the area of Micronesia known as the Caroline Islands, certain
islanders maintained the ancient traditions well into the twentieth century.
And the first Westerners who traveled with them were astonished at what
they witnessed.
The Islanders would travel in outrigger canoes fitted with a sail with
three or four men aboard, one serving as the chief navigator. They had no
charts or instruments of any kind, and for the Westerners who accompanied
them this could be a disconcerting experience. Taking off at night or day (it
didn’t matter to them), there would be apparently nothing to guide them
along the way. The islands were so far apart that one could travel for days
without spotting land. To go off course only slightly (and storms or weather
changes could certainly cause that) would mean never spotting their
destination, and probably death—it would take too long to find the next
island in the chain, and supplies would run out. And yet they would embark
on their sea voyages with a remarkably relaxed spirit.
The chief navigator would occasionally glance at the night sky or the
position of the sun, but mostly he talked with the others or stared straight
ahead. Sometimes one of the men would lie belly down in the middle of the
outrigger canoe and report some information he had gleaned. In general
they gave the impression of being passengers on a train, serenely taking in
the passing scenery. They seemed even calmer at night. When they were
supposedly getting closer to their destination, they would become slightly
more alert. They would follow the paths of birds in the sky; they would
look deeply into the water, which they would sometimes cup in their hands
and smell. When they arrived at their destination, it was all with the air of
pulling into the train station on time. They seemed to know exactly how
long it would take and how many supplies were required for the voyage.
Along the way, they would make perfect adjustments to any changes in
weather or currents.
Curious as to how this was possible, some Westerners asked to be
initiated into their secrets, and over the decades such travelers managed to
piece together the system the Islanders used. As these Westerners
discovered, one of their principal means of navigation was following the
paths of stars in the night sky. Over the course of centuries, they had
devised a chart comprising the path of fourteen different constellations.
These constellations, along with the sun and the moon, described arcs in the
sky that could translate into thirty-two different directions around the circle
of the horizon. These arcs remained the same, no matter the season. From
their own island, they could map out the location of all of the islands in
their area by locating what stars they should be under at particular moments
at night, and they knew how this position would change to another star as
they traveled toward their destination. The Islanders had no writing system.
Apprentice navigators simply had to memorize this elaborate map, which
was in continual motion.
During the day, they would chart a course by the sun. Toward the
middle of the day they could read the exact direction they were headed in
by the shadows that were cast on the mast. At dawn or at sunset they could
use the moon, or the stars sinking below the horizon or starting to rise. To
help them measure the distance they had covered, they would choose an
island somewhere off to the side as a reference point. By following the stars
in the sky they could calculate when they would be passing by this
reference island, and how much time remained to reach their destination.
As part of this system, they envisioned that their canoe was completely
still—the stars moved above them, and the islands in the ocean were
moving toward and then away from them as they passed them. Acting as if
the canoe were stationary made it easier to calculate their position within
their reference system. Although they knew that islands did not move, after
many years of traveling this way, they would literally experience the trip as
if they were sitting still. This would account for the impression they gave of
looking like passengers in a train viewing the passing landscape.
Their sky chart was complemented by dozens of other signs they had
learned to read. In their apprenticeship system, young navigators would be
taken to sea and made to float in the ocean for several hours. In this way,
they could learn to distinguish the various currents by how they felt on their
skin. After much practice, they could read these currents by lying down on
the floor of the canoe. They had developed a similar sensitivity to winds,
and could identify various wind currents by how they moved the hairs on
their head, or the sail on the outrigger.
Once they approached an island, they knew how to interpret the paths
of land birds, which left in the morning to fish or returned at dusk to their
homes. They could read the changes in the phosphorescence of the water
that indicated closeness to land, and they could gauge whether the clouds in
the distance were reflecting land beneath them, or simply ocean. They could
touch the water to their lips, sensing any changes in temperature that
indicated they were approaching an island. There were many more such
indicators; the Islanders had learned to see everything in this environment
as a potential sign.
What was most remarkable was that the chief navigator hardly seemed
to be paying attention to this complex network of signs. Only an occasional
glance upward or downward would indicate any kind of reading that was
going on. Apparently, Master navigators knew the sky chart so well that
with the sight of one star in the sky they could immediately sense where all
of the others were located. They had learned how to read the other
navigational signs so well that it all had become second nature. They had a
complete feel for this environment, including all of the variables that
seemed to make it so chaotic and dangerous. As one Westerner put it, such
Masters could travel hundreds of miles from island to island as easily as an
experienced cab driver could negotiate the labyrinthine streets of London.
At some point in history, the original navigators in this region must have
felt a great degree of fear as they confronted the need to travel to find other
food sources, realizing the tremendous dangers this involved. The ocean
must have seemed much more chaotic than the tiny patch of land on their
islands. They slowly overcame this fear and evolved a system that was
magnificently suited to the environment they lived in. In this part of the
world, the night sky is particularly clear through much of the year, giving
them the ability to use the changing position of stars to great effect. Using
smaller craft allowed them to maintain closer contact with the water, which
they had learned to read as accurately as the undulating earth on their
island. Imagining themselves as stationary and the islands as moving helped
them keep track of their reference points and had a calming effect. They did
not depend on a single tool or instrument; this elaborate system existed
entirely in their minds. By building a deep connection to the environment
and reading all of the available signs, the Islanders could approximate the
remarkable instinctual powers of animals, such as various bird species that
can navigate around the globe through their extreme sensitivity to the
earth’s geomagnetic field.
Understand: the ability to connect deeply to your environment is the
most primal and in many ways the most powerful form of mastery the brain
can bring us. It applies equally well to the waters of Micronesia as it does to
any modern field or office. We gain such power by first transforming
ourselves into consummate observers. We see everything in our
surroundings as a potential sign to interpret. Nothing is taken at face value.
Like the Islanders, we can break these observations down into various
systems. There are the people with whom we work and interact—
everything they do and say reveals something hidden below the surface. We
can look at our interactions with the public, how they respond to our work,
how people’s tastes are constantly in flux. We can immerse ourselves in
every aspect of our field, paying deep attention, for example, to the
economic factors that play such a large role. We become like the Proustian
spider, sensing the slightest vibration on our web. Over the years, as we
progress on this path, we begin to merge our knowledge of these various
components into an overall feel for the environment itself. Instead of
exerting and overtaxing ourselves to keep up with a complex, changing
environment, we know it from the inside and can sense the changes before
they happen.
For the Caroline Islanders, there was nothing unconventional in their
approach to mastery; their method fit perfectly their circumstances. But for
us, in our advanced technological age, such mastery involves making an
unconventional choice. To become such sensitive observers, we must not
succumb to all of the distractions afforded by technology; we must be a
little primitive. The primary instruments that we depend on must be our
eyes for observing and our brains for analyzing. The information afforded
to us through various media is only one small component in our connection
to the environment. It is easy to become enamored with the powers that
technology affords us, and to see them as the end and not the means. When
that happens, we connect to a virtual environment, and the power of our
eyes and brain slowly atrophy. You must see your environment as a physical
entity and your connection to it as visceral. If there is any instrument you
must fall in love with and fetishize, it is the human brain—the most
miraculous, awe-inspiring, information-processing tool devised in the
known universe, with a complexity we can’t even begin to fathom, and with
dimensional powers that far outstrip any piece of technology in
sophistication and usefulness.
2. Play to your strengths—Supreme Focus
A. In the first years of the life of their child, the parents of Albert Einstein
(1879–1955) had cause for concern. It took longer than usual for little
Albert to talk, and his first attempts at language were always so halting.
(See here and here for more on Einstein.) He had a strange habit of first
muttering to himself the words he was going to speak out loud. His parents
were concerned that their son might have a mental deficiency, and they
consulted a doctor. Soon, however, he lost his hesitancy with words and
revealed some hidden mental strengths—he was good with puzzles, had a
knack for certain sciences, and he loved playing the violin, particularly
anything by Mozart, whose music he would play over and over.
The problems began again, however, as he advanced his way through
school. He was not a particularly good student. He hated having to
memorize so many facts and numbers. He hated the stern authority of the
teachers. His grades were mediocre and, concerned for his future, the
parents decided to send their sixteen-year-old son to a more liberal-minded
school in the town of Aarau, near their home in Zurich. This school used a
method developed by the Swiss educational reformer Johann Pestalozzi,
which emphasized the importance of learning through one’s own
observations, leading to the development of ideas and intuitions. Even
mathematics and physics were taught in this manner. There were no drills or
facts to memorize; instead, the method placed supreme importance on
visual forms of intelligence, which Pestalozzi saw as the key to creative
thinking.
In this atmosphere, young Einstein suddenly thrived. He found the
place intensely stimulating. The school encouraged students to learn on
their own, wherever their inclinations would take them, and for Einstein this
meant delving even more deeply into Newtonian physics (a passion of his)
and recent advances in the study of electromagnetism. In his studies of
Newton while at Aarau, he came upon some problems in the Newtonian
concept of the universe that deeply troubled him and caused him many
sleepless nights.
According to Newton, all phenomena in nature can be explained
through simple mechanical laws. Knowing them, we can deduce the causes
for almost everything that happens. Objects move through space according
to these mechanical laws, such as laws of gravity, and all of these
movements can be measured mathematically. It is a universe that is highly
ordered and rational. But Newton’s concept relied upon two assumptions
that could never be proven or verified empirically: the existence of absolute
time and space, both of which were thought to exist independently of living
beings and objects. Without these assumptions there would be no supreme
standard of measurement. The brilliance of his system, however, was hard
to call into question, considering that based on his laws scientists could
accurately measure the movements of sound waves, the diffusion of gases,
or the motion of stars.
In the late nineteenth century, however, certain cracks began to emerge
in Newton’s concept of the mechanical universe. Based on the work of
Michael Faraday, the great Scottish mathematician James Maxwell made
some interesting discoveries about the properties of electromagnetism.
Developing what became known as field theories, Maxwell asserted that
electromagnetism should not be described in terms of charged particles, but
rather in terms of fields in space that have the continual potential to be
converted into electromagnetism; this field consists of vectors of stress that
can be charged at any point. By his calculations, electromagnetic waves
move at the speed of 186,000 miles per second, which happens to be the
speed of light. This could not simply be some coincidence. Light must
therefore be a visible manifestation of an entire spectrum of
electromagnetic waves.
This was a groundbreaking and novel concept of the physical universe,
but to make it consistent with Newton, Maxwell and others assumed the
existence of a “light-bearing ether,” a substance that could oscillate and
produce these electromagnetic waves, analogous to water for ocean waves,
or air for sound waves. This concept added one more absolute to the
Newtonian equation—that of absolute rest. The speed of the movement of
these waves could only be measured against the backdrop of something at
rest, which would be the ether itself. This ether would have to be something
strange—covering the entire universe but not in any way interfering with
the movement of planets or objects.
Scientists around the world had been struggling for decades to prove
somehow the existence of this ether, concocting all sorts of elaborate
experiments, but it seemed an impossible quest, and this raised increasingly
more questions about the Newtonian universe and the absolutes on which it
depended. Albert Einstein devoured everything he could about Maxwell’s
work and the questions it raised. Einstein himself had a basic need to
believe in laws, in the existence of an ordered universe, and experiencing
doubts on these laws caused him great anxiety.
One day, in the midst of all of these thoughts and while still attending
the school at Aarau, an image appeared in his mind: that of a man moving
at the speed of light itself. As he pondered this image, it turned into a sort of
puzzle, or what he would later call a thought experiment: if the man were
moving at the speed of light alongside a light beam, he should be able to
“observe such a beam of light as an electromagnetic field at rest though
spatially oscillating.”
Intuitively, however, this made no sense to him for two reasons. The
moment the man would look at the light source to see the beam, the light
pulse would be moving ahead of him at the speed of light; he could not
perceive it otherwise, since visible light travels at that constant speed. The
speed of the light pulse with respect to the observer would still be 186,000
miles per second. The law governing the speed of light or any
electromagnetic wave would have to be the same to someone standing still
on Earth, or someone theoretically moving at the speed of light. There
could not be two separate laws. And yet in theory it still could be supposed
that one could catch up with and see the wave itself before it appeared as
light. It was a paradox, and it made him unbearably anxious as he
contemplated it.
The next year Einstein entered the Zurich Polytechnic Institute, and
once again his dislike for traditional schooling returned. He did not do
particularly well at math. He disliked the way physics was taught, and he
started taking many classes in totally unrelated fields. He was not a
promising student, and had not attracted the attention of any important
professor or mentor. He quickly developed a disdain for academia and the
constrictions it placed on his thinking. Still deeply troubled by his thought
experiment, he continued to work on it on his own. He spent months
devising an experiment that could perhaps allow him to detect the ether and
its effects on light, but a professor at the Polytechnic revealed to him that
his experiment was unworkable. He gave Einstein a paper describing all of
the failed attempts to detect ether that had been attempted by eminent
scientists, perhaps trying to deflate the pretensions of a twenty-year-old
student who thought he could uncover what the greatest scientists in the
world had failed to accomplish.
A year later, in 1900, Einstein came to a life-changing decision about
himself: He was not an experimental scientist. He was not good at devising
experiments and he did not enjoy the process. He had several strengths—he
was a marvel at solving abstract puzzles of any kind; he could turn them
over in his mind, converting them into images he could manipulate and
shape at will. And because of his natural disdain of authority and
conventions, he could think in ways that were novel and flexible. This
meant of course that he would never succeed in the slippery world of
academia. He would have to blaze his own path, but this could be an
advantage. He would not be burdened by the need to fit in or adhere to the
standard paradigm.
Continuing to work on his thought experiment day and night, he
finally came to a conclusion—something had to be wrong with the entire
notion of the physical universe as described by Newton. Scientists were
going at the problem from the wrong end: they were straining to prove the
existence of the ether in order to maintain the Newtonian edifice. Although
Einstein admired Newton, he had no ties to any school of thought.
Considering his decision to work on his own, he could be as daring as he
liked. He would throw out the idea of the ether itself and all of the absolutes
that could not be verified. His way forward would be to deduce the laws,
the principles that governed motion, through his reasoning powers and
through mathematics. He did not need a university position or any
laboratory to do this. Wherever he found himself, he could work on these
problems.
As the years went by, it would seem to others that Einstein was a bit of
a failure. He had graduated from the Polytechnic close to the bottom of his
class. He could not find any kind of teaching job and had settled for a
mediocre, low-paid position as an evaluator of inventions for the Swiss
patent office in Bern. But free to continue on his own, he worked with
unbelievable tenacity at this one problem. Even while apparently on the job
at the patent office, he would focus for hours on the theory that was forming
in his mind; even when out for a walk with friends, he would continue to
ponder his ideas—he had the unusual ability to listen on one track and think
on another. He carried with him a little notebook and filled it up with all
kinds of ideas. He reflected on his original paradox and all of the
embellishments it had undergone and played around with them endlessly in
his mind, imagining a thousand different possibilities. During almost every
waking hour he contemplated the problem from some angle or other.
In the course of his deep thinking, he came up with two important
principles that would guide him further. First, he determined that his
original intuition had to be correct—the laws of physics had to apply
equally to someone at rest as to someone traveling at a uniform speed in a
spaceship. Nothing else would make sense. And second, that the speed of
light was a constant. Even if a star moving at several thousand miles per
hour emitted light, the speed of such light would remain at 186,000 miles
per second and not any faster. In this way he would adhere to Maxwell’s
law on the invariable speed of electromagnetic waves.
As he contemplated these principles further, however, another paradox
emerged in his mind in the shape of yet another image. He imagined a train
speeding along a track with its lights beaming. A man standing on the
embankment would see the light of the beam moving at the expected speed.
But what if a woman were running toward or away from the train on the
tracks? The woman’s speed relative to the train would depend on how
quickly she was moving and in which direction, but wouldn’t it be the same
with the light beam? Certainly, the light beam from the train relative to the
woman would travel at a different speed if she were running away or
running toward it, and the speed of this beam would be different from the
speed relative to the man on the tracks. This one image seemingly called
into question all of his guiding principles up until then.
For months he pondered this paradox, and by May 1905 he had
decided to give up the entire matter. It seemed beyond solution. On a
beautiful, sunny day in Bern, he walked with a friend and colleague from
the patent office, explaining to him the dead end he had reached, his
frustration, and his decision to give up. Just as he said all of this, as Einstein
later recalled, “I suddenly understood the key to the problem.” It came to
him in a grand, intuitive flash, first with an image and then with words—a
split-second insight that would forever alter our own concept of the
universe.
Later Einstein would illustrate his insight through the following image:
Suppose a train is moving past an embankment at a constant velocity. A
man stands in the center of the embankment. Just as the train moves by,
lightning strikes simultaneously at two equidistant points, A and B, to the
right and left of the man. Suppose there is a woman seated in the middle of
the train, who is passing just in front of the man on the embankment as the
lightning strikes. She will be moving closer to point B as the light signal
travels. She will see it strike ever so slightly ahead of the lightning at point
A. What is simultaneous for the man on the embankment is not so for the
woman on the train. No two events can ever be said to be simultaneous,
because every moving reference frame has its own relative time, and
everything in the universe is moving in relation to something else. As
Einstein put it, “There is no audible tick-tock everywhere in the world that
can be considered as time.” If time is not absolute, then neither is space or
distance. Everything is relative to everything else—speed, time, distance,
and so on—except for the speed of light, which never changes.
This was called his theory of Simple Relativity, and in the years to
come it would shake the foundations of physics and science. Several years
later, Einstein would repeat the exact same process for his discovery of
General Relativity and what he called the “curvature of spacetime,”
applying relativity to gravitational force. He again began with an image, a
thought experiment that he pondered for close to ten years, leading to his
breakthrough theory in 1915. From this theory alone he deduced that the
course of light rays must be bent by the curvature of spacetime, and had
gone even further to speculate the exact bend of the arc for rays of starlight
grazing the sun. To the astonishment of scientists and the public alike,
during the solar eclipse of 1919, astronomers were able to precisely verify
Einstein’s speculation. It seemed that only someone with superhuman brain
capabilities could deduce such a measurement simply through abstract
reasoning. The fame and reputation of Albert Einstein as a freakish genius
was born at that moment and has remained ever since.
Although we like to assume that a genius like Albert Einstein had powers
far beyond our capabilities, his great discoveries depended on two very
simple decisions he made as a young man. First, at the age of twenty he
determined that he would be a mediocre experimental scientist. Even
though a heavy immersion in mathematics and experimentation was the
conventional route in physics, he would go his own way—a daring
decision. Second, he would consider his primal distaste for authority and
conventions as a great strength. He would attack from the outside and
unburden himself of all the assumptions that were torturing scientists in
relation to Newton. These two decisions allowed him to play to his
strengths. A third factor can be identified as well: his love of the violin and
the music of Mozart. To others who would marvel at his feel for Mozart, he
would reply, “It’s in my blood.” He meant that he had played this music so
often that it had become part of him, his essence. He had an inside
understanding of the music. This would become the unconscious model for
his approach to science: he would think himself inside complex phenomena.
Although we tend to imagine Einstein as the ultimate abstract thinker,
his way of thinking was remarkably concrete—almost always in terms of
images that related to the everyday objects around him, such as trains,
clocks, and elevators. Thinking in this concrete way, he could turn a
problem over and over in his mind, consider it from all angles while
walking, talking to others, or sitting at his desk at the patent office. He
would later explain that imagination and intuition played a far larger role in
his discoveries than his knowledge of science and mathematics. If he had
any qualities that were extraordinary, they were his patience mixed with his
extreme tenacity. After what can only be considered as well beyond 10,000
hours of contemplation of one problem, he reached a transformation point.
The various aspects of a supremely complicated phenomenon had become
internalized, leading to an intuitive grasp of the whole—in this case, the
sudden image that came to him revealing the relativity of time. His two
theories of relativity have to be considered as perhaps the greatest
intellectual feats in history, the fruits of intense labor and not of some
extraordinary, inexplicable genius.
There are many paths to mastery, and if you are persistent you will
certainly find one that suits you. But a key component in the process is
determining your mental and psychological strengths and working with
them. To rise to the level of mastery requires many hours of dedicated focus
and practice. You cannot get there if your work brings you no joy and you
are constantly struggling to overcome your own weaknesses. You must look
deep within and come to an understanding of these particular strengths and
weaknesses you possess, being as realistic as possible. Knowing your
strengths, you can lean on them with utmost intensity. Once you start in this
direction, you will gain momentum. You will not be burdened by
conventions, and you will not be slowed down by having to deal with skills
that go against your inclinations and strengths. In this way, your creative
and intuitive powers will be naturally awakened.
B. In thinking back to her earliest years in the 1950s, Temple Grandin could
only recall a dark and chaotic world. Born with autism, she could remember
spending hours on the beach watching grains of sand pour through her
hands. (For more on Grandin see here and here.) She lived in a world of
constant terrors—any sudden noise would overwhelm her. It took her much
longer than other children to learn language, and as she slowly did, she
became painfully aware of how different she was from other children. Often
alone, she naturally gravitated toward animals, particularly horses. It was
more than just a need for companionship—she somehow felt an unusual
identification and empathy with the world of animals. Her great passion
was to go horseback riding in the country around Boston where she was
raised. In riding horses, she could deepen her connection to them.
Then one summer, as a young girl, she was sent to visit her Aunt Ann,
who had a ranch in Arizona. Temple felt an instant connection with the
cattle on the ranch, and she would watch them for hours. What particularly
intrigued her was the squeeze chute they would enter to be vaccinated. The
pressure from the side panels of the chute was designed to help relax them
while they were injected.
As far back as she could remember, she had always been trying to
wrap herself in blankets or bury herself under cushions and pillows to
somehow feel squeezed. As with the cows, any sort of gradual compression
would relax her. (As is common for autistic children, being hugged by
humans was overstimulating for her and induced anxiety; she had no
control over the experience.) She had long dreamed about some kind of
device that could squeeze her, and seeing the cattle in the chute she realized
the answer. One day she begged her aunt to let her into the chute to be
squeezed like a cow, and the aunt agreed. For thirty minutes she
experienced what she had always wanted, and afterwards felt a complete
calmness. It was at such a moment that she realized that she had some kind
of strange connection to cattle, that her destiny was somehow tied up with
these animals.
Curious about this connection, a few years later in high school she
decided to research the subject of cattle. She also wanted to find out
whether other autistic children and adults felt the same way. She could find
very little information on cattle and their emotions or how they might
experience the world; there was much more on autism, and she devoured
books on the subject. In this way, she discovered an interest in the sciences;
doing research allowed her to channel her nervous energy and learn about
the world. She had tremendous powers to focus completely on one subject.
Slowly, she transformed herself into a promising student, which
allowed her to gain admittance into a liberal arts school in New Hampshire
where she majored in psychology. She had chosen the field because of her
interest in autism—she had a personal, inside knowledge of the subject, and
following this major would help her to understand more of the science
behind the phenomenon. After graduating, she decided to pursue a PhD in
psychology at Arizona State University, but when she went back to the
Southwest and visited her aunt, she reconnected with her childhood
fascination with cattle. Not really knowing why or what it would lead to,
she decided to switch her major to animal sciences. For her thesis, she
would focus largely on cattle.
Grandin had always done much of her thinking in visual terms, often
having to translate words into images before she could understand them.
Perhaps this was the result of the unique wiring of her brain. As part of the
fieldwork for her major, she visited a couple of cattle feedlots in the state,
and she was appalled by what she saw. It suddenly became clear to her that
her propensity to think in visual terms was not shared by most others. How
else to explain the highly irrational design of many of these feedlots and the
remarkable lack of attention paid to details that were so visible to her eyes?
She would watch with dismay as the animals were herded through
cattle chutes that were far too slippery. She would imagine what it must feel
like to be a 1,200 pound animal suddenly sensing a loss of control on
surfaces that were clearly too slick. The animals would bellow and stop in
their tracks as they slid into one another, causing a sudden pileup. At one
feedlot, almost all of the cows would stop at the same point; something in
their visual field was obviously terrifying them. Didn’t anyone stop to
consider what was causing this? At another feedlot, she witnessed the
horrifying spectacle of cattle being herded onto ramps leading to a dip vat
—a pool of water full of disinfectant to help rid them of ticks and parasites.
The ramp was too steep and the drop into the water too great; some of the
cattle would tumble upside down into the pool and drown.
Based on what she had seen, she decided to do a detailed analysis of
the efficiency of these feedlots, and how they could be improved, for her
master’s thesis. She now visited dozens of these sites, and each time she
would stand close to the chutes, recording the reactions of the cattle as they
were branded and vaccinated. On her own, she would approach the cattle
and touch them. When she used to ride horses as a girl, she often could
sense the mood of the horse just by the contact with her legs and hands. She
began to experience the same with the cattle, as she would press her hands
on their sides and feel their relaxing response. She noticed that when she
was calm, they would react to her in a calmer manner. Slowly, she was
getting a sense of their perspective, and how so much of their behavior was
guided by perceived threats that we could not necessarily notice.
It soon became obvious to Grandin that in the animal sciences
department she was essentially alone in her interest in the emotions and
experience of animals. Such subjects were considered beneath scientific
interest. She persisted, however, in these lines of investigation—for her
own sake and because she felt they had relevance to her thesis. She began to
carry a camera with her on her tours of the feedlots. Knowing that cattle are
very sensitive to any contrasts in their visual field, she would follow the
course of the animals through the various chutes, kneeling and taking black-
and-white photographs from their point of view. Her camera would pick up
all kinds of sharp contrasts in their field of vision—bright reflections from
the sun, sudden shadows, the glare from a window. It was clear to her that
seeing these sharp contrasts is what caused the cattle to stop repeatedly in
their tracks. Sometimes the sight of a suspended plastic bottle or a dangling
chain would cause the same reaction—somehow these things represented
dangers to them.
The instincts of these animals were obviously not designed for living
in an industrial feedlot, and this created a great strain. Whenever the
animals would become instinctively frightened by something and react, the
fieldworkers would grow irritated and hurry them along, which only
exacerbated the cattle’s fear. The number of injuries and deaths was rather
appalling, and the time lost when they all piled up into gridlock was
incredibly high; and yet, as she knew now, this was all quite easy to fix.
After graduating, she got her first series of jobs working on various
design elements for feedlots throughout the Southwest. For meatpacking
plants, she devised cattle ramps and restrainer systems that were infinitely
more humane than what was there before. Some of this was accomplished
through attention to simple details, such as making a ramp curved so the
cattle could not see anything to the sides or too far ahead, which kept them
calmer. At another site, she redesigned the dip vat so that the incline leading
to it sloped gently and had deep grooves in the concrete to help them with
their footing. The drop into the water was ever so slight. She also
redesigned the area where they dried off, making it a much more placid
environment for them.
In the case of the dip vat, the cowboys and fieldworkers would stare at
her as if she were from Mars. They secretly mocked her “touchy-feely”
approach to farm animals. But when her design was finished, they would
watch in amazement as the cattle would blithely approach the dip vat and
plop into it with hardly a sound or a complaint. There were no injuries or
deaths, and no time lost with pileups or group panic. Such an increase in
efficiency would occur in all of her other designs, and this would win her
begrudging respect from the skeptical men on the job. Slowly, she was
making a name for herself in the field, and considering how far she had
come from her earliest days as a severely impaired autistic child, such
achievements gave her an incredible feeling of pride.
As the years went by, her knowledge of cattle continued to grow, both
through research and through frequent contact with them. Soon her work
expanded to other farm animals, such as hogs, and later to antelope and elk.
She became a sought-after consultant to farms and zoos. She seemed to
possess a sixth sense for the inner lives of the animals she dealt with and a
remarkable power to calm them down. She herself felt that she had reached
a point where she could imagine the thought processes of these various
animals. This was based both on her intense scientific investigations and a
great deal of thinking inside their minds. She determined, for instance, that
animals’ memory and thinking is largely driven by images and other sense
traces. Animals are more than capable of learning, but their reasoning
process cycles through images. Although we might find it hard to imagine
such thinking, before the invention of language we reasoned in a similar
way. The distance between humans and animals is not nearly as great as we
like to believe, and this connection fascinated her.
With cattle, she could read their moods by the movement of their ears,
the look in their eyes, the tension she could feel through their skin. In
studying the brain dynamics of cattle, she had the strange feeling that they
resembled people with autism in many ways. A scan of her own brain
revealed that she possessed fear centers that were three times larger than
normal. She always had to manage higher levels of anxiety than most other
people, and she would see continual threats in the environment. Cattle, as
prey species, were continually on guard and anxious. Perhaps her own
enlarged fear center, she reasoned, was a throwback to the deep past, when
humans were prey as well. These reactions are now largely blocked or
hidden to us, but because of her autism, her brain had retained this ancient
trait. She noticed other similarities between cattle and people with autism,
such as the dependence on habit and routine.
Thinking in this way led her back to her early interest in the
psychology behind autism, and to deepening studies of the neuroscience
involved. Her condition as someone who had emerged from autism to a
career in science gave her a unique perspective on the subject. As she had
done with animals, she could explore it both from the outside (science) and
the inside (empathy). She could read about the latest discoveries on autism
and relate them to her own experiences. She could illuminate aspects of the
condition that no other scientist was able to describe or understand. As she
delved deeply into the subject and wrote books on her experiences, she
quickly became an extremely popular consultant and lecturer on the subject,
as well as a role model for young people with autism.
As she looks back on her life from the present, Temple Grandin has a
strange sensation. She emerged from the darkness and chaos of her earliest
years of autism, her mind partially guided out of it by her love of animals
and her curiosity about their inner lives. Through her experience on her
aunt’s ranch with cattle, she became interested in science, which then
opened her mind to studying autism itself. Returning to animals for her
career, through science and deep observation, she made innovative designs
and unique discoveries. These discoveries led her back to autism yet again,
a field to which she could now apply her scientific training and thinking. It
would appear that some form of destiny kept directing her to the particular
fields that she could explore and understand with single-minded purpose,
and master in her own ingenious way.
For someone like Temple Grandin, the possibility of achieving mastery in
any field would normally seem like an impossible dream. The obstacles in
the path of someone with autism are enormous. And yet she managed to
find her way to the two subjects that opened up possibilities for
advancement. Although it might seem as if luck or blind fate led her there,
even as a child she intuited her natural strengths—her love and feel for
animals, her visual powers of thinking, her ability to focus on one thing—
and leaned on them with all of her energy. Moving with these strengths
gave her both the desire and resiliency to put up with all of the doubters, all
those who saw her as strange and different and who found the subject
matters she chose to study too unconventional. Working in a field where she
could use her natural empathy and her particular way of thinking to great
effect, she was able to delve deeper and deeper into her chosen subject,
arriving at a powerful inside sense of the world of animals. Once she had
mastery in this realm, she was able to apply her skills to her other great
interest—autism.
Understand: achieving mastery in life often depends on those first
steps that we take. It is not simply a question of knowing deeply our Life’s
Task, but also of having a feel for our own ways of thinking and for
perspectives that are unique to us. A deep level of empathy for animals or
for certain types of people may not seem like a skill or an intellectual
strength, but in truth it is. Empathy plays an enormous role in learning and
knowledge. Even scientists, renowned for their objectivity, regularly engage
in thinking in which they momentarily identify with their subject. Other
qualities we might possess, such as a penchant for visual forms of thinking,
represent other possible strengths, not weaknesses. The problem is that we
humans are deep conformists. Those qualities that separate us are often
ridiculed by others, or criticized by teachers. People with a high visual
sense are often labeled as dyslexic, for example. Because of these
judgments, we might see our strengths as disabilities and try to work around
them in order to fit in. But anything that is peculiar to our makeup is
precisely what we must pay the deepest attention to and lean on in our rise
to mastery. Mastery is like swimming—it is too difficult to move forward
when we are creating our own resistance or swimming against the current.
Know your strengths and move with them.
3. Transform yourself through practice—The Fingertip Feel
As narrated in chapter 2 (here), after graduating from the Citadel in 1981,
Cesar Rodriguez decided to enter the pilot training program for the United
States Air Force. But soon he had to confront a harsh reality—he was not
naturally gifted for flying a jet plane. Among those in the program were
some who were known as “golden boys.” They seemed to have a knack for
flying at high speeds. They were in their element. From the very beginning
Rodriguez loved to fly, and he had ambitions to become a fighter pilot, the
most elite and coveted position within the air force. But he would never
reach such a goal unless he somehow managed to raise himself up to the
skill level of the golden boys. His problem was that he was quickly
overwhelmed by the glut of information that a pilot had to process. The key
was to learn how to take a scan pattern of all the instruments—a quick
reading here and there—while maintaining a feel for one’s overall position
in the sky. Losing situational awareness could prove fatal. For him, this
scanning ability could only come through endless hours of practice on the
simulator and in flying, until it became relatively automatic.
Rodriguez had played sports in high school and he knew the value of
practice and repetition, but this was a lot more complex than any sport or
any skill he had ever tried to master. As soon as he became comfortable
with the instruments, he would be faced with the daunting task of learning
to execute various flying maneuvers (like rolls), and to develop a feel for
the exact speeds needed to enter them. All of this required extremely rapid
mental calculations. The golden boys would ace these maneuvers in no
time. For Rodriguez, it would require a lot of repetition and intense focus
every time he entered the cockpit. He noticed sometimes that his body
would get there ahead of his mind; his nerves and his fingers would intuit a
sense of what command of the maneuver should feel like; he would then
consciously aim to recreate that feeling.
Once this mark was passed, he would have to learn how to fly in
formation, working with other pilots in an intricately coordinated team.
Flying in formation meant juggling several skills at the same time, and the
complexity of it all could be mind-boggling. Part of him was motivated by
the great excitement he felt commanding such a jet and working with the
team, and part of him was also motivated by the challenge. He had noticed
that in gaining control of the jet and the various maneuvers, he had
developed acute powers of concentration. He could tune everything out and
immerse himself completely in the moment. This made every new skill set a
little easier to master.
Slowly, through sheer tenacity and practice, he rose to the top of his
class, and was considered among the few who could serve as fighter pilots.
But there remained one last hurdle in his ascent to the top: flying in the
high-scale exercises run by all branches of the military. In this case it was a
matter of understanding the overall mission and operating in an intricately
orchestrated land-air-sea campaign. It required an even higher level of
awareness, and at moments during these exercises Rodriguez had an odd
sensation—he was no longer focusing on the various physical elements of
flying or on the individual skill components, but was thinking and feeling
the overall campaign and how he fit into it in a seamless fashion. It was a
sensation of mastery, and it was fleeting. He also noticed a slight gap
between himself and the golden boys. They had relied for so long on their
natural skills that they had not cultivated the same level of concentration
that he now possessed. In many ways, he had surpassed them. After
participating in a few of these exercises, Rodriguez had risen to elite status.
On January 19, 1991, in the space of a few minutes, all of his elaborate
training and practice would be put to the ultimate test. A few days before,
the United States and allied forces had launched Operation Desert Storm in
response to Sadaam Hussein’s invasion of Kuwait. The morning of the 19th
Rodriguez and his wingman, Craig “Mole” Underhill, flew into Iraq as part
of a thirty-six-aircraft strike force, heading toward a target near Baghdad. It
was his first real taste of combat. Flying F-15s, he and Mole quickly spotted
a pair of Iraqi MiG fighters in the distance and decided to give chase.
Within seconds they realized that they had been lured into a trap, the
pursuer turning into the pursued, as two MiGs now bore down on them
from an unexpected direction.
Realizing how quickly one of the enemy planes was approaching,
Rodriguez suddenly jettisoned his fuel tanks for greater speed and
maneuverability. He then dove toward the ground, below the level of the
approaching MiG, doing everything he could to make it difficult for the
enemy to get a read on him with his radar, including flying at a right angle
to the ground to make his plane as skinny as possible. Without a radar
reading, the MiG could not launch a missile. Everything was happening so
fast. At any moment his own radar could light up, indicating the enemy had
locked into him and he was as good as dead. He had one chance to make it:
evading the MiG until it got too close to fire, and drawing it into a dogfight
—a circular battle in the air that was a rare occurrence in modern warfare.
At the back of his mind he was also trying to buy enough time for his
wingman to help him out, and he could somehow sense Mole’s presence
following him from a distance. But time would bring another danger—the
presence of the second MiG on the scene.
He tried every evasive maneuver in the book. He saw the MiG getting
closer and closer when suddenly he heard from Mole, who had been
following him and had now maneuvered into position. As Rodriguez looked
over his shoulder, he could see the enemy MiG exploding—Mole’s missile
had struck it. As the chase had unfolded, everything had gone as Rodriguez
wanted, but there was not a second to relax. The second MiG was now
rapidly approaching.
Mole ascended to 20,000 feet. As the MiG bore down on Rodriguez’s
plane, its pilot realized Mole’s presence above him, and began to maneuver
up and down to somehow escape being trapped between the two of them.
Using this instant of confusion, Rodriguez was able to get inside the MiG’s
turning circle. It had now turned into a classic two-circle dogfight in which
each plane tried to circle onto the tail of the other and into firing range,
moving closer to the ground with each succeeding loop. They circled and
circled around each other. Finally, at 3,600 feet, Rodriguez got a reading
and locked his missiles on the MiG. The Iraqi pilot went into a hard evasive
maneuver, turning directly toward the ground, flipping upside down and
trying to circle into a reverse direction to escape, but in the few seconds of
the dogfight the pilot had lost awareness of how close they had drifted to
the ground, and he crashed into the desert below.
Mole and Rodriguez returned to the base to debrief their superiors on
the mission, but as Rodriguez went over it all and watched video of the
encounters, he had a strange sensation. He could not really recall any
moment of it. It had happened so fast. The entire encounter with the MiGs
had only lasted three to four minutes, and the final dogfight a matter of
seconds. He must have been thinking in some way—he had executed some
nearly perfect maneuvers. For instance, he had no recollection of deciding
to jettison the fuel tanks nor where such an idea came from. It must have
been something he had learned, and somehow in the moment it had simply
occurred to him, and very easily might have saved his life. The evasive
maneuvers he executed with the first MiG astounded his superiors—they
were so fast and effective. His awareness during the dogfight must have
been exceptionally keen; he had circled to his opponent’s tail in ever-faster
cycles, never losing sight of the desert floor they were approaching. How
could he explain all of these maneuvers? He could hardly remember them.
All he knew was that in the moment he hadn’t been experiencing fear, but
rather an intense adrenalin rush that made his body and mind operate in
total harmony, with a kind of thinking that moved in milliseconds and was
too fast for him to analyze.
For three days after the encounter he could not sleep, the adrenalin still
coursing through his veins. It made him realize that the body possesses
latent physiological powers—unleashed in such dramatic moments—that
elevate the mind to an even higher level of focus. Rodriguez would go on to
have one more kill in Desert Storm, and another in the 1999 Kosovo
campaign, more than any pilot in recent combat, earning him the nickname
the Last American Ace.
In our daily, conscious activity we generally experience a separation
between the mind and the body. We think about our bodies and our physical
actions. Animals do not experience this division. When we start to learn any
skill that has a physical component, this separation becomes even more
apparent. We have to think about the various actions involved, the steps we
have to follow. We are aware of our slowness and of how our bodies
respond in an awkward way. At certain points, as we improve, we have
glimpses of how this process could function differently, of how it might feel
to practice the skill fluidly, with the mind not getting in the way of the body.
With such glimpses, we know what to aim for. If we take our practice far
enough the skill becomes automatic, and we have the sensation that the
mind and the body are operating as one.
If we are learning a complex skill, such as flying a jet in combat, we
must master a series of simple skills, one on top of the other. Each time one
skill becomes automatic, the mind is freed up to focus on the higher one. At
the very end of this process, when there are no more simple skills to learn,
the brain has assimilated an incredible amount of information, all of which
has become internalized, part of our nervous system. The whole complex
skill is now inside us and at our fingertips. We are thinking, but in a
different way—with the body and mind completely fused. We are
transformed. We possess a form of intelligence that allows us to
approximate the instinctual power of animals, but only through a conscious,
deliberate, and extended practice.
In our culture we tend to denigrate practice. We want to imagine that
great feats occur naturally—that they are a sign of someone’s genius or
superior talent. Getting to a high level of achievement through practice
seems so banal, so uninspiring. Besides, we don’t want to have to think of
the 10,000 to 20,000 hours that go into such mastery. These values of ours
are oddly counterproductive—they cloak from us the fact that almost
anyone can reach such heights through tenacious effort, something that
should encourage us all. It is time to reverse this prejudice against
conscious effort and to see the powers we gain through practice and
discipline as eminently inspiring and even miraculous. The ability to master
complicated skills by building connections in the brain is the product of
millions of years of evolution, and the source of all of our material and
cultural powers. When we sense the possible unity of mind and body in the
early stages of practice, we are being guided toward this power. It is the
natural bent of our brain to want to move in this direction, to elevate its
powers through repetition. To lose our connection to this natural inclination
is the height of madness, and will lead to a world in which no one has the
patience to master complex skills. As individuals we must resist such a
trend, and venerate the transformative powers we gain through practice.
4. Internalize the details—The Life Force
As the illegitimate son of the notary Ser Piero da Vinci, Leonardo da Vinci
(see here, for more on the artist) was essentially barred from studying and
practicing the traditional professional careers—medicine, law, and so on—
and from higher education. And so as a boy growing up in the town of
Vinci, near Florence, he received little formal education. He spent much of
his time roaming around the countryside and venturing into the forests
outside his town. He was enchanted by the incredible variety of life he
found there, and the dramatic rock formations and waterfalls that were part
of the landscape. As his father was a notary, there was a fair amount of
paper (a rare commodity at the time) in the family house, and feeling a great
desire to draw all that he saw on his walks, he began stealing sheets of
paper and carrying them with him.
He would sit on a rock and draw the insects, birds and flowers that
fascinated him. He never received any instruction. He simply drew what he
saw, and he began to notice that in trying to capture these things on paper,
he had to think deeply. He had to focus on the details that the eye would
often pass over. In drawing plants, for instance, he began to notice the
subtle distinctions in the stamens of various flowers and how they were
different from one another. He would notice the transformations these
plants went through on their way to blossoming, and he would capture these
changes in sequential drawings. In going so deeply into their details, he had
fleeting intimations of what animated these plants from within, what made
them distinct and alive. Soon, thinking and drawing became fused in his
mind. Through drawing things in the world around him, he came to
understand them.
His progress at drawing was so astounding that his father thought of
finding him a position as an apprentice in one of the various studios in
Florence. Working in the arts was one of the few professions open to
illegitimate sons. In 1466, using his influence as a respected notary in
Florence, he managed to secure a position for his fourteen-year-old son in
the workshop of the great artist Verrocchio. For Leonardo, this was a
perfect fit. Verrocchio was deeply influenced by the enlightened spirit of the
times, and his apprentices were taught to approach their work with the
seriousness of scientists. For instance, plaster casts of human figures would
be placed about the studio with various pieces of fabric draped over them.
The apprentices had to learn to concentrate deeply, and recognize the
different creases and shadows that would form. They had to learn how to
reproduce them realistically. Leonardo loved learning in this way, and soon
it became apparent to Verrocchio that his young apprentice had developed
an exceptional eye for detail.
By 1472 Leonardo was one of Verrocchio’s top assistants, helping him
on his large-scale paintings and taking on a fair amount of responsibility. In
Verrocchio’s The Baptism of Christ, Leonardo was given the task of
painting one of the two angels off to the side, and this work is now the
oldest example we have of his painting. When Verrocchio saw the results of
Leonardo’s work he was astounded. The face of the angel had a quality he
had never seen before—it seemed to literally glow from within. The look on
the angel’s face seemed uncannily real and expressive.
Although it might have seemed like magic to Verrocchio, recent X-
rays have revealed some of the secrets to Leonardo’s early technique. The
layers of paint he applied were exceptionally thin, his brush strokes
invisible. He had gradually added more layers, each ever so slightly darker
than the last. Operating in this way, and experimenting with different
pigments, he had taught himself how to capture the delicate contours of
human flesh. Because of the thin layers, any light hitting the painting
seemed to pass through the angel’s face and illuminate it from within.
What this revealed was that in the six years that he had been working
in the studio, he must have applied himself to an elaborate study of the
various paints and perfected a style of layering that made everything seem
delicate and lifelike, with a feeling of texture and depth. He must have also
spent a great deal of time studying the composition of human flesh itself.
What this also revealed was the incredible patience of Leonardo, who must
have felt a great deal of love for such detailed work.
Over the years, after he left Verrocchio’s studio and established a name
for himself as an artist, Leonardo da Vinci developed a philosophy that
would guide his artwork and, later, his scientific work as well. He noticed
that other artists generally started with an overall image they planned to
depict, one that would create a startling or spiritual effect. His mind
operated differently. He would find himself beginning with a keen focus on
details—the various shapes of noses, the possible turnings of the mouth to
indicate a mood, the veins in a hand, the intricate knots of trees. These
details fascinated him. He had come to believe that by focusing on and
understanding such details he was actually getting closer to the secret of life
itself, to the work of the Creator who infused his presence into every living
thing and every form of matter. The bones of the hand or the contours of
human lips were as inspiring to him as any religious image. For him,
painting was a quest to get at the life force that animates all things. In the
process of doing so, he believed he could create work that was much more
emotional and visceral. And to realize this quest, he invented a series of
exercises that he followed with incredible rigor.
During the day he would take endless walks through the city and
countryside, his eyes taking in all of the details of the visible world. He
would make himself notice something new in every familiar object that he
saw. At night, before falling asleep, he would review all of these various
objects and details, fixing them in his memory. He was obsessed with
capturing the essence of the human face in all of its glorious diversity. For
this purpose, he would visit every conceivable place where he could find
different types of people—brothels, public houses, prisons, hospitals, prayer
corners in churches, country festivals. With his notebook always at hand, he
would sketch grimacing, laughing, pained, beatific, leering expressions on
an incredible variety of faces. He would follow people in the streets who
had a type of face he had never seen before, or some kind of physical
deformity, and would sketch them as he walked. He would fill single sheets
of paper with dozens of different noses in profile. He seemed particularly
interested in lips, finding them just as expressive as eyes. He would repeat
all of these exercises at different times of the day, to make sure he could
capture the different effects that changing light would have on the human
face.
For his great painting The Last Supper, his patron, the duke of Milan,
grew increasingly angry with Leonardo for the time he was taking to finish
it. It seemed that all that remained was to fill in the face of Judas, but
Leonardo could not find an adequate model. He had taken to visiting the
worst parts of Milan to find the most perfectly villainous expression to
translate onto Judas, but was having no luck. The duke accepted his
explanation, and soon enough Leonardo had found the model he wanted.
He applied this same rigor to capturing bodies in motion. Part of his
philosophy was that life is defined by continual movement and constant
change. The artist must be able to render the sensation of dynamic
movement in a still image. Ever since he was a young man he had been
obsessed with currents of water, and had become quite proficient at
capturing the look of waterfalls, cascades, and rushing water. With people,
he would spend hours seated on the side of a street, watching pedestrians as
they moved by. He would hurriedly sketch the outlines of their figures,
capturing their various movements in a stop-action sequence. (He had
reached the point where he could sketch with incredible rapidity.) At home,
he would fill in the outlines. To develop his eye for following movement in
general, he invented a whole series of different exercises. For instance, one
day in his notebook he wrote, “Tomorrow make some silhouettes out of
cardboard in various forms and throw them from the top of the terrace
through the air; then draw the movements each makes at different stages of
descent.”
His hunger to get at the core of life by exploring its details drove him
into elaborate research on human and animal anatomy. He wanted to be able
to draw a human or a cat from the inside out. He personally dissected
cadavers, sawing through bones and skulls, and he religiously attended
autopsies so that he could see as closely as possible the structure of muscles
and nerves. His anatomical drawings were far in advance of anything of his
time for their realism and accuracy.
To other artists, Leonardo seemed insane for all of this attention to
detail, but in the few paintings that he actually completed, the results of
such rigorous practice can be seen and felt. More than the work of any other
artist of his time, the landscapes in the backgrounds of his paintings seemed
infused with life. Every flower, branch, leaf or stone was rendered in
intense detail. But these backgrounds were not simply there to decorate. In
an effect known as sfumato, and one that was peculiar to his work, he would
soften parts of these backgrounds to the point at which they would melt into
the figure in the foreground, giving a dreamlike effect. It was part of his
idea that all of life is deeply interconnected and fused on some level.
The faces of the women he painted had a pronounced effect on people,
and particularly on men, who often fell in love with the female figures he
depicted in religious scenes. It wasn’t any obvious sensual quality in their
expression, but in their ambiguous smiles and their beautifully rendered
flesh the men would recognize a powerfully seductive quality. Leonard
heard many stories of them finding their way to his paintings in various
houses and secretly fondling the women in the images and kissing their lips.
Much of Leonardo’s Mona Lisa has been damaged by attempts to
clean and restore it in the past, making it hard to imagine it as it originally
appeared, and how its startling qualities shocked the public. Fortunately, we
have the critic Vasari’s description of it, before it became hopelessly
altered: “The eyebrows, growing thickly in one place and thinly in another,
following the pores of the skin, could not have been more lifelike. The
nose, with its ravishingly delicate pink nostrils, was life itself. The shaping
of the mouth, where the red of the lips merged with the skin tones of the
face, seemed not to be made from colors but from living flesh. In the
hollow of the throat, the observant onlooker could see the pulsing of the
veins.”
Long after Leonardo’s death, his paintings continue to have haunting
and disturbing effects on viewers. Numerous security guards in museums
around the world have been fired for their weird, obsessive relationships to
his work, and Leonardo’s paintings remain the most vandalized in the
history of art, all of this attesting to the power of his work to stir up the
most visceral emotions.
The primary problem for artists in Leonardo da Vinci’s day was the
constant pressure to produce more and more work. They had to produce at a
relatively high rate in order to keep the commissions coming and remain in
the public eye. This influenced the quality of their work. A style had
developed in which artists could quickly create effects in their painting that
would superficially excite viewers. To create such effects they would
depend on bright colors, unusual juxtapositions and compositions, and
dramatic scenes. In the process, they would inevitably gloss over the details
in the background and even in the people they portrayed. They did not pay
much attention to the flowers or trees or the hands of figures in the
foreground. They had to dazzle on the surface. Leonardo recognized this
fact early in his career and it distressed him. It went against his grain in two
ways—he hated the feeling of having to hurry with anything, and he loved
immersing himself in details for their own sake. He was not interested in
creating surface effects. He was animated by a hunger to understand life
forms from the inside out and to grasp the force that makes them dynamic,
and to somehow express all of this on a flat surface. And so, not fitting in,
he went on his own peculiar path, mixing science and art.
To complete his quest, Leonardo had to become what he termed
“universal”—for each object he had to be able to render all of its details,
and he had to extend this knowledge as far as possible, to as many objects
in the world as he could study. Through sheer accumulation of such details,
the essence of life itself became visible to him, and his understanding of
this life force became visible in his artwork.
In your own work you must follow the Leonardo path. Most people
don’t have the patience to absorb their minds in the fine points and minutiae
that are intrinsically part of their work. They are in a hurry to create effects
and make a splash; they think in large brush strokes. Their work inevitably
reveals their lack of attention to detail—it doesn’t connect deeply with the
public, and it feels flimsy. If it gets attention, the attention is momentary.
You must see whatever you produce as something that has a life and
presence of its own. This presence can be vibrant and visceral, or it can be
weak and lifeless. A character in a novel, for instance, will come to life for
the reader if the writer has put great effort into imagining the details of that
character. The writer does not need to literally lay out these details; readers
will feel it in the work and will intuit the level of research that went into the
creation of it. All living things are an amalgam of intricate levels of details,
animated by the dynamic that connects them. Seeing your work as
something alive, your path to mastery is to study and absorb these details in
a universal fashion, to the point at which you feel the life force and can
express it effortlessly in your work.
5. Widen your vision—the Global Perspective
Early in his career as a boxing trainer, Freddie Roach felt like he knew the
business well enough to become highly successful at it. (For more
information on Roach see chapter 1, here, and chapter 3, here.) He had
fought for years as a professional; he had a boxer’s feel for the game. His
own trainer had been the legendary Eddie Futch, who had trained Joe
Frazier, among others. When Roach’s career as a boxer had ended in the
mid-1980s, he had served as an apprentice trainer for several years under
Futch himself. On his own, Roach had created a novel training technique
based on the use of sparring mitts. Wearing these large mitts, he could spar
with and teach his fighters in the ring, in real time. This added another
dimension to his instruction. He worked hard at building a personal rapport
with his fighters. And finally, he developed the practice of poring over
videos of opposing fighters, studying their styles in depth, and devising an
effective counter-strategy based on this study.
And yet despite all of this work, he sensed that something was
missing. Everything would go well in practice, but in actual fights he would
often watch from the corner with a helpless feeling as his boxers would go
their own way, or would enact only a part of the strategy he had devised.
Sometimes he and his fighters would be on the same page, sometimes not.
All of this was reflected in the winning percentage of his boxers—good but
not great. He could remember back to his own days as a fighter under
Futch. He too had done well in practice, but in actual fights and in the heat
of the moment, all strategy and preparation would go out the window and
he would try to punch his way to a victory. He had always missed
something from Futch’s training. Futch had trained him well in all of the
separate components of a fight (like offense, defense, and footwork), but
Roach never had had a sense of the whole picture or the overall strategy.
The connection between himself and Futch had never been that great, and
so under pressure in the ring, he would suddenly just revert to his own
natural way of fighting. And he now seemed to be having a similar problem
with his own fighters.
Trying to feel his way through to a process that would bring better
results, Roach decided he needed to do for his fighters what had never been
done for himself in his own career—namely, to give them a feel for the
complete picture of the fight. He wanted them to enact this script over all
the rounds, and to deepen the connection between fighter and trainer. He
began by expanding the mitt work, making it not just a component in the
training process, but the focal point. Now he would spend hours sparring
with his fighters over several rounds. Day after day, feeling their punches
and getting a sense of the rhythm of their footwork, he could almost get
inside their skin. He could feel their moods, the level of their focus, and the
degree to which they were open to instruction. Without ever having to say a
word, he could alter their moods and focus by the intensity of the mitt work
he did with them.
Having trained as a fighter since he was six years old, Roach had a feel
for every square inch of the ring. With his eyes closed he could gauge
exactly where he stood in the ring at any moment. Training his fighters for
hours with the mitt work, he could imprint into them his own sixth sense for
the space itself, deliberately maneuvering them into bad positions so they
could feel in advance how they were approaching such a dangerous space.
In the same way, he would impart to them several ways to avoid such dead
positions.
One day, as he was studying a video of an opposing fighter, he had an
epiphany—his way of watching videos was all wrong. In general, he would
focus on a fighter’s style, which is something boxers can control and alter
for strategic purposes. This suddenly seemed like a superficial way of
studying the opponent. A far better strategy would be to look for their
habits or tics, the things they couldn’t control no matter how hard they tried.
Every fighter has such tics—they are signs of something deeply wired into
their rhythms—and they translate into potential weaknesses. Discovering
these tics and habits would give Roach a much deeper read on the
opponent, cutting to his psyche and to his heart.
He began to look for signs of this in the tapes he watched, and in the
beginning it would take him several days to see anything. But in the course
of watching so many hours on the opposing fighter, he would get a feel for
his ways of moving and thinking. Eventually, he would find the habit he
was looking for—for instance, a slight motion of the head that always
foreshadowed a particular punch. Now that he had found it, he would see it
everywhere on the tapes. After doing this for many different fights over
several years, he developed a feel for identifying such tics much more
quickly.
Based on these discoveries, he would craft a complete strategy that had
built-in flexibility. Depending on what the opponent showed in the first
round, Roach would have ready several options for his own fighter that
would surprise and upset the opponent, keeping him on his heels and in
react mode. His strategy would encompass the entire fight. If necessary, his
own fighter could sacrifice a round or two without ever losing control of the
overall dynamic. Now, in the mitt work, he would go over the strategy
endlessly. Carefully mimicking the tics and rhythms of the opponent he had
come to know so well, he could show his fighters how to mercilessly take
advantage of their habits and weaknesses; he would go over the various
options to adopt, depending on what the opponent revealed in the first
round. By the time the fight itself approached, his fighters would feel as if
they had already fought and destroyed this opponent, having faced Roach
so many times in preparation.
During the progress of the fights themselves, Roach now had a
completely different feeling than in the years before. The connection with
his fighters was absolute. His vision of the whole picture—the spirit of the
opponent, the way to dominate the ring space within each round, the overall
strategy to win the fight—was now deeply imprinted into the footwork,
punching, and thinking of his own fighter. He could almost feel himself in
the ring exchanging punches, but now he had the ultimate satisfaction of
controlling both the mind of his own fighter and that of the opponent’s. He
would watch with mounting excitement as his fighters would slowly wear
down their opponents, exploiting their habits and getting inside their heads
just as he had taught them to.
His winning percentage started to climb to a level that was
unprecedented in the sport. His success extended beyond the main fighter in
his stable, Manny Pacquiao, to include nearly all of his boxers. Since 2003
he has been named Boxing Trainer of the Year five times, no other previous
trainer having received the award more than twice. It seems that in modern
boxing he is now in a class all by himself.
If we look closely at the career path of Freddie Roach, we can see a
transparent example of the development of mastery. His father, a former
New England featherweight champion himself, had pushed all of his sons
into the sport at a very early age. Freddie Roach himself had begun serious
training as a boxer at the age of six, and this continued all the way to the
age of eighteen, when he turned professional. Those twelve years added up
to an extremely deep level of practice and immersion in the sport. For the
next eight years of his life, until he retired from the sport, he fought fifty-
three bouts, an intense fighting schedule. As someone who enjoyed
practicing and training, the number of hours he spent in the gym as a
professional boxer was much higher than that of other fighters. After
retirement he stayed around the sport, working as an apprentice trainer for
Eddie Futch. By the time he began his own career as a trainer, he had
accumulated so many overall hours of work in the sport that he already saw
boxing from a perspective that was much wider and deeper than that of
other trainers. And so when he felt that there was an even higher level to
aim for, this intuition was based on the depth of all those years of practical
experience. Inspired by this feeling, he was able to analyze his own work up
to that point and see its limitations.
Roach knew from his own career that so much of boxing is mental. A
fighter who enters the ring with a clear sense of purpose and strategy, and
with the confidence that comes from complete preparation, has a much
better chance of prevailing. It was one thing to imagine giving his fighters
such an advantage, but it was quite another to bring it to pass. Before a fight
there are so many distractions, and during a match it is so easy to simply
react emotionally to the punches and lose any sense of strategy. To
overcome these problems, he developed a two-pronged approach—he
crafted a comprehensive and fluid strategy based on his perception of the
opponent’s habits, and he imprinted this strategy into the nervous system of
his fighters through hours of mitt work. On this level, his training did not
consist of individual elements that he worked on with his boxers, but of an
integrated, seamless form of preparation that closely simulated the
experience of a fight, repeated over and over again. It took many years of a
hit-and-miss process to create this high-level training, but when it all came
together his success rate skyrocketed.
In any competitive environment in which there are winners or losers,
the person who has the wider, more global perspective will inevitably
prevail. The reason is simple: such a person will be able to think beyond the
moment and control the overall dynamic through careful strategizing. Most
people are perpetually locked in the present. Their decisions are overly
influenced by the most immediate event; they easily become emotional and
ascribe greater significance to a problem than it should have in reality.
Moving toward mastery will naturally bring you a more global outlook, but
it is always wise to expedite the process by training yourself early on to
continually enlarge your perspective. You can do so by always reminding
yourself of the overall purpose of the work you are presently engaged in
and how this meshes with your long-term goals. In dealing with any
problem, you must train yourself to look at how it inevitably connects to a
larger picture. If your work is not having the desired effect, you must look
at it from all angles until you find the source of the problem. You must not
merely observe the rivals in your field, but dissect and uncover their
weaknesses. “Look wider and think further ahead” must be your motto.
Through such mental training, you will smooth the path to mastery while
separating yourself ever further from the competition.
6. Submit to the other—The Inside-out Perspective
As narrated in chapter 2 (here), in December 1977, Daniel Everett, along
with his wife, Keren, and their two children, arrived in a remote village in
the Amazonian jungles of Brazil, where they would end up spending a good
part of the next twenty years of their lives. The village belonged to a tribe
scattered in the area known as the Pirahã. Everett had been sent there by the
Summer Institute of Languages (SIL)—a Christian organization that trains
future missionaries in the linguistic skills that will enable them to translate
the Bible into indigenous languages and help spread the Gospel. Everett
himself was an ordained minister.
The directors at SIL considered Pirahã one of the last frontiers in their
quest to translate the Bible into all languages; it represented perhaps the
most challenging language for any outsider to learn. The Pirahã had lived
for centuries in the same Amazonian basin, resisting all attempts to
assimilate or learn Portuguese. Living in such isolation, a point was reached
in which no one outside of the Pirahã could speak or understand their
language. Several missionaries had been sent there after World War II, and
all had failed to make much progress; despite their training and linguistic
talents, they found the language maddeningly elusive.
Daniel Everett was one of the most promising linguists the SIL had
seen in a long time, and when the institute presented him with the challenge
of the Pirahã he was more than excited. His wife’s parents had been
missionaries stationed in Brazil, and Keren had grown up in an environment
not too dissimilar to a Pirahã village. It seemed the family was up to the
task, and in his first months there Everett made good progress. He attacked
the Pirahã language with great energy. Using the methods he had learned at
SIL, he slowly built up a vocabulary and the ability to speak some
rudimentary sentences. He copied everything down on index cards and
carried them in his belt loop. He was a tireless researcher. Although life in
the village presented some challenges for him and his family, he was
comfortable with the Pirahã and hoped they had accepted his presence. But
soon he began to feel that all was not right.
Part of the SIL method was to encourage immersion in the indigenous
culture as the best means for learning the language. Missionaries are
essentially abandoned to their fate, to sink or swim in the local culture
without any crutches to lean on. Perhaps unconsciously, however, Everett
could not help but keep some distance and feel ever so slightly superior to
the backward culture of the Pirahã. He became aware of this inner distance
after several incidents that occurred in the village.
First, several months into their stay, his wife and daughter nearly died
from malaria. He was rather perturbed by the lack of empathy from the
Pirahã about this. A little later, Everett and his wife tried desperately to
nurse back to health a Pirahã infant that was gravely ill. The Pirahã were
certain the baby would die, and seemed bothered by the missionaries’
efforts. Then one day, Everett and his wife discovered the baby was dead;
the Pirahã had forced alcohol down its throat to kill it. Although he tried to
rationalize this event to himself, he could not help but feel some disgust. On
another occasion, for apparently no reason, a group of Pirahã men had
gotten very drunk and were looking for him in order to kill him. He
managed to escape the threat, and nothing else ever happened, but it made
him wonder about the safety of his family.
More than anything, however, he began to feel disappointed by the
Pirahã themselves. He had read much about Amazonian tribes, and by any
standards the Pirahã did not measure up. They had virtually no material
culture—no important tools, artwork, costumes, or jewelry. If women
needed a basket, they would find some moist palm leaves, quickly weave
them together, use the basket once or twice, and then abandon it. They
placed no value on material things, and nothing in their villages was
designed to last very long. They had few rituals, and as far as he could tell
no real folklore or creation myths. One time he had been woken up by
excitement in the village—apparently a spirit who lived above the clouds
had been sighted and was warning them not to go into the jungle. He looked
at what they were looking at and saw nothing. There were no colorful
stories being told about this, no relation to any myth, just some villagers
excitedly staring off into empty space. They seemed to him like Boy Scouts
on a camping trip, or a group of hippies—a tribe that had somehow lost its
own culture.
This disappointment and unease coincided with frustration in his own
work. He had made some progress with the language, but it seemed that the
more words and phrases he learned, the more questions and puzzles he
uncovered. He would think that he had mastered a particular expression,
only to find it meant something different or something larger than he had
imagined. He could see the children learning the language so easily, but to
him who now lived among them, it seemed beyond his reach. Then one day
he experienced what he would later realize was a turning point.
The thatch roof of his family’s hut needed replacing, and he decided to
enlist some villagers in the effort. Although he felt he had integrated
himself into their lives, he had never ventured very far into the surrounding
jungles with the Pirahã men. Finally, on this occasion he would go much
farther than before to gather the necessary materials. Suddenly, during this
trip, he saw an entirely different side to them. While he was stomping and
whacking his way through the brush, they seemed to glide through the thick
jungle without being touched by a single branch. He was not able to keep
up with them, and so he stopped and rested. In the distance he could hear
strange sounds—the Pirahã men were clearly speaking to one another, but
their words were somehow transposed into whistles. He realized that in the
jungle they used this different form of communication, one that would not
stand out from the jungle hum. It was a marvelous way to talk without
attracting attention, and must have been a great help in hunting.
Now he joined them on subsequent forays into the jungle, and his
respect for them increased. They could hear and see things he could not
perceive at all—dangerous animals, signs of something different or
suspicious. Occasionally, it would rain when it was not the rainy season,
and in the jungle they had a sixth sense for the weather and knew when a
heavy rain was coming hours before it arrived. (They could even predict the
arrival of a plane several hours in advance, although he never figured out
how.) They could identify every plant and its possible medicinal purposes,
and knew every square inch of the jungle. If they saw bubbles or ripples in
the river, they could instantly tell whether the movement was from a falling
rock or from some dangerous animal lurking below the surface. They had a
mastery of their environment that he could not sense by seeing them in the
village. And as he became aware of this, he began to understand that their
life and culture, which at first glance had seemed rather poor according to
our standards, was actually something remarkably rich. Over the course of
hundreds of years they had adapted a way of life that was perfectly wedded
to the harsh circumstances of their environment.
Now, as he looked back on the same incidents that had troubled him
before, he could see them in a new light. Living so closely to death on a
daily basis (the jungle was teeming with dangers and diseases), they had
developed a rather stoic attitude. They could not afford to waste time or
energy on mourning rituals or on too much empathy. They could sense
when someone was going to die, and being certain that the infant the
Everetts had tried to nurse was doomed, they thought it easier and better to
hasten its death and not look back. The village men who had thought of
killing him had heard that he did not like their drinking; they feared that he
was yet another outsider who was going to impose his values and authority
on them. They had their reasons for behaving as they did, but only with
time could he see them clearly.
He extended his participation in their lives to other aspects—hunting
and fishing excursions, gathering roots and vegetables in the fields, and so
on. He and his family would share meals with them and interacted with
them as much as possible, and in this way he slowly immersed himself in
the Pirahã culture. Although it was not immediately apparent, this also
initiated a change in his learning of the language itself. It started to come
more naturally—less from the tireless work of a field researcher and more
from within, from simply living inside their culture. He began to think like
a Pirahã, to foresee their reactions to what some visiting Westerner would
ask of them; he got inside their sense of humor, and the kinds of stories they
liked to relate around the campfire.
And as he began to understand more aspects of their culture and to
communicate with a higher degree of proficiency, he noticed more and
more peculiarities to the Pirahã language. Everett had been indoctrinated in
the prevailing beliefs in linguistics championed by Noam Chomsky.
According to Chomsky all languages share certain features, which he
designates as Universal Grammar. This grammar implies a common
neurological trait to the brain that allows for the learning of languages
among children. According to this theory, we are hardwired for language.
But the more time Everett spent among the Pirahã, the more signs he saw
that their language did not share some of these common features. They had
no numbers and no system for counting. They had no specific words for
colors, but rather described colors through phrases that related to real
objects.
According to Universal Grammar, the most important trait shared by
all languages is what is known as recursion, the embedding of phrases
within phrases that gives language an almost infinite potential to relate
experiences. An example would be, “the food you are eating smells good.”
Everett could find absolutely no evidence for recursion in Pirahã. They
would express such ideas in simple, assertive phrases, such as “You are
eating food. That food smells good.” These exceptions to Universal
Grammar began to pile up as he looked for them.
At the same time, the Pirahã culture began to make increasing sense to
him, which altered his conception of their language. For instance, one time
he learned a new word that a Pirahã explained to him meant “what is in
your head when you sleep.” The word then means to dream. But the word
was used with a special intonation that Pirahã use when they are referring to
a new experience. Questioning further, he saw that to them dreaming is
simply a different form of experience, not at all a fiction. A dream is as real
and immediate to them as anything they encounter in waking life. With
more and more of these examples, a theory began to stir in his head, one
that he would call the Immediate Experience Principle (IEP). What this
means is that for the Pirahã all that concerns them are things that can be
experienced in the here and now, or that relate to something that someone
personally has experienced in the very recent past.
This would account for the peculiarities of their language—colors and
numbers are abstractions that do not fit IEP. Instead of recursion, they have
simple declarative statements on what they have seen. His theory would
account for their lack of material culture, or of creation myths and stories
that refer to something in the past. They had developed this form of culture
as the perfect adaptation to their environment and needs; it made them
profoundly immersed in the present and remarkably happy. It helped them
to psychologically transcend the difficulties of their environment. Because
they had no need for anything beyond their immediate experience, they had
no words for such things. Everett’s theory was the fruit of years and years
of deep immersion in their culture. As it came together in his mind, it
explained so many things. It could not have been seen or understood in the
course of a few months or years observing them from the outside.
The conclusion that he drew from this, one that would provoke much
controversy within the field of linguistics, is that culture plays an enormous
role in the development of language, and that languages are more different
than we have imagined. Although there are certainly common aspects to all
human languages, there can be no universal grammar that overrides the
relevance of culture. Such a conclusion, he determined, can only come
through years of intense fieldwork. Those who make assumptions from far
away, based on universal theories, do not see the whole picture. It takes
great time and effort to see the differences, to participate in a culture. And
because it is so much harder to perceive these differences, culture has not
been given its due as one of the primary shaping forces for language and for
how we experience the world.
The deeper he immersed himself into Pirahã culture, the more it
changed him. He not only grew disenchanted with the top-down form of
research in linguistics and the ideas it led to, but also with his work as a
missionary. These were both attempts to impose on the Pirahã alien ideas
and values. He could only imagine that spreading the Gospel and
converting them to Christianity would completely ruin their culture, which
had shaped itself so perfectly to their circumstances and made them so
content. With these ideas, he lost his faith in Christianity itself, and finally
left the church. Learning an alien culture from so deeply inside it, he could
no longer accept the superiority of one particular belief or value system. To
hold such an opinion, he determined, is merely an illusion that comes from
remaining on the outside.
For many researchers in circumstances similar to Daniel Everett’s, the
natural response is to rely on the skills and concepts they have learned for
research purposes. This would mean studying the Pirahã as closely as
Everett had done in the beginning, taking extensive notes, and trying to
make this alien culture fit into the framework already designated by the
prevailing theories in linguistics and anthropology. Doing so, such
researchers would be rewarded with articles in prestigious journals and
solid positions within academia. But in the end they would remain on the
outside looking in, and a good portion of their conclusions would simply be
confirmations of what they had already assumed. The wealth of information
that Everett had uncovered about their language and culture would remain
unnoticed. Imagine how often this has occurred in the past and still occurs
in the present, and how many secrets of indigenous cultures have been lost
to us because of this outsider approach.
Part of this predilection for the outside perspective originates from a
prejudice among scientists. Studying from the outside, many would say,
preserves our objectivity. But what kind of objectivity is it when the
researcher’s perspective is tainted by so many assumptions and predigested
theories? The reality of the Pirahã could only be seen from within and from
participating in their culture. This does not taint the observer with
subjectivity. A scientist can participate from within and yet retain his or her
reasoning powers. Everett could stand back from their culture and devise
his IEP theory. The intuitive and the rational, the inside perspective and
science, can easily coexist. For Everett, choosing this inside path required a
great deal of courage. It meant physically subjecting himself to the dangers
of their life in the jungle. It led to a difficult confrontation with other
linguists and all of the problems such conflict presented for his future career
as a professor. It led to a profound disenchantment with Christianity, which
had meant so much to him as a young man. But he felt compelled to do so
by his desire to uncover the reality. And by moving in this unconventional
direction, he was able to master an unbelievably complex language system
and gain invaluable insights into their culture and the role of culture in
general.
Understand: we can never really experience what other people are
experiencing. We always remain on the outside looking in, and this is the
cause of so many misunderstandings and conflicts. But the primal source of
human intelligence comes from the development of mirror neurons (see
here), which gives us the ability to place ourselves in the skin of another
and imagine their experience. Through continual exposure to people and by
attempting to think inside them we can gain an increasing sense of their
perspective, but this requires effort on our part. Our natural tendency is to
project onto other people our own beliefs and value systems, in ways in
which we are not even aware. When it comes to studying another culture, it
is only through the use of our empathic powers and by participating in their
lives that we can begin to overcome these natural projections and arrive at
the reality of their experience. To do so we must overcome our great fear of
the Other and the unfamiliarity of their ways. We must enter their belief and
value systems, their guiding myths, their way of seeing the world. Slowly,
the distorted lens through which we first viewed them starts to clear up.
Going deeper into their Otherness, feeling what they feel, we can discover
what makes them different and learn about human nature. This applies to
cultures, individuals, and even writers of books. As Nietzsche once wrote,
“As soon as you feel yourself against me you have ceased to understand my
position and consequently my arguments! You have to be the victim of the
same passion.”
7. Synthesize all forms of knowledge—
The Universal Man/Woman
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe (1749–1832) grew up in an unhappy home in
Frankfurt, Germany. His father had a failed career in local politics that had
left him embittered, and he had become estranged from his young wife. To
make up for his own lack of success, Johann’s father made certain that his
son received the finest education possible. He learned the arts, the sciences,
numerous languages, various crafts, fencing, and dancing. But Johann
found life in the house under the watchful eye of his father unbearable and
stultifying. When he finally left home to study at the university in Leipzig,
it was as if he had been set free from prison. All of his pent-up energies, his
restlessness, his hunger for women and adventures, were suddenly released
and he went wild.
He lived the life of a dandy, dressing in the most fashionable clothes
and seducing as many young women as he could find. He threw himself
into the intellectual life of Leipzig; he could be seen in all of the taverns
arguing about this or that philosophy with professors and fellow students.
His ideas went against the grain—he ranted against Christianity and
yearned for the pagan religion of the ancient Greeks. As one professor
noted, “It was the well-nigh universal opinion that he had a slate loose in
the upper story.”
And then young Johann fell in love, and any remnant of self-control
was finally gone. His letters to friends about this love affair caused them
great concern. He swung from elation to deep depression, from adoration to
distrust. He stopped eating. He proposed marriage, then broke it off. To
many it looked like he was on the edge of madness. “I’m going downhill
faster every day,” he wrote to a friend. “Three months will see the end of
me.” Then suddenly in 1768, in the middle of all this, he collapsed. He
awoke to find himself bathed in blood. He had suffered a lung hemorrhage,
and for days he was near death. To the doctors, his recovery seemed
miraculous; fearful of a relapse, they made him return to his home in
Frankfurt, where he was to be confined to his bed for many months.
As he emerged from his illness, young Goethe felt like a different
person. He was struck now by two ideas that would remain with him for the
rest of his life. First, he had the sensation that he possessed a type of inner
spirit that he named his daemon. This spirit was an incarnation of all of his
intense, restless, demonic energy. It could turn destructive, as it had done in
Leipzig. Or he could master it and channel it into something productive.
This energy was so powerful that it made him swing from one mood or idea
to the opposite—from spirituality to sensuality, from naïveté to craftiness.
This daemon, he decided, was a spirit implanted in him at birth and it
encompassed his whole being. How he managed this daemon would
determine the length of his life and the success of his endeavors.
Second, coming so close to death at such an early age made him feel
the presence of death in his bones, and this feeling stayed with him for
weeks after recovering. As he returned to life, he was suddenly struck by
the strangeness of being alive—of possessing a heart and lungs and brain
that functioned beyond his conscious control. He felt that there was a life
force that transcended the individual incarnations of life, a force not from
God (Goethe would remain a pagan his entire life), but from nature itself. In
his convalescence he would take long walks in the country, and his personal
sense of the strangeness of life was transferred to the sight of plants and
trees and animals. What force brought them to their present, perfectly
adapted states of life? What was the source of the energy that made them
grow?
Feeling as if he had been reprieved from a death sentence, he
experienced an insatiable curiosity for this life force. An idea came to him
for a story based on the famous German legend of a scholar named Faust,
who desperately wants to discover the secret of life, and who meets an
incarnation of the devil named Mephistopheles who helps him in this quest
in exchange for possession of his soul. If ever the restless Faust experiences
a moment of contentment and wants nothing more from life, then he is to
die and the devil will own his soul. Goethe began to take notes on this
drama, and in the dialogues he wrote between the devil and Faust he could
hear his own inner voices, his own demonic dualities talking to each other.
Several years later, Goethe began life as a lawyer in Frankfurt. And as
before in Leipzig, his daemon seemed to take control of him. He hated the
conventional life of a lawyer, and he hated all of the conventions that
seemed to dominate social life and to disconnect people from nature. He
entertained deeply rebellious thoughts, which he channeled into an
epistolary novel—The Sorrows of Young Werther. Although the story was
loosely based on people he knew and on a young friend who had committed
suicide over a failed romance, most of the ideas in it came from his
experiences. The novel promoted the superiority of the emotions, and
advocated a return to a life of sensation and to living closer to nature. It was
the precursor of the movement that would come to be known throughout
Europe as Romanticism, and it created a powerful reaction in Germany and
beyond. Overnight, young Goethe became a celebrity. Almost everyone
read the book. Hundreds of young people committed suicide in imitation of
the despairing Werther.
For Goethe, this success surprised and baffled him. Suddenly, he was
hobnobbing with the most famous writers of his time. Slowly, the daemon
reared its ugly head. He gave himself up to a life of wine, women, and
parties. His moods began to swing wildly back and forth. He felt a rising
disgust—at himself and the world he was frequenting. The circle of writers
and intellectuals who dominated his social life annoyed him to no end. They
were so smug, and their world was as disconnected from reality and nature
as that of lawyers. He felt increasingly constricted by his reputation as a
sensational writer.
In 1775, a year after the publication of Werther, he received an
invitation from the duke of Weimar to stay in his duchy and serve as a
personal adviser and minister. The duke was a great admirer of his writing,
and was trying to recruit more artists to his rather dull court. For Goethe,
however, this was the opportunity he was waiting for. He could say good-
bye to the literary world and bury himself in Weimar. He could pour his
energies into political work and into science, taming that damnable inner
daemon. He accepted the invitation, and except for one later trip to Italy, he
would spend the rest of his life in Weimar.
In Weimar Goethe had the idea of trying to modernize the local
government, but he quickly realized that the duke was weak and
undisciplined and that any attempt at reforming the duchy was doomed.
There was too much corruption. And so slowly he poured his energies into
his new passion in life, the sciences. He focused on geology, botany, and
anatomy. His years of writing poetry and novels were over. He began to
collect a large amount of stones, plants, and bones that he could study in his
house at all hours. And as he looked deeply into these sciences, he began to
see strange connections between them. In geology, changes in the earth
occur with great slowness, over immensely long periods of time, too slowly
to be observed in the span of a single lifetime. Plants are in a continual state
of metamorphosis, from the most primitive beginnings of the seed to the
flower or tree. All life on the planet is in an ever-present state of
development, one life form growing out of another. He began to entertain
the radical idea that humans themselves evolved from primitive life forms
—that was the way, after all, of nature.
One of the main arguments of the time against such evolutionary
theory was the nonexistence of the intermaxillary bone in humans. It exists
in all lower animals in the jaw, including primates, but at the time could not
be found in the human skull. This was paraded as evidence that man is
separate and created by a divine force. Based on his idea that all of nature is
interconnected, Goethe could not accept such a hypothesis, and through
much research he discovered remnants of the intermaxillary bone in the
upper cheekbones of human infants, the ultimate indication of our
connection to all other life forms.
His style of science was unconventional for the time. He had the idea
that there existed a form of archetypal plant that could be deduced from the
shape and development of all plants. In his study of bones, he liked to
compare all life forms to see whether there were similarities in the
construction of parts such as the vertebral column. He was obsessed with
the connections between life forms, the result of his Faustian desire to get at
the essence of all life. He felt that phenomena in nature contained the theory
of their essence in their own structure, if we could only grasp it with our
senses and our minds. Almost all scientists at the time ridiculed his work,
but in the decades to follow it was recognized that he had developed
perhaps the first real concept of evolution, and his other work was the
precursor to such later sciences as morphology and comparative anatomy.
In Weimar, Goethe was a changed man—a sober scientist and thinker.
But in 1801 another bout of illness came close to killing him yet again. It
took years to recover, but by 1805 he felt his strength returning, and with it
a return to sensations he had not experienced since his youth. That year
initiated one of the strangest and most amazing periods of productivity in
the history of the human mind, stretching from his midfifties to his late
sixties. The daemon he had repressed for several decades broke loose once
more, but now he had the discipline to channel it into all kinds of work.
Poems, novels, and plays came pouring out of him. He took up Faust again,
writing most of it in this period. His day was an almost insane medley of
different studies—writing in the morning, experiments and scientific
observations (which were now expanded to chemistry and meteorology) in
the afternoon, discussions with friends about aesthetics, science, and
politics in the evening. He seemed to be tireless, and to be going through a
second youth.
Goethe had now come to the conclusion that all forms of human
knowledge are manifestations of the same life force he had intuited in his
near-death experience as a young man. The problem with most people, he
felt, is that they build artificial walls around subjects and ideas. The real
thinker sees the connections, grasps the essence of the life force operating
in every individual instance. Why should any individual stop at poetry, or
find art unrelated to science, or narrow his or her intellectual interests? The
mind was designed to connect things, like a loom that knits together all of
the threads of a fabric. If life exists as an organic whole and cannot be
separated into parts without losing a sense of the whole, then thinking
should make itself equal to the whole.
Friends and acquaintances noticed a strange phenomenon in this
twilight period of Goethe’s life—he loved to talk about the future, decades
and centuries ahead. In his Weimar years he had added to his studies,
reading many books on economics, history, and political science. Gaining
new insights from these readings and adding to them his own reasoning, he
loved to predict the tide of historical events, and those who witnessed these
predictions were later shocked at his prescience. Years before the French
Revolution he had predicted the fall of the Bourbon monarchy, intuiting that
it had lost its legitimacy in the eyes of the people. Participating on the
German side in battles to overturn the French Revolution, and witnessing
the victory of the French civilian army at the battle of Valmy, he exclaimed,
“Here and now begins a new historical era; and you can all say you have
seen it.” He meant the coming era of democracies and civilian armies.
Now in his seventies, he would tell people that petty nationalism was a
dying force and that one day Europe would form a union like the United
States, a development he welcomed. He talked excitedly of the United
States itself, predicting that it would some day be the great power in the
world, its borders slowly expanding to fill the continent. He discussed his
belief that a new science of telegraphy would connect the globe, and that
people would have access to the latest news by the hour. He called this
future “the velocipedic age,” one determined by speed. He was concerned
that it could lead to a deadening of the human spirit.
Finally, at the age of eighty-two, he could sense that the end was near,
even though his mind was sparking with more ideas than ever before. He
said to a friend that it was a shame that he could not live another eighty
years—what new discoveries he could make, with all of his accumulated
experience! He had been postponing it for years, but now it was time to
finally write the ending to Faust itself: the scholar would find a moment of
happiness, the devil would take his soul, but divine forces would forgive
Faust for his great intellectual ambition, for his relentless quest for
knowledge, and would save him from hell—perhaps Goethe’s own
judgment on himself.
A few months later, he wrote his friend, the great linguist and educator
Wilhelm von Humboldt, the following: “The human organs, by means of
practice, training, reflection, success or failure, furtherance or resistance…
learn to make the necessary connections unconsciously, the acquired and
the intuitive working hand-in-hand, so that a unison results which is the
world’s wonder…The world is ruled by bewildered theories of bewildering
operations; and nothing is to me more important than, so far as is possible,
to turn to the best account what is in me and persists in me, and keep a firm
hand upon my idiosyncrasies.” These would be the last words he would
write. Within a few days he was dead, at the age of eighty-three.
For Goethe, a turning point came in his life with the great success of The
Sorrows of Young Werther. He could not help but be dazzled by his sudden
fame. The people around him were clamoring for an encore. He was only
twenty-five at the time. For the rest of his life he would deny the public
such an encore, and none of his subsequent writings would approach the
success of Werther, although in his last years he was recognized as
Germany’s great genius. To deny the public what it wanted was an act of
tremendous courage. To decline to exploit such fame would mean that it
would probably never return. He would have to give up all of that attention.
But Goethe felt something within him that was much stronger than the lure
of fame. He did not want to be imprisoned by this one book, devoting his
life to literature and creating a sensation. And so he chose his own unique
and strange path in life, guided by an inner force that he called his daemon
—a spirit of restlessness that impelled him to explore beyond literature, to
the core of life itself. All that was necessary was to master and channel this
spirit, implanted in him at birth.
In the sciences, he followed his unique path, looking for deep patterns
in nature. He extended his studies to politics, economics and history.
Returning to literature in the last phase of his life, his head now teemed
with links between all forms of knowledge. His poetry, novels, and plays
were suffused with science, and his scientific investigations were suffused
with poetic intuitions. His insights into history were uncanny. His mastery
was not over this subject or that one, but in the connections between them,
based on decades of deep observation and thinking. Goethe epitomizes what
was known in the Renaissance as the Ideal of the Universal Man—a person
so steeped in all forms of knowledge that his mind grows closer to the
reality of nature itself and sees secrets that are invisible to most people.
Today some might see a person such as Goethe as a quaint relic of the
eighteenth century, and his ideal of unifying knowledge as a Romantic
dream, but in fact the opposite is the case, and for one simple reason: the
design of the human brain—its inherent need to make connections and
associations—gives it a will of its own. Although this evolution might take
various twists and turns in history, the desire to connect will win out in the
end because it is so powerfully a part of our nature and inclination. Aspects
of technology now offer unprecedented means to build connections between
fields and ideas. The artificial barriers between the arts and the sciences will
melt away under the pressure to know and to express our common reality.
Our ideas will become closer to nature, more alive and organic. In any way
possible, you should strive to be a part of this universalizing process,
extending your own knowledge to other branches, further and further out.
The rich ideas that will come from such a quest will be their own reward.
REVERSAL
The reversal to mastery is to deny its existence or its importance, and
therefore the need to strive for it in any way. But such a reversal can only
lead to feelings of powerlessness and disappointment. This reversal leads to
enslavement to what we shall call the false self.
Your false self is the accumulation of all the voices you have
internalized from other people—parents and friends who want you to
conform to their ideas of what you should be like and what you should do,
as well as societal pressures to adhere to certain values that can easily
seduce you. It also includes the voice of your own ego, which constantly
tries to protect you from unflattering truths. This self talks to you in clear
words, and when it comes to mastery, it says things like, “Mastery is for the
geniuses, the exceptionally talented, the freaks of nature. I was simply not
born that way.” Or it says, “Mastery is ugly and immoral. It is for those who
are ambitious and egotistical. Better to accept my lot in life and to work to
help other people instead of enriching myself.” Or it might say, “Success is
all luck. Those we call Masters are only people who were at the right place
at the right time. I could easily be in their place if I had a lucky break.” Or it
might also say, “To work for so long at something that requires so much
pain and effort, why bother? Better to enjoy my short life and do what I can
to get by.”
As you must know by now, these voices do not speak the truth.
Mastery is not a question of genetics or luck, but of following your natural
inclinations and the deep desire that stirs you from within. Everyone has
such inclinations. This desire within you is not motivated by egotism or
sheer ambition for power, both of which are emotions that get in the way of
mastery. It is instead a deep expression of something natural, something that
marked you at birth as unique. In following your inclinations and moving
toward mastery, you make a great contribution to society, enriching it with
discoveries and insights, and making the most of the diversity in nature and
among human society. It is in fact the height of selfishness to merely
consume what others create and to retreat into a shell of limited goals and
immediate pleasures. Alienating yourself from your inclinations can only
lead to pain and disappointment in the long run, and a sense that you have
wasted something unique. This pain will be expressed in bitterness and
envy, and you will not recognize the true source of your depression.
Your true self does not speak in words or banal phrases. Its voice
comes from deep within you, from the substrata of your psyche, from
something embedded physically within you. It emanates from your
uniqueness, and it communicates through sensations and powerful desires
that seem to transcend you. You cannot ultimately understand why you are
drawn to certain activities or forms of knowledge. This cannot really be
verbalized or explained. It is simply a fact of nature. In following this voice
you realize your own potential, and satisfy your deepest longings to create
and express your uniqueness. It exists for a purpose, and it is your Life’s
Task to bring it to fruition.
Because we think well of ourselves, but nonetheless never suppose ourselves capable of
producing a painting like one of Raphael’s or a dramatic scene like one of Shakespeare’s, we
convince ourselves that the capacity to do so is quite extraordinarily marvelous, a wholly
uncommon accident, or, if we are still religiously inclined, a mercy from on high. Thus our
vanity, our self-love, promotes the cult of the genius: for only if we think of him as being very
remote from us, as a miraculum, does he not aggrieve us…. But, aside from these suggestions
of our vanity, the activity of the genius seems in no way fundamentally different from the
activity of the inventor of machines, the scholar of astronomy or history, the master of tactics.
All these activities are explicable if one pictures to oneself people whose thinking is active in
one direction, who employ everything as material, who always zealously observe their own
inner life and that of others, who perceive everywhere models and incentives, who never tire of
combining together the means available to them. Genius too does nothing but learn first how
to lay bricks then how to build, and continually seek for material and continually form itself
around it. Every activity of man is amazingly complicated, not only that of the genius: but
none is a ‘miracle.’
—FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE
CONTEMPORARY
MASTER BIOGRAPHIES
Santiago Calatrava was born in 1951, in Valencia, Spain. He earned his
architecture degree from the Polytechnic University of Valencia, and then
went on to obtain a PhD in civil engineering from the Swiss Federal
Institute of Technology, in Zurich, Switzerland. Because of his civil
engineering background, Calatrava has focused primarily on large-scale
public projects such as bridges, train stations, museums, cultural centers,
and sports complexes. Inspired by organic shapes in nature, Calatrava has
sought to infuse these public projects with a mythic, yet futuristic quality,
featuring parts of buildings that move and change shape. Among his notable
designs are BCE Place Galleria in Toronto, Canada (1992), Oriente Railway
Station in Lisbon, Portugal (1998), the extension to the Milwaukee Art
Museum (2001), the Puente de la Mujer in Buenos Aires, Argentina (2001),
Auditorio de Tenerife in Santa Cruz, the Canary Islands (2003), the Athens
Olympic Sports Complex (2004), the Turning Torso Tower in Malmo,
Sweden (2005), and the Light Railway Bridge in Jerusalem, Israel (2008).
He is currently designing the Transportation Hub at the World Trade Center
in New York City, expected to open in 2014. Calatrava is also a renowned
sculptor whose work has been shown in galleries all around the world.
Among his numerous awards, he has received the Gold Medal from the
Institution of Structural Engineers (1992) and the Gold Medal from the
American Institute of Architects (2005).
Daniel Everett was born in 1951, in Holtville, California. He received a
degree in foreign missions from the Moody Bible Institute of Chicago, and
became an ordained minister. After studying linguistics at the Summer
Institute of Languages, a Christian organization, Everett and his family
were sent as missionaries to the Amazon basin, to live with a small group of
hunter and gatherers known as the Pirahã, whose language is not related to
any other living dialect. After spending many years among the Pirahã,
Everett was finally able to crack the code of their seemingly indecipherable
language, and in the process made some discoveries about the nature of
human language that continue to stir controversy in linguistics. He has also
conducted research, and published articles, on more than a dozen distinct
Amazonian languages. Everett has a PhD in linguistics from the State
University of Campinas in Brazil. He served as professor of Linguistics and
Anthropology at the University of Pittsburgh, where he was also chairman
of the Department of Linguistics. He has also taught at the University of
Manchester (England) and Illinois State University. Everett is currently the
dean of Arts and Sciences at Bentley University. He has published two
books: the best-selling Don’t Sleep, There are Snakes: Life and Language in
the Amazonian Jungle (2008), and Language: The Cultural Tool (2012). His
work with the Pirahã is the subject of a documentary, The Grammar of
Happiness (2012).
Teresita Fernández was born in 1968, in Miami, Florida. She received a
BFA from Florida International University, and her MFA from Virginia
Commonwealth University. Fernández is a conceptual artist who is best
known for her public sculptures and for her large-scale pieces in
unconventional materials. In her work she likes to explore how psychology
impacts our perception of the world around us; for this purpose, she creates
immersive environments that challenge our conventional views of art and
nature. Her work has been exhibited in prominent museums around the
world, including the Museum of Modern Art in New York, the San
Francisco Museum of Modern Art, and the Corcoran Gallery of Art in
Washington, D.C. Her large-scale commissions include a recent site-
specific work titled Blind Blue Landscape at the renowned Bennesee Art
site in Naoshima, Japan. Fernández has received numerous awards,
including a Guggenheim Fellowship, an American Academy in Rome
Affiliated Fellowship, and a National Endowment for the Arts Artist’s
Grant. In 2005 she was awarded a MacArthur Foundation Fellowship, also
known as the “genius grant.” In 2011 President Barack Obama appointed
Fernández to serve on the U.S. Commission on Fine Arts.
Paul Graham was born in 1964, in Weymouth, England. His family moved
to the United States when he was four, and he was raised in Monroeville,
Pennsylvania. Graham obtained a BA in philosophy from Cornell
University, and a PhD in computer science from Harvard University. He
studied painting at the Rhode Island School of Design and the Accademia
di Belle Arti in Florence, Italy. In 1995 he cofounded Viaweb, the first
application service provider that allowed users to set up their own Internet
stores. After Yahoo! acquired Viaweb for close to $50 million (and renamed
it Yahoo! Store), Graham went on to write a highly popular series of online
essays about programming, tech startups, the history of technology, and art.
Inspired by the reaction to a talk he gave at the Harvard Computer Society
in 2005, Graham created Y Combinator, an apprenticeship system that
provides seed funding, advice, and mentorship to young tech entrepreneurs.
It has since become one of the most successful tech incubators in the world.
Its portfolio of over two hundred companies is currently worth more than
$4 billion, and includes DropBox, Reddit, loopt, and AirBnB. He has
published two books: On Lisp (1993) about the computer programming
language, and Hackers and Painters (2004). His online essays can be
viewed at PaulGraham.com.
Temple Grandin was born in 1947, in Boston, Massachusetts. At the age
of three she was diagnosed with autism. Through special mentoring and
work with a speech therapist, she slowly mastered the language skills that
allowed her to develop intellectually and to attend various schools,
including a high school for gifted children, where she excelled in science.
Grandin went on to receive a bachelor’s degree in psychology from
Franklin Pierce College, a master’s degree in animal science from Arizona
State University, and a doctorate in animal science from the University of
Illinois at Urbana-Champaign. After graduation, she worked as a designer
of livestock-handling facilities. Half the cattle in the United States are
handled by equipment she has designed. Her work in this area is devoted to
making 
more 
humane, 
stress-free 
environments 
for 
animals 
in
slaughterhouses. For this purpose, she has created a series of guidelines for
handling cattle and pigs at meat plants that are now used by companies such
as McDonald’s. Grandin has become a popular lecturer on animal rights and
on autism. She has written several best-selling books, including Thinking in
Pictures: My Life with Autism (1996), Animals in Translation: Using the
Mysteries of Autism to Decode Animal Behavior (2005), and The Way I See
It: A Personal Look at Autism and Aspergers (2009). In 2010 she was the
subject of an HBO biopic about her life, titled Temple Grandin. She is
currently a professor of animal science at Colorado State University.
Yoky Matsuoka was born in 1972, in Tokyo, Japan. As a promising young
tennis player, Matsuoka came to the United States to attend a high-level
tennis academy. She ended up staying, completing her high school studies
in the States, and then attending the University of California at Berkeley,
where she received a BS in electrical engineering and computer science.
She received her PhD in electrical engineering and artificial intelligence
from MIT. While at MIT she was the chief engineer at Barrett Technology,
where she developed a robotic hand that became an industry standard. She
has served as a professor of robotics and mechanical engineering at
Carnegie Mellon University and professor of computer science and
engineering at the University of Washington at Seattle. At the University of
Washington, Matsuoka created a new field, which she called “neurobotics,”
and established the university’s neurobotics laboratory, where robotic
models and virtual environments are used to understand the biomechanics
and neuromuscular control of human limbs. In 2007, Matsuoka was
awarded a MacArthur Foundation Fellowship, or “genius grant.” She was a
cofounder of Google’s X division, where she served as Head of Innovation.
Matsuoka is currently the vice president of technology at Nest Labs, a green
technology firm that develops energy-efficient consumer products such as
the Nest Learning Thermostat.
Vilayanur S. Ramachandran was born in 1951, in Madras, India. He
trained as a doctor, then switched fields to study visual psychology at
Trinity College at the University of Cambridge in England, where he
received his PhD. In 1983 he was appointed assistant professor of
psychology at the University of California at San Diego (UCSD). He is
currently a Distinguished Professor in the Psychology Department and
Neurosciences Program at UCSD, and also serves as the director of the
university’s Center for Brain and Cognition. He is best known for his work
on bizarre neurological syndromes such as phantom limbs, various body-
identity disorders, Capgras delusion (in which the sufferer believes that
family members have been replaced by impostors), and for his theories on
mirror neurons and synesthesia. Among his numerous awards, he has been
elected to an honorary life membership to the Royal Institution of Great
Britain, fellowships from Oxford University and Stanford University, and
the annual Ramon Y Cajal award from the International Neuropsychiatry
Society. In 2011 Time magazine listed him as “one of the most influential
people in the world.” He is the author of the best-selling Phantoms in the
Brain (1998), as well as A Brief Tour of Human Consciousness: From
Impostor Poodles to Purple Numbers (2005), and The Tell-Tale Brain: A
Neuroscientist’s Quest for What Makes Us Human (2010).
Freddie Roach was born in 1960, in Dedham, Massachusetts. He began
training as a boxer at the age of six. By the time he turned professional in
1978, Roach had fought 150 amateur bouts. Training under the legendary
Eddie Futch, as a professional Roach compiled a record of 41 wins (17 by
knockout) and 13 losses. After retiring as a fighter in 1986, Roach
apprenticed as a trainer under Futch, then started his own career several
years later, opening in 1995 his Wild Card Boxing Club in Hollywood,
California, where he now trains his stable of fighters. As a trainer Roach
has worked with 28 world champion boxers including Manny Pacquiao,
Mike Tyson, Oscar De La Hoya, Amir Khan, Julio César Chávez Jr., James
Toney, and Virgil Hill. He is also the coach of UFC Welterweight Champion
Georges St. Pierre, and one of the top female boxers in the world, Lucia
Rijker. In 1990 Roach was diagnosed with Parkinson’s disease, but has been
able to largely control the effects of it through medication and his rigorous
training regimen. Among his numerous awards, he has been named Trainer
of Year by the Boxing Writers Association of America an unprecedented
five times, and was recently inducted into the International Boxing Hall of
Fame. Roach is the focus of the current HBO series On Freddie Roach,
directed by Peter Berg.
Cesar Rodriguez Jr. was born in 1959, in El Paso, Texas. After graduating
from the Citadel, the Military College of South Carolina, with a degree in
business administration, Rodriguez entered the Air Force Undergraduate
Pilot Training Program. Trained as a command fighter pilot on the F-15,
among other jets, he slowly rose through the ranks, becoming major in
1993, lieutenant colonel in 1997, and full colonel in 2002. He compiled
over 3,100 fighter flight hours, 350 of which were in combat operations. He
distinguished himself in aerial combat, as he is credited with downing three
enemy aircraft—two Iraqi MiG fighters during Operation Desert Storm
(1991) and a Yugoslavian Air Force MiG during the Yugoslav War (1999).
His three kills in active duty are the most of any American pilot since the
Vietnam War. Rodriguez commanded the 332nd Expeditionary Operations
Group during Operation Iraqi Freedom (2003). Rodriguez retired from the
air force in 2006. He is a graduate of the U.S. Air Force Air Command and
Staff College, and the U.S. Naval War College. Among his numerous
medals, he has been awarded three Distinguished Flying Crosses, the
Legion of Merit, and the Bronze Star. He is currently employed by
Raytheon as the director of International Programs and Growth for their Air
Warfare Systems Product line.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
First and foremost I would like to thank Anna Biller for all of her
invaluable contributions to this book—including her many insightful ideas,
her skillful editing, her help with the research, and her loving support
throughout the long writing process. Her work and assistance made this
book possible, and I am eternally grateful.
I would like to thank my agent, Michael Carlisle at Inkwell
Management, for deftly navigating this project past the occasional obstacles
that came up, and for all of his editorial and life advice. He is truly the
Master agent. Also at Inkwell, my thanks go to Lauren Smythe for all of her
help, and to Alexis Hurley for bringing the book to a worldwide audience.
I would like to thank Molly Stern for setting the whole project in
motion, and all of those at Viking who played such an important role in the
production of the book. That would include my editor Josh Kendall, who
helped and influenced the project on so many levels; Carolyn Carlson, who
took over the editorial reins and worked her magic; Maggie Payette, who
designed the cover; Daniel Lagin, who designed the layout; Noirin Lucas,
who ably shepherded the book through production; marketing director
Nancy Sheppard and publicity director Carolyn Coleburn, who both did
such a wonderful job in promoting the book; and last but not least Margaret
Riggs, who lent all of her logistical support. I must also thank Clare Ferraro
for her patience and her overall masterful direction of the project.
I would like to thank Ryan Holiday, author of Trust Me I’m Lying:
Confessions of a Media Manipulator (Penguin 2012), for his invaluable
assistance on the research and for helping find and coordinate interviews
with the various contemporary Masters.
Along the way, several people contributed with their advice and ideas.
First on the list would have to be 50 Cent. Our discussions back in 2007
planted the seed for this book. 50’s literary agent, Marc Gerald, played his
usual midwife role in the early stages. In this vein, I would also like to
thank Casper Alexander, Keith Ferrazzi, and Neil Strauss; Professor
William Ripple; Francisco Gimenez; my great friends Eliot Schain, Michiel
Schwarz, and Joost Elffers; and Katerina Kantola, whose memory will live
on forever. I would also like to thank my sister Leslie for all of her inspiring
ideas about animals and our Pleistocene ancestors.
I am, of course, eternally grateful to the contemporary Masters who
agreed to be interviewed for this book. I had made it a condition that all
interviews be conducted in person, with no real time limit, and that the
interview subjects had to be as candid as possible about their creative
process, their early struggles, and even failures along the way. All of the
people I interviewed were extremely generous with their time and gracious
in dealing with my often-irritating questions. They displayed the kind of
open spirit that I believe plays an essential role in mastery and success in
life.
In helping me to set up these interviews I must thank graduate student
Elizabeth Seckel, who works with Professor V.S. Ramachandran at UCSD;
Jessica Livingston, wife of Paul Graham and founding partner of Y
Combinator; Andrew Franklin, my extraordinary publisher at Profile Books
in the United Kingdom, who helped with the Daniel Everett interview;
David Gordon, former director of the Calatrava-enhanced Milwaukee Art
Museum, who helped set up the Santiago Calatrava interview; Mrs. Tina
Calatrava; Cheryl Miller, executive assistant to Temple Grandin; Stephanie
Smith, partner at Lehmann Maupin, who helped with the Teresita Fernández
interview; and agents Nick Khan and Evan Dick at CAA, who both
represent Freddie Roach.
I must also thank my mother, Laurette, for all of her patience and love,
and for being my biggest fan. And, of course, I cannot fail to mention
Brutus, the greatest cat who has ever lived and Master hunter.
Finally, I would like to thank all those in the past—masters, mentors,
and teachers—who over the years slowly opened my eyes to so many ideas,
and taught me how to think. Their presence and spirit are suffused
throughout this book.



Also by Robert Greene
Mastery
The 50th Law (with 50 Cent)
The 33 Strategies of War (a Joost Elffers Production)
The Art of Seduction (a Joost Elffers Production)
The 48 Laws of Power (a Joost Elffers Production)
VIKING
An imprint of Penguin Random House LLC
375 Hudson Street
New York, New York 10014
penguinrandomhouse.com
Copyright © 2018 by Robert Greene
Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes
free speech, and creates a vibrant culture. Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this
book and for complying with copyright laws by not reproducing, scanning, or distributing any
part of it in any form without permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin to
continue to publish books for every reader.
ISBN 9780525428145 (hardcover)
ISBN 9780698184541 (ebook)
ISBN 9780525561804 (international edition)
Version_1
To my mother
Contents
Also by Robert Greene
Title Page
Copyright
Dedication
Introduction
1   Master Your Emotional Self
The Law of Irrationality
The Inner Athena
Step One: Recognize the Biases
Step Two: Beware the Inflaming Factors
Step Three: Strategies Toward Bringing Out the Rational Self
2   Transform Self-love into Empathy
The Law of Narcissism
The Narcissistic Spectrum
Examples of Narcissistic Types
3   See Through People’s Masks
The Law of Role-playing
The Second Language
Observational Skills
Decoding Keys
The Art of Impression Management
4   Determine the Strength of People’s Character
The Law of Compulsive Behavior
The Pattern
Character Signs
Toxic Types
The Superior Character
5   Become an Elusive Object of Desire
The Law of Covetousness
The Object of Desire
Strategies for Stimulating Desire
The Supreme Desire
6   Elevate Your Perspective
The Law of Shortsightedness
Moments of Madness
Four Signs of Shortsightedness and Strategies to Overcome Them
The Farsighted Human
7   Soften People’s Resistance by Confirming Their Self-opinion
The Law of Defensiveness
The Influence Game
Five Strategies for Becoming a Master Persuader
The Flexible Mind—Self-strategies
8   Change Your Circumstances by Changing Your Attitude
The Law of Self-sabotage
The Ultimate Freedom
The Constricted (Negative) Attitude
The Expansive (Positive) Attitude
9   Confront Your Dark Side
The Law of Repression
The Dark Side
Deciphering the Shadow: Contradictory Behavior
The Integrated Human
10   Beware the Fragile Ego
The Law of Envy
Fatal Friends
Signs of Envy
Envier Types
Envy Triggers
Beyond Envy
11   Know Your Limits
The Law of Grandiosity
The Success Delusion
The Grandiose Leader
Practical Grandiosity
12   Reconnect to the Masculine or Feminine Within You
The Law of Gender Rigidity
The Authentic Gender
Gender Projection—Types
The Original Man/Woman
13   Advance with a Sense of Purpose
The Law of Aimlessness
The Voice
Strategies for Developing a High Sense of Purpose
The Lure of False Purposes
14   Resist the Downward Pull of the Group
The Law of Conformity
An Experiment in Human Nature
The Court and Its Courtiers
The Reality Group
15   Make Them Want to Follow You
The Law of Fickleness
The Entitlement Curse
Strategies for Establishing Authority
The Inner Authority
16   See the Hostility Behind the Friendly Façade
The Law of Aggression
The Sophisticated Aggressor
The Source of Human Aggression
Passive Aggression—Its Strategies and How to Counter Them
Controlled Aggression
17   Seize the Historical Moment
The Law of Generational Myopia
The Rising Tide
The Generational Phenomenon
Generational Patterns
Strategies for Exploiting the Spirit of the Times
The Human Beyond Time and Death
18   Meditate on Our Common Mortality
The Law of Death Denial
The Bullet in the Side
A Philosophy of Life Through Death
Acknowledgments
Selected Bibliography
Index
About the Author
T
Introduction
If you come across any special trait of meanness or stupidity . . .
you must be careful not to let it annoy or distress you, but to look
upon it merely as an addition to your knowledge—a new fact to
be considered in studying the character of humanity. Your
attitude towards it will be that of the mineralogist who stumbles
upon a very characteristic specimen of a mineral.
—Arthur Schopenhauer
hroughout the course of our lives, we inevitably have to deal with a
variety of individuals who stir up trouble and make our lives
difficult and unpleasant. Some of these individuals are leaders or
bosses, some are colleagues, and some are friends. They can be
aggressive or passive-aggressive, but they are generally masters at
playing on our emotions. They often appear charming and refreshingly
confident, brimming with ideas and enthusiasm, and we fall under
their spell. Only when it is too late do we discover that their confidence
is irrational and their ideas ill-conceived. Among colleagues, they can
be those who sabotage our work or careers out of secret envy, excited
to bring us down. Or they could be colleagues or hires who reveal, to
our dismay, that they are completely out for themselves, using us as
stepping-stones.
What inevitably happens in these situations is that we are caught
off guard, not expecting such behavior. Often these types will hit us
with elaborate cover stories to justify their actions, or blame handy
scapegoats. They know how to confuse us and draw us into a drama
they control. We might protest or become angry, but in the end we feel
rather helpless—the damage is done. Then another such type enters
our life, and the same story repeats itself.
We often notice a similar sensation of confusion and helplessness
when it comes to ourselves and our own behavior. For instance, we
suddenly say something that offends our boss or colleague or friend—
we are not quite sure where it came from, but we are frustrated to find
that some anger and tension from within has leaked out in a way that
we regret. Or perhaps we enthusiastically throw our weight into some
project or scheme, only to realize it was quite foolish and a terrible
waste of time. Or perhaps we fall in love with a person who is precisely
the wrong type for us and we know it, but we cannot help ourselves.
What has come over us, we wonder?
In these situations, we catch ourselves falling into self-destructive
patterns of behavior that we cannot seem to control. It is as if we
harbor a stranger within us, a little demon who operates
independently of our willpower and pushes us into doing the wrong
things. And this stranger within us is rather weird, or at least weirder
than how we imagine ourselves.
What we can say about these two things—people’s ugly actions and
our own occasionally surprising behavior—is that we usually have no
clue as to what causes them. We might latch onto some simple
explanations: “That person is evil, a sociopath” or “Something came
over me; I wasn’t myself.” But such pat descriptions do not lead to any
understanding or prevent the same patterns from recurring. The truth
is that we humans live on the surface, reacting emotionally to what
people say and do. We form opinions of others and ourselves that are
rather simplified. We settle for the easiest and most convenient story
to tell ourselves.
What if, however, we could dive below the surface and see deep
within, getting closer to the actual roots of what causes human
behavior? What if we could understand why some people turn envious
and try to sabotage our work, or why their misplaced confidence
causes them to imagine themselves as godlike and infallible? What if
we could truly fathom why people suddenly behave irrationally and
reveal a much darker side to their character, or why they are always
ready to provide a rationalization for their behavior, or why we
continually turn to leaders who appeal to the worst in us? What if we
could look deep inside and judge people’s character, avoiding the bad
hires and personal relationships that cause us so much emotional
damage?
If we really understood the roots of human behavior, it would be
much harder for the more destructive types to continually get away
with their actions. We would not be so easily charmed and misled. We
would be able to anticipate their nasty and manipulative maneuvers
and see through their cover stories. We would not allow ourselves to
get dragged into their dramas, knowing in advance that our interest is
what they depend on for their control. We would finally rob them of
their power through our ability to look into the depths of their
character.
Similarly, with ourselves, what if we could look within and see the
source of our more troubling emotions and why they drive our
behavior, often against our own wishes? What if we could understand
why we are so compelled to desire what other people have, or to
identify so strongly with a group that we feel contempt for those who
are on the outside? What if we could find out what causes us to lie
about who we are, or to inadvertently push people away?
Being able to understand more clearly that stranger within us
would help us to realize that it is not a stranger at all but very much a
part of ourselves, and that we are far more mysterious, complex, and
interesting than we had imagined. And with that awareness we would
be able to break the negative patterns in our lives, stop making excuses
for ourselves, and gain better control of what we do and what happens
to us.
Having such clarity about ourselves and others could change the
course of our lives in so many ways, but first we must clear up a
common misconception: we tend to think of our behavior as largely
conscious and willed. To imagine that we are not always in control of
what we do is a frightening thought, but in fact it is the reality. We are
subject to forces from deep within us that drive our behavior and that
operate below the level of our awareness. We see the results—our
thoughts, moods, and actions—but have little conscious access to what
actually moves our emotions and compels us to behave in certain
ways.
Look at our anger, for instance. We usually identify an individual or
a group as the cause of this emotion. But if we were honest and dug
down deeper, we would see that what often triggers our anger or
frustration has deeper roots. It could be something in our childhood or
some particular set of circumstances that triggers the emotion. We can
discern distinct patterns if we look—when this or that happens, we get
angry. But in the moment that we feel anger, we are not reflective or
rational—we merely ride the emotion and point fingers. We could say
something similar about a whole slew of emotions that we feel—
specific types of events trigger sudden confidence, or insecurity, or
anxiety, or attraction to a particular person, or hunger for attention.
Let us call the collection of these forces that push and pull at us
from deep within human nature. Human nature stems from the
particular wiring of our brains, the configuration of our nervous
system, and the way we humans process emotions, all of which
developed and emerged over the course of the five million years or so
of our evolution as a species. We can ascribe many of the details of our
nature to the distinct way we evolved as a social animal to ensure our
survival—learning to cooperate with others, coordinating our actions
with the group on a high level, creating novel forms of communication
and ways of maintaining group discipline. This early development
lives on within us and continues to determine our behavior, even in
the modern, sophisticated world we live in.
To take one example, look at the evolution of human emotion. The
survival of our earliest ancestors depended on their ability to
communicate with one another well before the invention of language.
They evolved new and complex emotions—joy, shame, gratitude,
jealousy, resentment, et cetera. The signs of these emotions could be
read immediately on their faces, communicating their moods quickly
and effectively. They became extremely permeable to the emotions of
others as a way to bind the group more tightly together—to feel joy or
grief as one—or to remain united in the face of danger.
To this day, we humans remain highly susceptible to the moods and
emotions of those around us, compelling all kinds of behavior on our
part—unconsciously imitating others, wanting what they have, getting
swept up in viral feelings of anger or outrage. We imagine we’re acting
of our own free will, unaware of how deeply our susceptibility to the
emotions of others in the group is affecting what we do and how we
respond.
We can point to other such forces that emerged from this deep past
and that similarly mold our everyday behavior—for instance, our need
to continually rank ourselves and measure our self-worth through our
status is a trait that is noticeable among all hunter-gatherer cultures,
and even among chimpanzees, as are our tribal instincts, which cause
us to divide people into insiders or outsiders. We can add to these
primitive qualities our need to wear masks to disguise any behavior
that is frowned upon by the tribe, leading to the formation of a shadow
personality from all the dark desires we have repressed. Our ancestors
understood this shadow and its dangerousness, imagining it
originated from spirits and demons that needed to be exorcised. We
rely on a different myth—“something came over me.”
Once this primal current or force within us reaches the level of
consciousness, we have to react to it, and we do so depending on our
individual spirit and circumstances, usually explaining it away
superficially without really understanding it. Because of the precise
way in which we evolved, there are a limited number of these forces of
human nature, and they lead to the behavior mentioned above—envy,
grandiosity, irrationality, shortsightedness, conformity, aggression,
and passive aggression, to name a few. They also lead to empathy and
other positive forms of human behavior.
For thousands of years, it has been our fate to largely grope in the
shadows when it comes to understanding ourselves and our own
nature. We have labored under so many illusions about the human
animal—imagining we descended magically from a divine source, from
angels instead of primates. We have found any signs of our primitive
nature and our animal roots deeply distressing, something to deny and
repress. We have covered up our darker impulses with all kinds of
excuses and rationalizations, making it easier for some people to get
away with the most unpleasant behavior. But finally we’re at a point
where we can overcome our resistance to the truth about who we are
through the sheer weight of knowledge we have now accumulated
about human nature.
We can exploit the vast literature in psychology amassed over the
last one hundred years, including detailed studies of childhood and the
impact of our early development (Melanie Klein, John Bowlby, Donald
Winnicott), as well as works on the roots of narcissism (Heinz Kohut),
the shadow sides of our personality (Carl Jung), the roots of our
empathy (Simon Baron-Cohen), and the configuration of our emotions
(Paul Ekman). We can now cull the many advances in the sciences that
can aid us in our self-understanding—studies of the brain (Antonio
Damasio, Joseph E. LeDoux), of our unique biological makeup
(Edward O. Wilson), of the relationship between the body and the
mind (V. S. Ramachandran), of primates (Frans de Waal) and hunter-
gatherers (Jared Diamond), of our economic behavior (Daniel
Kahneman), and of how we operate in groups (Wilfred Bion, Elliot
Aronson).
We can also include in this the works of certain philosophers
(Arthur Schopenhauer, Friedrich Nietzsche, José Ortega y Gasset) who
have illuminated so many aspects of human nature, as well as the
insights of many novelists (George Eliot, Henry James, Ralph Ellison),
who are often the most sensitive to the unseen parts of our behavior.
And finally, we can include the rapidly expanding library of
biographies now available, revealing human nature in depth and in
action.
This book is an attempt to gather together this immense storehouse
of knowledge and ideas from different branches (see the bibliography
for the key sources), to piece together an accurate and instructive
guide to human nature, basing itself on the evidence, not on particular
viewpoints or moral judgments. It is a brutally realistic appraisal of
our species, dissecting who we are so we can operate with more
awareness.
Consider The Laws of Human Nature a kind of codebook for
deciphering people’s behavior—ordinary, strange, destructive, the full
gamut. Each chapter deals with a particular aspect or law of human
nature. We can call them laws in that under the influence of these
elemental forces, we humans tend to react in relatively predictable
ways. Each chapter has the story of some iconic individual or
individuals who illustrate the law (negatively or positively), along with
ideas and strategies on how to deal with yourself and others under the
influence of this law. Each chapter ends with a section on how to
transform this basic human force into something more positive and
productive, so that we are no longer passive slaves to human nature
but actively transforming it.
You might be tempted to imagine that this knowledge is a bit old-
fashioned. After all, you might argue, we are now so sophisticated and
technologically advanced, so progressive and enlightened; we have
moved well beyond our primitive roots; we are in the process of
rewriting our nature. But the truth is in fact the opposite—we have
never been more in the thrall of human nature and its destructive
potential than now. And by ignoring this fact, we are playing with fire.
Look at how the permeability of our emotions has only been
heightened through social media, where viral effects are continually
sweeping through us and where the most manipulative leaders are
able to exploit and control us. Look at the aggression that is now
openly displayed in the virtual world, where it is so much easier to play
out our shadow sides without repercussions. Notice how our
propensities to compare ourselves with others, to feel envy, and to
seek status through attention have only become intensified with our
ability to communicate so quickly with so many people. And finally,
look at our tribal tendencies and how they have now found the perfect
medium to operate in—we can find a group to identify with, reinforce
our tribal opinions in a virtual echo chamber, and demonize any
outsiders, leading to mob intimidation. The potential for mayhem
stemming from the primitive side of our nature has only increased.
It is simple: Human nature is stronger than any individual, than
any institution or technological invention. It ends up shaping what we
create to reflect itself and its primitive roots. It moves us around like
pawns.
Ignore the laws at your own peril. Refusing to come to terms with
human nature simply means that you are dooming yourself to patterns
beyond your control and to feelings of confusion and helplessness.
—
The Laws of Human Nature is designed to immerse you in all aspects
of human behavior and illuminate its root causes. If you let it guide
you, it will radically alter how you perceive people and your entire
approach to dealing with them. It will also radically change how you
see yourself. It will accomplish these shifts in perspective in the
following ways:
First, the Laws will work to transform you into a calmer and more
strategic observer of people, helping to free you from all the
emotional drama that needlessly drains you.
Being around people stirs up our anxieties and insecurities as to
how others perceive us. Once we feel such emotions, it becomes very
hard to observe people as we are drawn into our own feelings,
evaluating what people say and do in personal terms—do they like me
or dislike me? The Laws will help you avoid falling into this trap by
revealing that people are generally dealing with emotions and issues
that have deep roots. They’re experiencing some desires and
disappointments that predate you by years and decades. You cross
their path at a particular moment and become the convenient target of
their anger or frustration. They’re projecting onto you certain qualities
they want to see. In most cases, they’re not relating to you as an
individual.
This should not upset you but liberate you. The book will teach you
to stop taking personally their insinuating comments, shows of
coldness, or moments of irritation. The more you grasp this, the easier
it will be to react not with your emotions but rather with the desire to
understand where their behavior might come from. You will feel much
calmer in the process. And as this takes root in you, you will be less
prone to moralize and judge people; instead you will accept them and
their flaws as part of human nature. People will like you all the more
as they sense this tolerant attitude in you.
Second, the Laws will make you a master interpreter of the cues
that people continually emit, giving you a much greater ability to
judge their character.
Normally, if we pay attention to people’s behavior, we are in a rush
to fit their actions into categories and to hurry to conclusions, so we
settle for the judgment that suits our own preconceptions. Or we
accept their self-serving explanations. The Laws will rid you of this
habit by making it clear how easy it is to misread people and how
deceptive first impressions can be. You will slow yourself down,
mistrust your initial judgment, and instead train yourself to analyze
what you see.
You will think in terms of opposites—when people overtly display
some trait, such as confidence or hypermasculinity, they are most
often concealing the contrary reality. You will realize that people are
continually playing to the public, making a show of being progressive
and saintly only to better disguise their shadow. You will see the signs
of this shadow leaking out in everyday life. If people take an action
that seems out of character, you will take note: what often appears out
of character is actually more of their true character. If people are
essentially lazy or foolish, they leave clues to this in the smallest of
details that you can pick up well before their behavior harms you. The
ability to gauge people’s true worth, their degree of loyalty and
conscientiousness, is one of the most important skills you can possess,
helping you avoid the bad hires, partnerships, and relationships that
can make your life miserable.
Third, the Laws will empower you to take on and outthink the
toxic types who inevitably cross your path and who tend to cause
long-term emotional damage.
Aggressive, envious, and manipulative people don’t usually
announce themselves as such. They have learned to appear charming
in initial encounters, to use flattery and other means of disarming us.
When they surprise us with their ugly behavior, we feel betrayed,
angry, and helpless. They create constant pressure, knowing that in
doing so they overwhelm our minds with their presence, making it
doubly hard to think straight or strategize.
The Laws will teach you how to identify these types in advance,
which is your greatest defense against them. Either you will steer clear
of them or, foreseeing their manipulative actions, you will not be
blindsided and thus will be better able to maintain your emotional
balance. You will learn to mentally cut them down to size and focus on
the glaring weaknesses and insecurities behind all of their bluster. You
will not fall for their myth, and this will neutralize the intimidation
they depend on. You will scoff at their cover stories and elaborate
explanations for their selfish behavior. Your ability to stay calm will
infuriate them and often push them into overreaching or making a
mistake.
Instead of being weighed down by these encounters, you might
even come to appreciate them as a chance to hone your skills of self-
mastery and toughen yourself up. Outsmarting just one of these types
will give you a great deal of confidence that you can handle the worst
in human nature.
Fourth, the Laws will teach you the true levers for motivating and
influencing people, making your path in life that much easier.
Normally, when we meet resistance to our ideas or plans, we cannot
help trying to directly change people’s minds by arguing, lecturing, or
cajoling them, all of which makes them more defensive. The Laws will
teach you that people are naturally stubborn and resistant to
influence. You must begin any attempt by lowering their resistance
and never inadvertently feeding their defensive tendencies. You will
train yourself to discern their insecurities and never inadvertently stir
them up. You will think in terms of their self-interest and the self-
opinion they need validated.
Understanding the permeability of emotions, you will learn that the
most effective means of influence is to alter your moods and attitude.
People are responding to your energy and demeanor even more than
to your words. You will get rid of any defensiveness on your part.
Instead, feeling relaxed and genuinely interested in the other person
will have a positive and hypnotic effect. You will learn that as a leader
your best means of moving people in your direction lies in setting the
right tone through your attitude, empathy, and work ethic.
Fifth, the Laws will make you realize how deeply the forces of
human nature operate within you, giving you the power to alter your
own negative patterns.
Our natural response to reading or hearing about the darker
qualities in human nature is to exclude ourselves. It is always the other
person who is narcissistic, irrational, envious, grandiose, aggressive,
or passive-aggressive. We almost always see ourselves as having the
best intentions. If we go astray, it is the fault of circumstances or
people forcing us to react negatively. The Laws will make you stop
once and for all this self-deluding process. We are all cut from the
same cloth, and we all share the same tendencies. The sooner you
realize this, the greater your power will be in overcoming these
potential negative traits within you. You will examine your own
motives, look at your own shadow, and become aware of your own
passive-aggressive tendencies. This will make it that much easier to
spot such traits in others.
You will also become humbler, realizing you’re not superior to
others in the way you had imagined. This will not make you feel guilty
or weighed down by your self-awareness, but quite the opposite. You
will accept yourself as a complete individual, embracing both the good
and the bad, dropping your falsified self-image as a saint. You will feel
relieved of your hypocrisies and free to be more yourself. People will
be drawn to this quality in you.
Sixth, the Laws will transform you into a more empathetic
individual, creating deeper and more satisfying bonds with the
people around you.
We humans are born with a tremendous potential for
understanding people on a level that is not merely intellectual. It is a
power developed by our earliest ancestors, in which they learned how
to intuit the moods and feelings of others by placing themselves in
their perspective.
The Laws will instruct you in how to bring out this latent power to
the highest degree possible. You will learn to slowly cut off your
incessant interior monologue and listen more closely. You will train
yourself to assume the other’s viewpoint as best you can. You will use
your imagination and experiences to help you feel how they might feel.
If they are describing something painful, you have your own painful
moments to draw upon as analogues. You will not be simply intuitive,
but rather you will analyze the information you glean in this empathic
fashion, gaining insights. You will continually cycle between empathy
and analysis, always updating what you observe and increasing your
ability to see the world through their eyes. You will notice a physical
sensation of connection between you and the other that will emerge
from this practice.
You will need a degree of humility in this process. You can never
know exactly what people are thinking and can easily make mistakes,
and so you must not rush to judgments but keep yourself open to
learning more. People are more complex than you imagine. Your goal
is to simply see their point of view better. As you go through this
process, it becomes like a muscle that gets stronger the more you
exercise it.
Cultivating such empathy will have innumerable benefits. We are
all self-absorbed, locked in our own worlds. It is a therapeutic and
liberating experience to be drawn outside ourselves and into the world
of another. It is what attracts us to film and any form of fiction,
entering the minds and perspectives of people so different from
ourselves. Through this practice your whole way of thinking will shift.
You are training yourself to let go of preconceptions, to be alive in the
moment, and to continually adapt your ideas about people. You will
find such fluidity affecting how you attack problems in general—you
will find yourself entertaining other possibilities, taking alternative
perspectives. This is the essence of creative thinking.
Finally, the Laws will alter how you see your own potential,
making you aware of a higher, ideal self within you that you will
want to bring out.
We can say that we humans have two contrary selves within us—a
lower and a higher. The lower tends to be stronger. Its impulses pull us
down into emotional reactions and defensive postures, making us feel
self-righteous and superior to others. It makes us grab for immediate
pleasures and distractions, always taking the path of least resistance.
It induces us to adopt what other people are thinking, losing ourselves
in the group.
We feel the impulses of the higher self when we are drawn out of
ourselves, wanting to connect more deeply with others, to absorb our
minds in our work, to think instead of react, to follow our own path in
life, and to discover what makes us unique. The lower is the more
animal and reactive side of our nature, and one that we easily slip into.
The higher is the more truly human side of our nature, the side that
makes us thoughtful and self-aware. Because the higher impulse is
weaker, connecting to it requires effort and insight.
Bringing out this ideal self within us is what we all really want,
because it is only in developing this side of ourselves that we humans
feel truly fulfilled. The book will help you accomplish this by making
you aware of the potentially positive and active elements contained
within each law.
Knowing our propensity for irrationality, you will learn to become
aware of how your emotions color your thinking (chapter 1), giving you
the ability to subtract them and become truly rational. Knowing how
our attitude in life effects what happens to us, and how naturally our
minds tend to close up out of fear (chapter 8), you will learn how to
forge an attitude that is expansive and fearless. Knowing you have the
propensity to compare yourself with others (chapter 10), you will use
this as a spur to excel in society through your superior work, to admire
those who achieve great things, and to be inspired by their example to
emulate them. You will work this magic on each of the primal
qualities, using your expanded knowledge of human nature to resist
the strong downward pull of your lower nature.
Think of the book in the following way: you are about to become an
apprentice in human nature. You will be developing some skills—how
to observe and measure the character of your fellow humans and see
into your own depths. You will work on bringing out your higher self.
And through practice you will emerge a master of the art, able to
thwart the worst that other people can throw at you and to mold
yourself into a more rational, self-aware, and productive individual.
Man will only become better when you make him see what he is
like.
—Anton Chekhov
Y
1
Master Your Emotional Self
The Law of Irrationality
ou like to imagine yourself in control of your fate, consciously
planning the course of your life as best you can. But you are
largely unaware of how deeply your emotions dominate you. They
make you veer toward ideas that soothe your ego. They make you
look for evidence that confirms what you already want to believe.
They make you see what you want to see, depending on your mood,
and this disconnect from reality is the source of the bad decisions and
negative patterns that haunt your life. Rationality is the ability to
counteract these emotional effects, to think instead of react, to open
your mind to what is really happening, as opposed to what you are
feeling. It does not come naturally; it is a power we must cultivate,
but in doing so we realize our greatest potential.
The Inner Athena
One day toward the end of the year 432 BC, the citizens of Athens
received some very disturbing news: representatives from the city-
state of Sparta had arrived in town and presented to the Athenian
governing council new terms of peace. If Athens did not agree to these
terms, then Sparta would declare war. Sparta was Athens’s archenemy
and in many ways its polar opposite. Athens led a league of democratic
states in the region, while Sparta led a confederation of oligarchies,
known as the Peloponnesians. Athens depended on its navy and on its
wealth—it was the preeminent commercial power in the
Mediterranean. Sparta depended on its army. It was a total military
state. Up until then, the two powers had largely avoided a direct war
because the consequences could be devastating—not only could the
defeated side lose its influence in the region, but its whole way of life
could be put in jeopardy—certainly for Athens its democracy and its
wealth. Now, however, war seemed inevitable and a sense of
impending doom quickly settled on the city.
A few days later, the Athenian Assembly met on the Pnyx Hill
overlooking the Acropolis to debate the Spartan ultimatum and decide
what to do. The Assembly was open to all male citizens, and on that
day close to ten thousand of them crowded on the hill to participate in
the debate. The hawks among them were in a state of great agitation—
Athens should seize the initiative and attack Sparta first, they said.
Others reminded them that in a land battle the Spartan forces were
nearly unbeatable. Attacking Sparta in this way would play straight
into their hands. The doves were all in favor of accepting the peace
terms, but as many pointed out, that would only show fear and
embolden the Spartans. It would only give them more time to enlarge
their army. Back and forth went the debate, with emotions getting
heated, people shouting, and no satisfactory solution in sight.
Then toward the end of the afternoon, the crowd suddenly grew
quiet as a familiar figure stepped forward to address the Assembly.
This was Pericles, the elder statesman of Athenian politics, now over
sixty years old. Pericles was beloved, and his opinion would matter
more than anyone’s, but despite the Athenians’ respect for him, they
found him a very peculiar leader—more of a philosopher than a
politician. To those old enough to remember the start of his career, it
was truly surprising how powerful and successful he had become. He
did nothing the usual way.
In the earliest years of their democracy, before Pericles had
appeared on the scene, the Athenians had preferred a certain
personality type in their leaders—men who could give an inspiring,
persuasive speech and had a flair for drama. On the battlefield these
men were risk takers; they often pushed for military campaigns that
they could lead, giving them a chance to gain glory and attention. They
advanced their careers by representing some faction in the Assembly—
landowners, soldiers, aristocrats—and doing everything they could to
further its interests. This led to highly divisive politics. Leaders would
rise and fall in cycles of a few years, but the Athenians were fine with
this; they mistrusted anyone who lasted long in power.
Then Pericles entered public life around 463 BC, and Athenian
politics would never be the same. His first move was the most unusual
of all. Although he came from an illustrious aristocratic family, he
allied himself with the growing lower and middle classes of the city—
farmers, oarsmen in the navy, the craftsmen who were the pride of
Athens. He worked to increase their voice in the Assembly and give
them greater power in the democracy. This was not some small faction
he now led but the majority of Athenian citizens. It would seem
impossible to control such a large, unruly mob of men, with their
varied interests, but he was so fervent in increasing their power that he
slowly gained their trust and backing.
As his influence grew, he started to assert himself in the Assembly
and alter its policies. He argued against expanding Athens’s
democratic empire. He feared the Athenians would overreach and lose
control. He worked to consolidate the empire and strengthen existing
alliances. When it came to war and to serving as a general, he strove to
limit campaigns and to win through maneuvers, with minimal loss of
lives. To many this seemed unheroic, but as these policies took effect,
the city entered a period of unprecedented prosperity. There were no
more needless wars to drain the coffers, and the empire was
functioning more smoothly than ever.
What Pericles did with the growing surplus of money startled and
amazed the citizenry: instead of using it to buy political favors, he
initiated a massive public building project in Athens. He
commissioned temples, theaters, and concert halls, putting all of the
Athenian craftsmen to work. Everywhere one looked, the city was
becoming more sublimely beautiful. He favored a form of architecture
that reflected his personal aesthetics—ordered, highly geometric,
monumental yet soothing to the eye. His greatest commission was that
of the Parthenon, with its enormous forty-foot statue of Athena.
Athena was the guiding spirit of Athens, the goddess of wisdom and
practical intelligence. She represented all of the values Pericles wanted
to promote. Singlehandedly Pericles had transformed the look and
spirit of Athens, and it entered a golden age in all of the arts and
sciences.
What was perhaps the strangest quality of Pericles was his speaking
style—restrained and dignified. He did not go in for the usual flights of
rhetoric. Instead, he worked to convince an audience through airtight
arguments. This would make people listen closely, as they followed the
interesting course of his logic. The style was compelling and calming.
Unlike any of the other leaders, Pericles remained in power year
after year, decade after decade, putting his total stamp on the city in
his quiet, unobtrusive way. He had his enemies. This was inevitable.
He had stayed in power so long that many accused him of being a
secret dictator. He was suspected of being an atheist, a man who
scoffed at all traditions. That would explain why he was so peculiar.
But nobody could argue against the results of his leadership.
And so now, as he began to address the Assembly that afternoon,
his opinion on war with Sparta would carry the most weight, and a
hush came over the crowd as they anxiously waited to hear his
argument.
“Athenians,” he began, “my views are the same as ever: I am against
making any concessions to the Peloponnesians, even though I am
aware that the enthusiastic state of mind in which people are
persuaded to enter upon a war is not retained when it comes to action,
and that people’s minds are altered by the course of events.”
Differences between Athens and Sparta were supposed to be settled
through neutral arbitrators, he reminded them. It would set a
dangerous precedent if they gave in to the Spartans’ unilateral
demands. Where would it end? Yes, a direct land battle with Sparta
would be suicide. What he proposed instead was a completely novel
form of warfare—limited and defensive.
He would bring within the walls of Athens all those living in the
area. Let the Spartans come and try to lure us into fighting, he said; let
them lay waste to our lands. We will not take the bait; we will not fight
them on land. With our access to the sea we will keep the city supplied.
We will use our navy to raid their coastal towns. As time goes on, they
will grow frustrated by the lack of battle. Having to feed and supply
their standing army, they will run out of money. Their allies will bicker
among themselves. The war party within Sparta will be discredited
and a real lasting peace will be agreed upon, all with minimal
expenditure of lives and money on our part.
“I could give you many other reasons,” he concluded, “why you
should feel confident in ultimate victory, if only you will make up your
minds not to add to the empire while the war is in progress, and not to
go out of your way to involve yourselves in new perils. What I fear is
not the enemy’s strategy but our own mistakes.” The novelty of what
he was proposing aroused great debate. Neither hawks nor doves were
satisfied with his plan, but in the end, his reputation for wisdom
carried the day and his strategy was approved. Several months later
the fateful war began.
In the beginning, all did not proceed as Pericles had envisioned.
The Spartans and their allies did not grow frustrated as the war
dragged on, but only bolder. The Athenians were the ones to become
discouraged, seeing their lands destroyed without retaliation. But
Pericles believed his plan could not fail as long as the Athenians
remained patient. Then, in the second year of the war, an unexpected
disaster upended everything: a powerful plague entered the city; with
so many people packed within the walls it spread quickly, killing over
one third of the citizenry and decimating the ranks of the army.
Pericles himself caught the disease, and as he lay dying he witnessed
the ultimate nightmare: all that he had done for Athens over so many
decades seemed to unravel at once, the people descending into group
delirium until it was every man for himself. If he had survived, he
almost certainly would have found a way to calm the Athenians down
and broker an acceptable peace with Sparta, or adjust his defensive
strategy, but now it was too late.
Strangely enough, the Athenians did not mourn for their leader.
They blamed him for the plague and railed at the ineffectiveness of his
strategy. They were not in a mood anymore for patience or restraint.
He had outlived his time, and his ideas were now seen as the tired
reactions of an old man. Their love of Pericles had turned to hate. With
him no longer there, the factions returned with a vengeance. The war
party became popular. The party fed off the people’s growing
bitterness toward the Spartans, who had used the plague to advance
their positions. The hawks promised they would regain the initiative
and crush the Spartans with an offensive strategy. For many
Athenians, such words came as a great relief, a release of pent-up
emotions.
As the city slowly recovered from the plague, the Athenians
managed to gain the upper hand, and the Spartans sued for peace.
Wanting to completely defeat their enemy, the Athenians pressed their
advantage, only to find the Spartans recover and turn the tables. Back
and forth it went, year after year. The violence and bitterness on both
sides increased. At one point Athens attacked the island of Melos, a
Spartan ally, and when the Melians surrendered, the Athenians voted
to kill all of their men and sell the women and children into slavery.
Nothing remotely like this had ever happened under Pericles.
Then, after so many years of a war without end, in 415 BC several
Athenian leaders had an interesting idea about how to deliver the fatal
blow. The city-state of Syracuse was the rising power on the island of
Sicily. Syracuse was a critical ally of the Spartans, supplying them with
much-needed resources. If the Athenians, with their great navy, could
launch an expedition and take control of Syracuse, they would gain
two advantages: it would add to their empire, and it would deprive
Sparta of the resources it needed to continue the war. The Assembly
voted to send sixty ships with an appropriate-sized army on board to
accomplish this goal.
One of the commanders assigned to this expedition, Nicias, had
great doubts as to the wisdom of this plan. He feared the Athenians
were underestimating the strength of Syracuse. He laid out all of the
possible negative scenarios; only a much larger expedition could
ensure victory. He wanted to squelch the plan, but his argument had
the opposite effect. If a larger expedition was necessary, then that was
what they would send—one hundred ships and double the number of
soldiers. The Athenians smelled victory in this strategy and nothing
would deter them.
In the ensuing days, Athenians of all ages could be seen in the
streets drawing maps of Sicily, dreaming of the riches that would pour
into Athens and the final humiliation of the Spartans. The day of the
launching of the ships turned into a great holiday and the most awe-
inspiring spectacle they had ever seen—an enormous armada filling
the harbor as far as the eye could see, the ships beautifully decorated,
the soldiers, glistening in their armor, crowding the decks. It was a
dazzling display of the wealth and power of Athens.
As the months went by, the Athenians desperately sought news of
the expedition. At one point, through the sheer size of the force, it
seemed that Athens had gained the advantage and had laid siege to
Syracuse. But at the last moment, reinforcements arrived from Sparta,
and now the Athenians were on the defensive. Nicias sent off a letter to
the Assembly describing this negative turn of events. He
recommended either giving up and returning to Athens, or the sending
of reinforcements right away. Unwilling to believe in the possibility of
defeat, the Athenians voted to send reinforcements—a second armada
of ships almost as large as the first. In the months after this, the
Athenians’ anxiety reached new heights—for now the stakes had been
doubled and Athens could not afford to lose.
One day a barber in Athens’s port town of Piraeus heard a rumor
from a customer that the Athenian expedition, every ship and almost
every man, had been wiped out in battle. The rumor quickly spread to
Athens. It was hard to believe, but slowly panic set in. A week later the
rumor was confirmed and Athens seemed doomed, drained of money,
ships, and men.
Miraculously, the Athenians managed to hold on. But over the next
few years, severely imbalanced by the losses in Sicily, they staggered
from one reeling blow to another, until finally in 405 BC Athens
suffered its final loss and was forced to agree to the harsh terms of
peace imposed by Sparta. Their years of glory, their great democratic
empire, the Periclean golden age were now and forever over. The man
who had curbed their most dangerous emotions—aggression, greed,
hubris, selfishness—had been gone from the scene for too long, his
wisdom long forgotten.
•   •   •
Interpretation: As Pericles surveyed the political scene early in his
career, he noticed the following phenomenon: Every Athenian political
figure believed he was rational, had realistic goals, and plans on how
to get there. They all worked hard for their political factions and tried
to increase their power. They led Athenian armies into battle and often
came out ahead. They strove to expand the empire and bring in more
money. And when their political maneuvering suddenly backfired, or
the wars turned out badly, they had excellent reasons for why this had
happened. They could always blame the opposition or, if need be, the
gods. And yet, if all these men were so rational, why did their policies
add up to so much chaos and self-destructiveness? Why was Athens
such a mess and the democracy itself so fragile? Why was there so
much corruption and turbulence? The answer was simple: his fellow
Athenians were not rational at all, merely selfish and shrewd. What
guided their decisions was their base emotions—hunger for power,
attention, and money. And for those purposes they could be very
tactical and clever, but none of their maneuvers led to anything that
lasted or served the overall interests of the democracy.
What consumed Pericles as a thinker and a public figure was how to
get out of this trap, how to be truly rational in an arena dominated by
emotions. The solution he came up with is unique in history and
devastatingly powerful in its results. It should serve as our ideal. In his
conception, the human mind has to worship something, has to have its
attention directed to something it values above all else. For most
people, it is their ego; for some it is their family, their clan, their god,
or their nation. For Pericles it would be nous, the ancient Greek word
for “mind” or “intelligence.” Nous is a force that permeates the
universe, creating meaning and order. The human mind is naturally
attracted to this order; this is the source of our intelligence. For
Pericles, the nous that he worshipped was embodied in the figure of
the goddess Athena.
Athena was literally born from the head of Zeus, her name itself
reflecting this—a combination of “god” (theos) and “mind” (nous). But
Athena came to represent a very particular form of nous—eminently
practical, feminine, and earthy. She is the voice that comes to heroes
in times of need, instilling in them a calm spirit, orienting their minds
toward the perfect idea for victory and success, then giving them the
energy to achieve this. To be visited by Athena was the highest blessing
of them all, and it was her spirit that guided great generals and the
best artists, inventors, and tradesmen. Under her influence, a man or
woman could see the world with perfect clarity and hit upon the action
that was just right for the moment. For Athens, her spirit was invoked
to unify the city, make it prosperous and productive. In essence,
Athena stood for rationality, the greatest gift of the gods to mortals, for
it alone could make a human act with divine wisdom.
To cultivate his inner Athena, Pericles first had to find a way to
master his emotions. Emotions turn us inward, away from nous, away
from reality. We dwell on our anger or our insecurities. If we look out
at the world and try to solve problems, we see things through the lens
of these emotions; they cloud our vision. Pericles trained himself to
never react in the moment, to never make a decision while under the
influence of a strong emotion. Instead, he analyzed his feelings.
Usually when he looked closely at his insecurities or his anger, he saw
that they were not really justified, and they lost their significance
under scrutiny. Sometimes he had to physically get away from the
heated Assembly and retire to his house, where he remained alone for
days on end, calming himself down. Slowly, the voice of Athena would
come to him.
He decided to base all of his political decisions on one thing—what
actually served the greater good of Athens. His goal was to unify the
citizenry through genuine love of democracy and belief in the
superiority of the Athenian way. Having such a standard helped him
avoid the ego trap. It impelled him to work to increase the
participation and power of the lower and middle classes, even though
such a strategy could easily turn against him. It inspired him to limit
wars, even though this meant less personal glory for him. And finally it
led to his greatest decision of all—the public works project that
transformed Athens.
To help himself in this deliberative process, he opened his mind to
as many ideas and options as possible, even to those of his opponents.
He imagined all of the possible consequences of a strategy before
committing to it. With a calm spirit and an open mind, he hit upon
policies that sparked one of the true golden ages in history. One man
was able to infect an entire city with his rational spirit. What happened
to Athens after he departed from the scene speaks for itself. The
Sicilian expedition represented everything he had always opposed—a
decision secretly motivated by the desire to grab more land, blinded to
its potential consequences.
Understand: Like everyone, you think you are rational, but you
are not. Rationality is not a power you are born with but one you
acquire through training and practice. The voice of Athena simply
stands for a higher power that exists within you right now, a potential
you have perhaps felt in moments of calmness and focus, the perfect
idea coming to you after much thinking. You are not connected to this
higher power in the present because your mind is weighed down with
emotions. Like Pericles in the Assembly, you are infected by all of the
drama that others churn up; you are continually reacting to what
people give you, experiencing waves of excitement, insecurity, and
anxiety that make it hard to focus. Your attention is pulled this way
and that, and without the rational standard to guide your decisions,
you never quite reach the goals that you set. At any moment this can
change with a simple decision—to cultivate your inner Athena.
Rationality is then what you will value the most and that which will
serve as your guide.
Your first task is to look at those emotions that are continually
infecting your ideas and decisions. Learn to question yourself: Why
this anger or resentment? Where does this incessant need for attention
come from? Under such scrutiny, your emotions will lose their hold on
you. You will begin to think for yourself instead of reacting to what
others give you. Emotions tend to narrow the mind, making us focus
on one or two ideas that satisfy our immediate desire for power or
attention, ideas that usually backfire. Now, with a calm spirit, you can
entertain a wide range of options and solutions. You will deliberate
longer before acting and reassess your strategies. The voice will
become clearer and clearer. When people besiege you with their
endless dramas and petty emotions, you will resent the distraction and
apply your rationality to think past them. Like an athlete continually
getting stronger through training, your mind will become more flexible
and resilient. Clear and calm, you will see answers and creative
solutions that no one else can envision.
It’s just as though one’s second self were standing beside one; one
is sensible and rational oneself, but the other self is impelled to do
something perfectly senseless, and sometimes very funny; and
suddenly you notice that you are longing to do that amusing thing,
goodness knows why; that is, you want to, as it were, against your
will; though you fight against it with all of your might, you want to.
—Fyodor Dostoyevsky, A Raw Youth
Keys to Human Nature
Whenever anything goes wrong in our life, we naturally seek an
explanation. To not find some cause for why our plans went awry, or
why we faced sudden resistance to our ideas, would be deeply
disturbing to us and intensify our pain. But in looking for a cause, our
minds tend to revolve around the same types of explanations:
someone or some group sabotaged me, perhaps out of dislike; large
antagonistic forces out there, such as the government or social
conventions, hindered me; I received bad advice, or information was
kept from me. Finally—if worse comes to worst—it was all bad luck
and unfortunate circumstances.
These explanations generally emphasize our helplessness. “What
could I have done differently? How could I have possibly foreseen the
nasty actions of X against me?” They are also somewhat vague. We
usually can’t point to specific malicious actions of others. We can only
suspect or imagine. These explanations tend to intensify our emotions
—anger, frustration, depression—which we can then wallow in and feel
bad for ourselves. Most significantly, our first reaction is to look
outward for the cause. Yes, we might be responsible for some of what
happened, but for the most part, other people and antagonistic forces
tripped us up. This reaction is deeply ingrained in the human animal.
In ancient times, it might have been the gods or evil spirits who were
to blame. We of the present choose to call them other names.
The truth, however, is very different from this. Certainly there are
individuals and larger forces out there that continually have an effect
on us, and there is much we cannot control in the world. But generally
what causes us to go astray in the first place, what leads to bad
decisions and miscalculations, is our deep-rooted irrationality, the
extent to which our minds are governed by emotion. We cannot see
this. It is our blind spot, and as exhibit A of this blind spot, let’s look at
the crash of 2008, which can serve as a compendium of all varieties of
human irrationality.
In the aftermath of the crash, the following were the most common
explanations in the media for what had happened: trade imbalances
and other factors led to cheap credit in the early 2000s, which led to
excess leverage; it was impossible to place accurate value on the highly
complex derivatives that were being traded, so no one really could
gauge profits and losses; there existed a shrewd and corrupt cabal of
insiders who had incentives to manipulate the system for quick profits;
greedy lenders pushed subprime mortgages on unsuspecting
homeowners; there was too much government regulation; there was
not enough government oversight; computer models and trading
systems ran amok.
These explanations reveal a remarkable denial of a basic reality.
Leading up to the crash of 2008, millions of people made daily
decisions on whether to invest or not invest. At each point of these
transactions, buyers and sellers could have pulled back from the
riskiest forms of investment but decided not to. There were plenty of
people out there warning of a bubble. Only a few years before, the
crash of the giant hedge fund Long-Term Capital Management showed
exactly how a larger crash could and would occur. If people had longer
memories, they could think back to the bubble of 1987; if they read
history, the stock market bubble and crash of 1929. Almost any
potential homeowner can understand the risks of no-money-down
mortgages and lending terms with fast-rising interest rates.
What all of the analysis ignores is the basic irrationality that drove
these millions of buyers and sellers up and down the line. They
became infected with the lure of easy money. This made even the most
educated investor emotional. Studies and experts were pulled in to
bolster ideas that people were already disposed to believe in—such as
the proverbial “this time it’s different” and “housing prices never go
down.” A wave of unbridled optimism swept through masses of people.
Then came the panic and crash and the ugly confrontation with reality.
Instead of coming to terms with the orgy of speculation that had
overwhelmed one and all, making smart people look like idiots, fingers
were pointed at outside forces, anything to deflect the real source of
the madness. This is not something peculiar to the crash of 2008. The
same types of explanations were trotted out after the crashes of 1987
and 1929, the railway mania in the 1840s in England, and the South
Sea bubble of the 1720s, also in England. People spoke of reforming
the system; laws were passed to limit speculation. And none of this
worked.
Bubbles occur because of the intense emotional pull they have on
people, which overwhelms any reasoning powers an individual mind
might possess. They stimulate our natural tendencies toward greed,
easy money, and quick results. It is hard to see other people making
money and not join in. There is no regulatory force on the planet that
can control human nature. And because we do not confront the real
source of the problem, bubbles and crashes keep repeating, and will
keep repeating as long as there are suckers and people who do not
read history. The recurrence of this mirrors the recurrence in our own
lives of the same problems and mistakes, forming negative patterns. It
is hard to learn from experience when we are not looking inward, at
the true causes.
Understand: The first step toward becoming rational is to
understand our fundamental irrationality. There are two factors that
should render this more palatable to our egos: nobody is exempt from
the irresistible effect of emotions on the mind, not even the wisest
among us; and to some extent irrationality is a function of the
structure of our brains and is wired into our very nature by the way we
process emotions. Being irrational is almost beyond our control. To
understand this, we must look at the evolution of emotions
themselves.
For millions of years, living organisms depended on finely tuned
instincts for survival. In a split second, a reptile could sense danger in
the environment and respond with an instantaneous flight from the
scene. There was no separation between impulse and action. Then,
slowly, for some animals this sensation evolved into something larger
and longer—a feeling of fear. In the beginning this fear merely
consisted of a high level of arousal with the release of certain
chemicals, alerting the animal to a possible danger. With this arousal
and the attention that came with it, the animal could respond in
several ways instead of just one. It could become more sensitive to the
environment and learn. It stood a better chance of survival because its
options were widened. This sensation of fear would last only a few
seconds or even less, for speed was of the essence.
For social animals, these arousals and feelings took on a deeper and
more important role: they became a critical form of communication.
Vicious sounds or hair standing on end could display anger, warding
off an enemy or signaling a danger; certain postures or smells revealed
sexual desire and readiness; postures and gestures signaled the desire
to play; certain calls from the young revealed deep anxiety and the
need for the mother to return. With primates, this became ever more
elaborate and complex. It has been shown that chimpanzees can feel
envy and the desire for vengeance, among other emotions. This
evolution took place over the course of hundreds of millions of years.
Much more recently, cognitive powers developed in animals and
humans, culminating in the invention of language and abstract
thinking.
As many neuroscientists have affirmed, this evolution has led to the
higher mammalian brain being composed of three parts. The oldest is
the reptilian part of the brain, which controls all automatic responses
that regulate the body. This is the instinctive part. Above that is the old
mammalian or limbic brain, governing feeling and emotion. And on
top of that has evolved the neocortex, the part that controls cognition
and, for humans, language.
Emotions originate as physical arousal designed to capture our
attention and cause us to take notice of something around us. They
begin as chemical reactions and sensations that we must then translate
into words to try to understand. But because they are processed in a
different part of the brain from language and thinking, this translation
is often slippery and inaccurate. For instance, we feel anger at person
X, whereas in fact the true source of this may be envy; below the level
of conscious awareness we feel inferior in relation to X and want
something he or she has. But envy is not a feeling that we are ever
comfortable with, and so often we translate it as something more
palatable—anger, dislike, resentment. Or let us say one day we are
feeling a mood of frustration and impatience; person Y crosses our
path at the wrong moment and we lash out, unaware that this anger is
prompted by a different mood and out of proportion to Y’s actions. Or
let us say that we are truly angry at person Z. But the anger is sitting
inside of us, caused by someone in our past who hurt us deeply,
perhaps a parent. We direct the anger at Z because they remind us of
this other person.
In other words, we do not have conscious access to the origins of
our emotions and the moods they generate. Once we feel them, all we
can do is try to interpret the emotion, translate it into language. But
more often than not we get this wrong. We latch onto interpretations
that are simple and that suit us. Or we remain baffled. We don’t know
why we feel depressed, for example. This unconscious aspect of
emotions also means that it is very hard for us to learn from them, to
stop or prevent compulsive behavior. Children who felt abandoned by
their parents will tend to create patterns of abandonment in later life,
without seeing the reason. (See Trigger Points from Early Childhood,
on this page.)
The communicating function of emotions, a critical factor for social
animals, also becomes somewhat tricky for us. We communicate anger
when it is something else we are feeling, or about someone else, but
the other person cannot see this and so they react as if personally
attacked, which can create cascading misinterpretations.
Emotions evolved for a different reason than cognition. These two
forms of relating to the world are not connected seamlessly in our
brains. For animals, unburdened by the need to translate physical
sensations into abstract language, emotions function smoothly, as they
were meant to. For us, the split between our emotions and our
cognition is a source of constant internal friction, comprising a second
Emotional Self within us that operates beyond our will. Animals feel
fear for a brief time, then it is gone. We dwell on our fears, intensifying
them and making them last well past the moment of danger, even to
the point of feeling constant anxiety.
Many might be tempted to imagine that we have somehow tamed
this Emotional Self through all of our intellectual and technological
progress. After all, we don’t appear as violent or passionate or
superstitious as our ancestors; but this is an illusion. Progress and
technology have not rewired us; they have merely altered the forms of
our emotions and the type of irrationality that comes with them. For
instance, new forms of media have enhanced the age-old ability of
politicians and others to play on our emotions, in ever subtler and
more sophisticated ways. Advertisers bombard us with highly effective
subliminal messages. Our continual connection to social media makes
us prone to new forms of viral emotional effects. These are not media
designed for calm reflection. With their constant presence, we have
less and less mental space to step back and think. We are as besieged
with emotions and needless drama as the Athenians in the Assembly,
because human nature has not changed.
Clearly the words rational and irrational can be quite loaded.
People are always labeling those who disagree with them “irrational.”
What we need is a simple definition that can be applied as a way of
judging, as accurately as possible, the difference between the two. The
following shall serve as our barometer: We constantly feel emotions,
and they continually infect our thinking, making us veer toward
thoughts that please us and soothe our egos. It is impossible to not
have our inclinations and feelings somehow involved in what we think.
Rational people are aware of this and through introspection and effort
are able, to some extent, to subtract emotions from their thinking and
counteract their effect. Irrational people have no such awareness. They
rush into action without carefully considering the ramifications and
consequences.
We can see the difference in the decisions and actions that people
take and the results that ensue. Rational people demonstrate over time
that they are able to finish a project, to realize their goals, to work
effectively with a team, and to create something that lasts. Irrational
people reveal in their lives negative patterns—mistakes that keep
repeating, unnecessary conflicts that follow them wherever they go,
dreams and projects that are never realized, anger and desires for
change that are never translated into concrete action. They are
emotional and reactive and unaware of this. Everyone is capable of
irrational decisions, some of which are caused by circumstances
beyond our control. And even the most emotional types can hit upon
great ideas or succeed momentarily through boldness. So it is
important to judge over time whether a person is rational or irrational.
Can they sustain success and hit upon several good strategies? Can
they adjust and learn from failures?
We can also see the difference between a rational and irrational
person in particular situations, when it comes to calculating long-term
effects and seeing what truly matters. For instance: In a divorce
proceeding with child custody issues, rational people will manage to
let go of their bitterness and prejudice and reason what is in the best
overall long-term interests of the child. Irrational people will become
consumed with a power struggle against the spouse, will let
resentments and desires for vengeance secretly guide their decisions.
This will lead to a protracted battle and a damaged child.
When it comes to hiring an assistant or partner, rational people will
use competence as their barometer—can this person do the job? An
irrational person will easily fall under the spell of those who are
charming, who know how to feed their insecurities, or who pose little
challenge or threat, and will hire them without realizing the reasons.
This will lead to mistakes and inefficiencies, for which the irrational
person will blame others. When it comes to career decisions, rational
people will look for positions that fit their long-term goals. Irrational
types will decide based on how much money they can immediately
make, what they feel they deserve in life (sometimes very little), how
much they can slack off on the job, or how much attention the position
might bring them. This will lead to career dead ends.
In all cases, the degree of awareness represents the difference.
Rational people can readily admit their own irrational tendencies and
the need to be vigilant. On the other hand, irrational people become
highly emotional when challenged about the emotional roots of their
decisions. They are incapable of introspection and learning. Their
mistakes make them increasingly defensive.
It is important to understand that rationality is not some means of
transcending emotion. Pericles himself valued bold and adventurous
action. He loved the spirit of Athena and the inspiration she brought.
He wanted Athenians to feel love for their city and empathy for their
fellow citizens. What he envisioned was a state of balance—a clear
understanding of why we feel the way we do, conscious of our
impulses so that we can think without being secretly compelled by our
emotions. Pericles wanted the energy that comes from impulses and
emotions to serve our thinking self. That was his vision of rationality,
and our ideal.
Fortunately, to acquire rationality is not complicated. It simply
requires knowing and working through a three-step process. First, we
must become aware of what we shall call low-grade irrationality. This
is a function of the continual moods and feelings that we experience in
life, below the level of consciousness. When we plan or make
decisions, we are not aware of how deeply these moods and feelings
skew the thinking process. They create in our thinking pronounced
biases that are so deeply ingrained in us that we see evidence of them
in all cultures and all periods of history. These biases, by distorting
reality, lead to the mistakes and ineffective decisions that plague our
lives. Being aware of them, we can begin to counterbalance their
effects.
Second, we must understand the nature of what we shall call high-
grade irrationality. This occurs when our emotions become inflamed,
generally because of certain pressures. As we think about our anger,
excitement, resentment, or suspicion, it intensifies into a reactive state
—everything we see or hear is interpreted through the lens of this
emotion. We become more sensitive and more prone to other
emotional reactions. Impatience and resentment can bleed into anger
and deep distrust. These reactive states are what lead people to
violence, to manic obsessions, to uncontrollable greed, or to desires to
control another person. This form of irrationality is the source of more
acute problems—crises, conflicts, and disastrous decisions.
Understanding how this type of irrationality operates can allow us to
recognize the reactive state as it is happening and pull back before we
do something we regret.
Third, we need to enact certain strategies and exercises that will
strengthen the thinking part of the brain and give it more power in the
eternal struggle with our emotions.
The following three steps will help you begin on the path toward
rationality. It would be wise to incorporate all three into your study
and practice in human nature.
Step One: Recognize the Biases
Emotions are continually affecting our thought processes and
decisions, below the level of our awareness. And the most common
emotion of them all is the desire for pleasure and the avoidance of
pain. Our thoughts almost inevitably revolve around this desire; we
simply recoil from entertaining ideas that are unpleasant or painful to
us. We imagine we are looking for the truth, or being realistic, when in
fact we are holding on to ideas that bring a release from tension and
soothe our egos, make us feel superior. This pleasure principle in
thinking is the source of all of our mental biases. If you believe that
you are somehow immune to any of the following biases, it is simply
an example of the pleasure principle in action. Instead, it is best to
search and see how they continually operate inside you, as well as
learn how to identify such irrationality in others.
Confirmation Bias
I look at the evidence and arrive at my decisions through more or less
rational processes.
To hold an idea and convince ourselves we arrived at it rationally,
we go in search of evidence to support our view. What could be more
objective or scientific? But because of the pleasure principle and its
unconscious influence, we manage to find the evidence that confirms
what we want to believe. This is known as confirmation bias.
We can see this at work in people’s plans, particularly those with
high stakes. A plan is designed to lead to a positive, desired objective.
If people considered the possible negative and positive consequences
equally, they might find it hard to take any action. Inevitably they veer
toward information that confirms the desired positive result, the rosy
scenario, without realizing it. We also see this at work when people are
supposedly asking for advice. This is the bane of most consultants. In
the end, people want to hear their own ideas and preferences
confirmed by an expert opinion. They will interpret what you say in
light of what they want to hear; and if your advice runs counter to their
desires, they will find some way to dismiss your opinion, your so-
called expertise. The more powerful the person, the more they are
subject to this form of the confirmation bias.
When investigating confirmation bias in the world, take a look at
theories that seem a little too good to be true. Statistics and studies are
trotted out to prove them; these are not very difficult to find, once you
are convinced of the rightness of your argument. On the internet, it is
easy to find studies that support both sides of an argument. In general,
you should never accept the validity of people’s ideas because they
have supplied “evidence.” Instead, examine the evidence yourself in
the cold light of day, with as much skepticism as you can muster. Your
first impulse should always be to find the evidence that disconfirms
your most cherished beliefs and those of others. That is true science.
Conviction Bias
I believe in this idea so strongly. It must be true.
We hold on to an idea that is secretly pleasing to us, but deep inside
we might have some doubts as to its truth, and so we go an extra mile
to convince ourselves—to believe in it with great vehemence and to
loudly contradict anyone who challenges us. How can our idea not be
true if it brings out in us such energy to defend it, we tell ourselves?
This bias is revealed even more clearly in our relationship to leaders—
if they express an opinion with heated words and gestures, colorful
metaphors and entertaining anecdotes, and a deep well of conviction,
it must mean they have examined the idea carefully to express it with
such certainty. Those, on the other hand, who express nuances, whose
tone is more hesitant, reveal weakness and self-doubt. They are
probably lying, or so we think. This bias makes us susceptible to
salesmen and demagogues who display conviction as a way to
convince and deceive. They know that people are hungry for
entertainment, so they cloak their half-truths with dramatic effects.
Appearance Bias
I understand the people I deal with; I see them just as they are.
We see people not as they are, but as they appear to us. And these
appearances are usually misleading. First, people have trained
themselves in social situations to present the front that is appropriate
and that will be judged positively. They seem to be in favor of the
noblest causes, always presenting themselves as hardworking and
conscientious. We take these masks for reality. Second, we are prone
to fall for the halo effect—when we see certain negative or positive
qualities in a person (social awkwardness, intelligence), other positive
or negative qualities are implied that fit with this. People who are
good-looking generally seem more trustworthy, particularly
politicians. If a person is successful, we imagine they are probably also
ethical, conscientious, and deserving of their good fortune. This
obscures the fact that many people who have gotten ahead have done
so through less-than-moral actions, which they cleverly disguise from
view.
The Group Bias
My ideas are my own. I do not listen to the group. I am not a
conformist.
We are social animals by nature. The feeling of isolation, of
difference from the group, is depressing and terrifying. We experience
tremendous relief when we find others who think the same way we do.
In fact, we are motivated to take up ideas and opinions because they
bring us this relief. We are unaware of this pull and so imagine we
have come to certain ideas completely on our own. Look at people who
support one party or the other, one ideology—a noticeable orthodoxy
or correctness prevails, without anyone saying anything or applying
overt pressure. If someone is on the right or the left, their opinions will
almost always follow the same direction on dozens of issues, as if by
magic, and yet few would ever admit this influence on their thought
patterns.
The Blame Bias
I learn from my experience and mistakes.
Mistakes and failures elicit the need to explain. We want to learn
the lesson and not repeat the experience. But in truth, we do not like to
look too closely at what we did; our introspection is limited. Our
natural response is to blame others, circumstances, or a momentary
lapse of judgment. The reason for this bias is that it is often too painful
to look at our mistakes. It calls into question our feelings of
superiority. It pokes at our ego. We go through the motions,
pretending to reflect on what we did. But with the passage of time, the
pleasure principle rises and we forget what small part in the mistake
we ascribed to ourselves. Desire and emotion will blind us yet again,
and we will repeat exactly the same mistake and go through the same
mild recriminating process, followed by forgetfulness, until we die. If
people truly learned from their experience, we would find few
mistakes in the world and career paths that ascend ever upward.
Superiority Bias
I’m different. I’m more rational than others, more ethical as well.
Few would say this to people in conversation. It sounds arrogant.
But in numerous opinion polls and studies, when asked to compare
themselves with others, people generally express a variation of this.
It’s the equivalent of an optical illusion—we cannot seem to see our
faults and irrationalities, only those of others. So, for instance, we’ll
easily believe that those in the other political party do not come to
their opinions based on rational principles, but those on our side have
done so. On the ethical front, few of us will ever admit that we have
resorted to deception or manipulation in our work or have been clever
and strategic in our career advancement. Everything we’ve got, or so
we think, comes from natural talent and hard work. But with other
people, we are quick to ascribe to them all kinds of Machiavellian
tactics. This allows us to justify whatever we do, no matter the results.
We feel a tremendous pull to imagine ourselves as rational, decent,
and ethical. These are qualities highly promoted in the culture. To
show signs otherwise is to risk great disapproval. If all of this were true
—if people were rational and morally superior—the world would be
suffused with goodness and peace. We know, however, the reality, and
so some people, perhaps all of us, are merely deceiving ourselves.
Rationality and ethical qualities must be achieved through awareness
and effort. They do not come naturally. They come through a
maturation process.
Step Two: Beware the Inflaming Factors
Low-grade emotions continually affect our thinking, and they
originate from our own impulses—for instance, the desire for pleasing
and comforting thoughts. High-grade emotion, however, comes at
certain moments, reaches an explosive pitch, and is generally sparked
by something external—a person who gets under our skin, or
particular circumstances. The level of arousal is higher and our
attention is captured completely. The more we think about the
emotion, the stronger it gets, which makes us focus even more on it,
and so on and so forth. Our minds tunnel into the emotion, and
everything reminds us of our anger or excitement. We become
reactive. Because we are unable to bear the tension this brings, high-
grade emotion usually culminates in some rash action with disastrous
consequences. In the middle of such an attack we feel possessed, as if a
second, limbic self has taken over.
It is best to be aware of these factors so that you can stop the mind
from tunneling and prevent the releasing action that you will always
come to regret. You should also be aware of high-grade irrationality in
others, to either get out of their way or help bring them back to reality.
Trigger Points from Early Childhood
In early childhood we were at our most sensitive and vulnerable. Our
relationship to our parents had a much greater impact on us the
further back in time we go. The same could be said for any early
powerful experience. These vulnerabilities and wounds remain buried
deep within our minds. Sometimes we try to repress the memory of
these influences, if they happen to be negative—great fears or
humiliations. Sometimes, however, they are associated with positive
emotions, experiences of love and attention that we continually want
to relive. Later in life, a person or event will trigger a memory of this
positive or negative experience, and with it a release of powerful
chemicals or hormones associated with the memory.
Take, for example, a young man who had a distant, narcissistic
mother. As an infant or child, he experienced her coldness as
abandonment, and to be abandoned must mean he was somehow
unworthy of her love. Or similarly, a new sibling on the scene caused
his mother to give him much less attention, which he equally
experienced as abandonment. Later in life, in a relationship, a woman
might hint at disapproval of some trait or action of his, all of which is
part of a healthy relationship. This will hit a trigger point—she is
noticing his flaws, which, he imagines, precedes her abandonment of
him. He feels a powerful rush of emotion, a sense of imminent
betrayal. He does not see the source of this; it is beyond his control. He
overreacts, accuses, withdraws, all of which leads to the very thing he
feared—abandonment. His reaction was to some reflection in his
mind, not to the reality. This is the height of irrationality.
The way to recognize this in yourself and in others is by noticing
behavior that is suddenly childish in its intensity and seemingly out of
character. This could center on any key emotion. It could be fear—of
losing control, of failure. In this case, we react by withdrawing from
the situation and the presence of others, like a child curling up into a
ball. A sudden illness, brought on by the intense fear, will conveniently
cause us to have to leave the scene. It could be love—desperately
searching to re-create a close parental or sibling relationship in the
present, triggered by someone who vaguely reminds us of the lost
paradise. It could be extreme mistrust, originating from an authority
figure in early childhood who disappointed or betrayed us, generally
the father. This often triggers a sudden rebellious attitude.
The great danger here is that in misreading the present and
reacting to something in the past, we create conflict, disappointments,
and mistrust that only strengthen the wound. In some ways, we are
programmed to repeat the early experience in the present. Our only
defense is awareness as it is happening. We can recognize a trigger
point by the experience of emotions that are unusually primal, more
uncontrollable than normal. They trigger tears, deep depression, or
excessive hope. People under the spell of these emotions will often
have a very different tone of voice and body language, as if they were
physically reliving a moment from early life.
In the midst of such an attack, we must struggle to detach ourselves
and contemplate the possible source—the wound in early childhood—
and the patterns it has locked us into. This deep understanding of
ourselves and our vulnerabilities is a key step toward becoming
rational.
Sudden Gains or Losses
Sudden success or winnings can be very dangerous. Neurologically,
chemicals are released in the brain that give a powerful jolt of arousal
and energy, leading to the desire to repeat this experience. It can be
the start of any kind of addiction and manic behavior. Also, when
gains come quickly we tend to lose sight of the basic wisdom that true
success, to really last, must come through hard work. We do not take
into account the role that luck plays in such sudden gains. We try
again and again to recapture that high from winning so much money
or attention. We acquire feelings of grandiosity. We become especially
resistant to anyone who tries to warn us—they don’t understand, we
tell ourselves. Because this cannot be sustained, we experience an
inevitable fall, which is all the more painful, leading to the depression
part of the cycle. Although gamblers are the most prone to this, it
equally applies to businesspeople during bubbles and to people who
gain sudden attention from the public.
Unexpected losses or a string of losses equally create irrational
reactions. We imagine we are cursed with bad luck and that this will go
on indefinitely. We become fearful and hesitant, which will often lead
to more mistakes or failures. In sports, this can induce what is known
as choking, as previous losses and misses weigh on the mind and
tighten it up.
The solution here is simple: whenever you experience unusual
gains or losses, that is precisely the time to step back and
counterbalance them with some necessary pessimism or optimism. Be
extra wary of sudden success and attention—they are not built on
anything that lasts and they have an addictive pull. And the fall is
always painful.
Rising Pressure
The people around you generally appear sane and in control of their
lives. But put any of them in stressful circumstances, with the pressure
rising, and you will see a different reality. The cool mask of self-control
comes off. They suddenly lash out in anger, reveal a paranoid streak,
and become hypersensitive and often petty. Under stress or any threat,
the most primitive parts of the brain are aroused and engaged,
overwhelming people’s reasoning powers. In fact, stress or tension can
reveal flaws in people that they have carefully concealed from view. It
is often wise to observe people in such moments, precisely as a way to
judge their true character.
Whenever you notice rising pressure and stress levels in your life,
you must watch yourself carefully. Monitor any signs of unusual
brittleness or sensitivity, sudden suspicions, fears disproportionate to
the circumstances. Observe with as much detachment as possible,
finding time and space to be alone. You need perspective. Never
imagine that you are someone who can withstand rising stress without
emotional leakage. It is not possible. But through self-awareness and
reflection you can prevent yourself from making decisions you will
come to regret.
Inflaming Individuals
There are people in the world who by their nature tend to trigger
powerful emotions in almost everyone they encounter. These emotions
range among the extremes of love, hatred, confidence, and mistrust.
Some examples in history would include King David in the Bible,
Alcibiades in ancient Athens, Julius Caesar in ancient Rome, Georges
Danton during the French Revolution, and Bill Clinton. These types
have a degree of charisma—they have the ability to express eloquently
emotions they are feeling, which inevitably stirs parallel emotions in
others. But some of them can also be quite narcissistic; they project
their internal drama and troubles outward, catching other people up in
the turmoil they create. This leads to profound feelings of attraction in
some and repulsion in others.
It is best to recognize these inflamers by how they affect others, not
just yourself. No one can remain indifferent to them. People find
themselves incapable of reasoning or maintaining any distance in their
presence. They make you think of them continually when not in their
presence. They have an obsessive quality, and they can lead you to
extreme actions as a devoted follower or as an inveterate enemy. On
either end of the spectrum—attraction or repulsion—you will tend to
be irrational and you will desperately need to distance yourself. A good
strategy to utilize is to see through the front they project. They
inevitably try to cast a larger-than-life image, a mythic, intimidating
quality; but in fact they are all too human, full of the same insecurities
and weaknesses we all possess. Try to recognize these very human
traits and demythologize them.
The Group Effect
This is the high-grade variety of the group bias. When we are in a
group of a large enough size, we become different. Notice yourself and
others at a sporting event, a concert, a religious or political gathering.
It is impossible to not feel yourself caught up in the collective
emotions. Your heart beats faster. Tears of joy or sadness come more
readily. Being in a group does not stimulate independent reasoning
but rather the intense desire to belong. This can happen equally in a
work environment, particularly if the leader plays on people’s
emotions to spur competitive, aggressive desires, or creates an us-
versus-them dynamic. The group effect does not necessarily require
the presence of others. It can occur virally, as some opinion spreads
over social media and infects us with the desire to share the opinion—
generally of a strong variety, such as outrage.
There is an exhilarating, positive aspect to the stimulation of group
emotions. It is how we can be rallied to do something for the collective
good. But if you notice the appeal is to more diabolical emotions, such
as hatred of the other, rabid patriotism, aggression, or sweeping
worldviews, you need to inoculate yourself and see through the
powerful pull as it works on you. It is often best to avoid the group
setting if possible in order to maintain your reasoning powers, or to
enter such moments with maximum skepticism.
Be aware of demagogues who exploit the group effect and stimulate
outbreaks of irrationality. They inevitably resort to certain devices. In
a group setting, they begin by warming up the crowd, talking about
ideas and values that everyone shares, creating a pleasant feeling of
agreement. They rely on vague but loaded words full of emotive quality
such as justice or truth or patriotism. They talk of abstract, noble goals
rather than the solving of specific problems with concrete action.
Demagogues in politics or the media try to stir a continual sense of
panic, urgency, and outrage. They must keep the emotional levels
high. Your defense is simple: Consider your reasoning powers, your
ability to think for yourself, your most precious possession. Resent any
kind of intrusion upon your independent mind by others. When you
feel you are in the presence of a demagogue, become doubly wary and
analytical.
—
A final word on the irrational in human nature: do not imagine that
the more extreme types of irrationality have somehow been overcome
through progress and enlightenment. Throughout history we witness
continual cycles of rising and falling levels of the irrational. The great
golden age of Pericles, with its philosophers and its first stirrings of
the scientific spirit, was followed by an age of superstition, cults, and
intolerance. This same phenomenon happened after the Italian
Renaissance. That this cycle is bound to recur again and again is part
of human nature.
The irrational simply changes its look and its fashions. We may no
longer have literal witch hunts, but in the twentieth century, not so
very long ago, we witnessed the show trials of Stalin, the McCarthy
hearings in the U.S. Senate, and the mass persecutions during the
Chinese Cultural Revolution. Various cults are continually being
generated, including cults of personality and the fetishizing of
celebrities. Technology now inspires religious fervor. People have a
desperate need to believe in something and they will find it anywhere.
Polls have revealed that increasing numbers of people believe in
ghosts, spirits, and angels, in the twenty-first century.
As long as there are humans, the irrational will find its voices and
means of spreading. Rationality is something to be acquired by
individuals, not by mass movements or technological progress. Feeling
superior and beyond it is a sure sign that the irrational is at work.
Step Three: Strategies Toward Bringing Out the Rational
Self
Despite our pronounced irrational tendencies, two factors should give
us all hope. First and foremost is the existence throughout history and
in all cultures of people of high rationality, the types who have made
progress possible. They serve as ideals for all of us to aim for. These
include Pericles, the ruler Aśoka of ancient India, Marcus Aurelius of
ancient Rome, Marguerite de Valois in medieval France, Leonardo da
Vinci, Charles Darwin, Abraham Lincoln, the writer Anton Chekhov,
the anthropologist Margaret Mead, and the businessman Warren
Buffett, to name but a few. All of these types share certain qualities—a
realistic appraisal of themselves and their weaknesses; a devotion to
truth and reality; a tolerant attitude toward people; and the ability to
reach goals that they have set.
The second factor is that almost all of us at some point in our lives
have experienced moments of greater rationality. This often comes
with what we shall call the maker’s mind-set. We have a project to get
done, perhaps with a deadline. The only emotion we can afford is
excitement and energy. Other emotions simply make it impossible to
concentrate. Because we have to get results, we become exceptionally
practical. We focus on the work—our mind calm, our ego not
intruding. If people try to interrupt or infect us with emotions, we
resent it. These moments—as fleeting as a few weeks or hours—reveal
the rational self that is waiting to come out. It just requires some
awareness and some practice.
The following strategies are designed to help you bring out that
inner Pericles or Athena:
Know yourself thoroughly. The Emotional Self thrives on
ignorance. The moment you are aware of how it operates and
dominates you is the moment it loses its hold on you and can be
tamed. Therefore, your first step toward the rational is always inward.
You want to catch that Emotional Self in action. For this purpose, you
must reflect on how you operate under stress. What particular
weaknesses come out in such moments—the desire to please, to bully
or control, deep levels of mistrust? Look at your decisions, especially
those that have been ineffective—can you see a pattern, an underlying
insecurity that impels them? Examine your strengths, what makes you
different from other people. This will help you decide upon goals that
mesh with your long-term interests and that are aligned with your
skills. By knowing and valuing what marks you as different, you will
also be able to resist the pull of the group bias and effect.
Examine your emotions to their roots. You are angry. Let the
feeling settle from within, and think about it. Was it triggered by
something seemingly trivial or petty? That is a sure sign that
something or someone else is behind it. Perhaps a more
uncomfortable emotion is at the source—such as envy or paranoia. You
need to look at this square in the eye. Dig below any trigger points to
see where they started. For these purposes, it might be wise to use a
journal in which you record your self-assessments with ruthless
objectivity. Your greatest danger here is your ego and how it makes
you unconsciously maintain illusions about yourself. These may be
comforting in the moment, but in the long run they make you
defensive and unable to learn or progress. Find a neutral position from
which you can observe your actions, with a bit of detachment and even
humor. Soon all of this will become second nature, and when the
Emotional Self suddenly rears its head in some situation, you will see
it as it happens and be able to step back and find that neutral position.
Increase your reaction time. This power comes through
practice and repetition. When some event or interaction requires a
response, you must train yourself to step back. This could mean
physically removing yourself to a place where you can be alone and not
feel any pressure to respond. Or it could mean writing that angry email
but not sending it. You sleep on it for a day or two. You do not make
phone calls or communicate while feeling some sudden emotion,
particularly resentment. If you find yourself rushing to commit to
people, to hire or be hired by them, step back and give it a day. Cool
the emotions down. The longer you can take the better, because
perspective comes with time. Consider this like resistance training—
the longer you can resist reacting, the more mental space you have for
actual reflection, and the stronger your mind will become.
Accept people as facts. Interactions with people are the major
source of emotional turmoil, but it doesn’t have to be that way. The
problem is that we are continually judging people, wishing they were
something that they are not. We want to change them. We want them
to think and act a certain way, most often the way we think and act.
And because this is not possible, because everyone is different, we are
continually frustrated and upset. Instead, see other people as
phenomena, as neutral as comets or plants. They simply exist. They
come in all varieties, making life rich and interesting. Work with what
they give you, instead of resisting and trying to change them. Make
understanding people a fun game, the solving of puzzles. It is all part
of the human comedy. Yes, people are irrational, but so are you. Make
your acceptance of human nature as radical as possible. This will calm
you down and help you observe people more dispassionately,
understanding them on a deeper level. You will stop projecting your
own emotions on to them. All of this will give you more balance and
calmness, more mental space for thinking.
It is certainly difficult to do this with the nightmare types who cross
our path—the raging narcissists, the passive aggressors, and other
inflamers. They remain a continual test to our rationality. Look at the
Russian writer Anton Chekhov, one of the most fiercely rational people
who ever lived, as the model for this. His family was large and poor,
and his father, an alcoholic, mercilessly beat all of the children,
including young Chekhov. Chekhov became a doctor and took up
writing as a side career. He applied his training as a doctor to the
human animal, his goal to understand what makes us so irrational, so
unhappy, and so dangerous. In his stories and plays, he found it
immensely therapeutic to get inside his characters and make sense of
even the worst types. In this way, he could forgive anybody, even his
father. His approach in these cases was to imagine that each person,
no matter how twisted, has a reason for what they’ve become, a logic
that makes sense to them. In their own way, they are striving for
fulfillment, but irrationally. By stepping back and imagining their
story from the inside, Chekhov demythologized the brutes and
aggressors; he cut them down to human size. They no longer elicited
hatred but rather pity. You must think more like a writer in
approaching the people you deal with, even the worst sorts.
Find the optimal balance of thinking and emotion. We
cannot divorce emotions from thinking. The two are completely
intertwined. But there is inevitably a dominant factor, some people
more clearly governed by emotions than others. What we are looking
for is the proper ratio and balance, the one that leads to the most
effective action. The ancient Greeks had an appropriate metaphor for
this: the rider and the horse.
The horse is our emotional nature continually impelling us to move.
This horse has tremendous energy and power, but without a rider it
cannot be guided; it is wild, subject to predators, and continually
heading into trouble. The rider is our thinking self. Through training
and practice, it holds the reins and guides the horse, transforming this
powerful animal energy into something productive. The one without
the other is useless. Without the rider, no directed movement or
purpose. Without the horse, no energy, no power. In most people the
horse dominates, and the rider is weak. In some people the rider is too
strong, holds the reins too tightly, and is afraid to occasionally let the
animal go into a gallop. The horse and rider must work together. This
means we consider our actions beforehand; we bring as much thinking
as possible to a situation before we make a decision. But once we
decide what to do, we loosen the reins and enter action with boldness
and a spirit of adventure. Instead of being slaves to this energy, we
channel it. That is the essence of rationality.
As an example of this ideal in action, try to maintain a perfect
balance between skepticism (rider) and curiosity (horse). In this mode
you are skeptical about your own enthusiasms and those of others.
You do not accept at face value people’s explanations and their
application of “evidence.” You look at the results of their actions, not
what they say about their motivations. But if you take this too far, your
mind will close itself off from wild ideas, from exciting speculations,
from curiosity itself. You want to retain the elasticity of spirit you had
as a child, interested in everything, while retaining the hard-nosed
need to verify and scrutinize for yourself all ideas and beliefs. The two
can coexist. It is a balance that all geniuses possess.
Love the rational. It is important to not see the path to
rationality as something painful and ascetic. In fact, it brings powers
that are immensely satisfying and pleasurable, much deeper than the
more manic pleasures the world tends to offer us. You have felt this in
your own life when absorbed in a project, time flowing by, and
experiencing occasional bursts of excitement as you make discoveries
or progress in your work. There are other pleasures as well. Being able
to tame the Emotional Self leads to an overall calmness and clarity. In
this state of mind you are less consumed by petty conflicts and
considerations. Your actions are more effective, which also leads to
less turmoil. You have the immense satisfaction of mastering yourself
in a deep way. You have more mental space to be creative. You feel
more in control.
Knowing all of this, it will become easier to motivate yourself to
develop this power. In this sense, you are following the path of Pericles
himself. He envisioned the goddess Athena embodying all of the
practical powers of rationality. He worshipped and loved this goddess
above all others. We may no longer venerate the goddess as a deity,
but we can appreciate on a deep level all of those who promote
rationality in our own world, and we can seek to internalize their
power as much as we can.
“Trust your feelings!”—But feelings are nothing final or original;
behind feelings there stand judgments and evaluations which we
inherit in the form of . . . inclinations, aversions. . . . The
inspiration born of a feeling is the grandchild of a judgment—and
often of a false judgment!—and in any event not a child of your
own! To trust one’s feelings—means to give more obedience to
one’s grandfather and grandmother and their grandparents than
to the gods which are in us: our reason and our experience.
—Friedrich Nietzsche
W
2
Transform Self-love into
Empathy
The Law of Narcissism
e all naturally possess the most remarkable tool for connecting
to people and attaining social power—empathy. When
cultivated and properly used, it can allow us to see into the moods
and minds of others, giving us the power to anticipate people’s
actions and gently lower their resistance. This instrument, however,
is blunted by our habitual self-absorption. We are all narcissists,
some deeper on the spectrum than others. Our mission in life is to
come to terms with this self-love and learn how to turn our sensitivity
outward, toward others, instead of inward. We must recognize at the
same time the toxic narcissists among us before getting enmeshed in
their dramas and poisoned by their envy.
The Narcissistic Spectrum
From the moment we are born, we humans feel a never-ending need
for attention. We are social animals to the core. Our survival and
happiness depend on the bonds we form with others. If people do not
pay attention to us, we cannot connect to them on any level. Some of
this is purely physical—we must have people looking at us to feel alive.
As those who have gone through long periods of isolation can attest,
without eye contact we begin to doubt our existence and to descend
into a deep depression. But this need is also deeply psychological:
through the quality of attention we receive from others, we feel
recognized and appreciated for who we are. Our sense of self-worth
depends on this. Because this is so important to the human animal,
people will do almost anything to get attention, including committing
a crime or attempting suicide. Look behind almost any action, and you
will see this need as a primary motivation.
In trying to satisfy our hunger for attention, however, we face an
inevitable problem: there is only so much of it to go around. In the
family, we have to compete with our siblings; at school, with
classmates; at work, with colleagues. The moments in which we feel
recognized and appreciated are fleeting. People can largely be
indifferent to our fate, as they must deal with their own problems.
There are even some who are downright hostile and disrespectful to
us. How do we handle those moments when we feel psychologically
alone, or even abandoned? We can double our efforts to get attention
and notice, but this can exhaust our energy and it can often have the
opposite effect—people who try too hard seem desperate and repulse
the attention they want. We simply cannot rely on others to give us
constant validation, and yet we crave it.
Facing this dilemma from early childhood on, most of us come up
with a solution that works quite well: we create a self, an image of
ourselves that comforts us and makes us feel validated from within.
This self is composed of our tastes, our opinions, how we look at the
world, what we value. In building this self-image, we tend to
accentuate our positive qualities and explain away our flaws. We
cannot go too far in this, for if our self-image is too divorced from
reality, other people will make us aware of the discrepancy, and we will
doubt ourselves. But if it is done properly, in the end we have a self
that we can love and cherish. Our energy turns inward. We become the
center of our attention. When we experience those inevitable moments
when we are alone or not feeling appreciated, we can retreat to this self
and soothe ourselves. If we have moments of doubt and depression,
our self-love raises us up, makes us feel worthy and even superior to
others. This self-image operates as a thermostat, helping us to regulate
our doubts and insecurities. We are no longer completely dependent
on others for attention and recognition. We have self-esteem.
This idea might seem strange. We generally take this self-image
completely for granted, like the air we breathe. It operates on a largely
unconscious basis. We don’t feel or see the thermostat as it operates.
The best way to literally visualize this dynamic is to look at those who
lack a coherent sense of self—people we shall call deep narcissists.
In constructing a self that we can hold on to and love, the key
moment in its development occurs between the ages of two and five
years old. As we slowly separate from our mother, we face a world in
which we cannot get instant gratification. We also become aware that
we are alone and yet dependent on our parents for survival. Our
answer is to identify with the best qualities of our parents—their
strength, their ability to soothe us—and incorporate these qualities
into ourselves. If our parents encourage us in our first efforts at
independence, if they validate our need to feel strong and recognize
our unique qualities, then our self-image takes root, and we can slowly
build upon it. Deep narcissists have a sharp break in this early
development, and so they never quite construct a consistent and
realistic feeling of a self.
Their mothers (or fathers) might be deep narcissists themselves,
too self-absorbed to acknowledge the child, to encourage its early
efforts at independence. Or alternatively the parents could be
enmeshers—overinvolved in the child’s life, suffocating it with
attention, isolating it from others, and living through its advancement
as a means to validate their own self-worth. They give the child no
room to establish a self. In the backgrounds of almost all deep
narcissists we find either abandonment or enmeshment. The result is
that they have no self to retreat to, no foundation for self-esteem, and
are completely dependent on the attention they can get from others to
make them feel alive and worthy.
In childhood, if such narcissists are extroverts, they can function
reasonably well, and even thrive. They become masters at attracting
notice and monopolizing attention. They can appear vivacious and
exciting. In a child, such qualities can seem a sign of future social
success. But underneath the surface, they are becoming dangerously
addicted to the hits of attention they stimulate to make them feel
whole and worthy. If they are introverts, they will retreat to a fantasy
life, imagining a self that is quite superior to others. Since they will not
get validation of this self-image from others because it is so unrealistic,
they will also have moments of great doubt and even self-loathing.
They are either a god or a worm. Lacking a coherent core, they could
imagine themselves to be anyone, and so their fantasies will keep
shifting as they try on new personalities.
The nightmare for deep narcissists generally arrives in their
twenties and thirties. They have failed to develop that inner
thermostat, a cohesive sense of self to love and depend upon. The
extroverts must constantly attract attention to feel alive and
appreciated. They become more dramatic, more exhibitionistic and
grandiose. This can become tiresome and even pathetic. They have to
change friends and scenes so that they can have a fresh audience.
Introverts fall deeper into a fantasy self. Being socially awkward yet
radiating superiority, they tend to alienate people, increasing their
dangerous isolation. In both cases, drugs or alcohol or any other form
of addiction can become a necessary crutch to soothe them in the
inevitable moments of doubt and depression.
You can recognize deep narcissists by the following behavior
patterns: If they are ever insulted or challenged, they have no defense,
nothing internal to soothe them or validate their worth. They generally
react with great rage, thirsting for vengeance, full of a sense of
righteousness. This is the only way they know how to assuage their
insecurities. In such battles, they will position themselves as the
wounded victim, confusing others and even drawing sympathy. They
are prickly and oversensitive. Almost everything is taken personally.
They can become quite paranoid and have enemies in all directions to
point to. You can see an impatient or distant look on their face
whenever you talk about something that does not directly involve
them in some way. They immediately turn the conversation back to
themselves, with some story or anecdote to distract from the insecurity
behind it. They can be prone to vicious bouts of envy if they see others
getting the attention they feel they deserve. They frequently display
extreme self-confidence. This always helps to gain attention, and it
neatly covers up their gaping inner emptiness and their fragmented
sense of self. But beware if this confidence is ever truly put to the test.
When it comes to other people in their lives, deep narcissists have
an unusual relationship that is hard for us to understand. They tend to
see others as extensions of themselves, what is known as self-objects.
People exist as instruments for attention and validation. Their desire is
to control them like they control their own arm or leg. In a
relationship, they will slowly make the partner cut off contact with
friends—there must be no competition for attention.
Some highly talented deep narcissists (see stories starting on this
page for examples) manage to find some redemption through their
work, channeling their energies and getting the attention they crave
through their accomplishments, although they tend to remain quite
erratic and volatile. For most deep narcissists, however, it can be
difficult to concentrate on their work. Lacking the self-esteem
thermostat, they are prone to continually worrying about what others
think of them. This makes it hard to actually focus attention outward
for long periods of time, and to deal with the impatience and anxiety
that comes with work. Such types tend to change jobs and careers
quite frequently. This becomes the nail in their coffin—unable to
attract genuine recognition through their accomplishments, they are
forever thrown back on the need to artificially stimulate attention.
Deep narcissists can be annoying and frustrating to deal with; they
can also become quite harmful if we get too close to them. They
entangle us in their never-ending dramas and make us feel guilty if we
are not continually paying them attention. Relationships with them
are most unsatisfying, and having one as a partner or spouse can be
deadly. In the end, everything must revolve around them. The best
solution in such cases is to get out of their way, once we identify them
as a deep narcissist.
There is one variety of this type, however, that is more dangerous
and toxic, because of the levels of power he or she can attain—namely
the narcissistic leader. (This type has been around for a long time. In
the Bible, Absalom was perhaps the first recorded example, but we
find frequent references in ancient literature to others—Alcibiades,
Cicero, and Emperor Nero, to name a few.) Almost all dictator types
and tyrannical CEOs fall into this category. They generally have more
ambition than the average deep narcissist and for a while can funnel
this energy into work. Full of narcissistic self-confidence, they attract
attention and followers. They say and do things that other people don’t
dare say or do, which seems admirable and authentic. They might have
a vision for some innovative product, and because they radiate such
confidence, they can find others to help them realize their vision. They
are experts at using people.
If they have success, a terrible momentum is set in place—more
people are attracted to their leadership, which only inflates their
grandiose tendencies. If anyone dares to challenge them, they are
more prone than others to go into that deep narcissistic rage. They are
hypersensitive. They also like to stir up constant drama as a means to
justify their power—they are the only ones who can solve the problems
they create. This also gives them more opportunities to be the center of
attention. The workplace is never stable under their direction.
Sometimes they can become entrepreneurs, people who found a
company because of their charisma and ability to attract followers.
They can have creative flair as well. But for many of these leader types,
eventually their own inner instability and chaos will come to be
mirrored in the company or group they lead. They cannot forge a
coherent structure or organization. Everything must flow through
them. They have to control everything and everyone, their self-objects.
They will proclaim this as a virtue—as being authentic and
spontaneous—when really they lack the ability to focus and create
something solid. They tend to burn and destroy whatever they create.
Let us imagine narcissism as a way of gauging the level of our self-
absorption, as if it existed on a measurable scale from high to low. At a
certain depth, let us say below the halfway mark on the scale, people
enter the realm of deep narcissism. Once they reach this depth, it is
very difficult for them to raise themselves back up, because they lack
the self-esteem device. The deep narcissist becomes completely self-
absorbed, almost always below the mark. If for a moment they manage
to engage with others, some comment or action will trigger their
insecurities and they will go plummeting down. But mostly they tend
to sink deeper into themselves over time. Other people are
instruments. Reality is just a reflection of their needs. Constant
attention is their only way of survival.
Above that halfway mark is what we shall call the functional
narcissist, where most of us reside. We also are self-absorbed, but
what prevents us from falling deep into ourselves is a coherent sense
of self that we can rely upon and love. (It is ironic that the word
narcissism has come to mean self-love, when it is in fact the case that
the worst narcissists have no cohesive self to love, which is the source
of their problem.) This creates some inner resiliency. We may have
deeper narcissistic moments, fluctuating below the mark, particularly
when depressed or challenged in life, but inevitably we elevate
ourselves. Not feeling continually insecure or wounded, not always
needing to fish for attention, functional narcissists can turn their
attention outward, into their work and into building relationships with
people.
Our task, as students of human nature, is threefold. First, we must
fully understand the phenomenon of the deep narcissist. Although
they are in the minority, some of them can inflict an unusual amount
of harm in the world. We must be able to distinguish the toxic types
that stir up drama and try to turn us into objects they can use for their
purposes. They can draw us in with their unusual energy, but if we
become enmeshed, it can be a nightmare to disengage. They are
masters at turning the tables and making others feel guilty.
Narcissistic leaders are the most dangerous of all, and we must resist
their pull and see through the façade of their apparent creativity.
Knowing how to handle the deep narcissists in our lives is an
important art for all of us.
Second, we must be honest about our own nature and not deny it.
We are all narcissists. In a conversation we are all champing at the bit
to talk, to tell our story, to give our opinion. We like people who share
our ideas—they reflect back to us our good taste. If we happen to be
assertive, we see assertiveness as a positive quality because it is ours,
whereas others, more timid, will rate it as obnoxious and value
introspective qualities. We are all prone to flattery because of our self-
love. Moralizers who try to separate themselves and denounce the
narcissists in the world today are often the biggest narcissists of them
all—they love the sound of their voice as they point fingers and preach.
We are all on the spectrum of self-absorption. Creating a self that we
can love is a healthy development, and there should be no stigma
attached to it. Without self-esteem from within, we would fall into
deep narcissism. But to move beyond functional narcissism, which
should be our goal, we must first be honest with ourselves. Trying to
deny our self-absorbed nature, trying to pretend we are somehow
more altruistic than others, makes it impossible for us to transform
ourselves.
Third and most important, we must begin to make the
transformation into the healthy narcissist. Healthy narcissists have a
stronger, even more resilient sense of self. They tend to hover closer to
the top of the scale. They recover more quickly from any wounds or
insults. They do not need as much validation from others. They realize
at some point in life that they have limits and flaws. They can laugh at
these flaws and not take slights so personally. In many ways, by
embracing the full picture of themselves, their self-love is more real
and complete. From this stronger inner position, they can turn their
attention outward more often and more easily. This attention goes in
one of two directions, and sometimes both. First, they are able to
direct their focus and their love into their work, becoming great artists,
creators, and inventors. Because their outward focus on the work is
more intense, they tend to be successful in their ventures, which gives
them the necessary attention and validation. They can have moments
of doubt and insecurity, and artists can be notoriously brittle, but work
stands as a continual release from too much self-absorption.
The other direction healthy narcissists take is toward people,
developing empathic powers. Imagine empathy as the realm lying at
the very top of the scale and beyond—complete absorption in others.
By our very nature, we humans have tremendous abilities to
understand people from the inside out. In our earliest years, we felt
completely bonded with our mother, and we could sense her every
mood and read her every emotion in a preverbal way. Unlike any other
animal or primate, we also had the ability to extend this beyond the
mother to other caregivers and people in our vicinity.
This is the physical form of empathy that we feel even to this day
with our closest friends, spouses, or partners. We also have a natural
ability to take the perspective of others, to think our way inside their
minds. These powers largely lie dormant because of our self-
absorption. But in our twenties and beyond, feeling more confident
about ourselves, we can begin to focus outward, on people, and
rediscover these powers. Those who practice this empathy often
become superior social observers in the arts or sciences, therapists,
and leaders of the highest order.
The need to develop this empathy is greater than ever. Various
studies have indicated a gradual increase in levels of self-absorption
and narcissism in young people since the late 1970s, with a much
higher spike since 2000. Much of this can be attributed to technology
and the internet. People simply spend less time in social interactions
and more time socializing online, which makes it increasingly difficult
to develop empathy and sharpen social skills. Like any skill, empathy
comes through the quality of attention. If your attention is continually
interrupted by the need to look at your smartphone, you are never
really gaining a foothold in the feelings or perspectives of other people.
You are continually drawn back to yourself, flitting about the surface
of social interactions, never really engaging. Even in a crowd, you
remain essentially alone. People come to serve a function—not to bond
with but to placate your insecurities.
Our brains were built for continual social interaction; the
complexity of this interaction is one of the main factors that drastically
increased our intelligence as a species. At a certain point, involving
ourselves less with others has a net negative effect on the brain itself
and atrophies our social muscle. To make matters worse, our culture
tends to emphasize the supreme value of the individual and individual
rights, encouraging greater self-involvement. We find more and more
people who cannot imagine that others have a different perspective,
that we are all not exactly the same in what we desire or think.
You must try to run counter to these developments and create
empathic energy. Each side of the spectrum has its peculiar
momentum. Deep narcissism tends to sink you deeper, as your
connection to reality lessens and you are unable to really develop your
work or your relationships. Empathy does the opposite. As you
increasingly turn your attention outward, you get constant positive
feedback. People want to be around you more. You develop your
empathic muscle; your work improves; without trying, you gain the
attention that all humans thrive on. Empathy creates its own upward,
positive momentum.
The following are the four components that go into the empathic
skill set.
The empathic attitude: Empathy is more than anything a state
of mind, a different way of relating to others. The greatest danger you
face is your general assumption that you really understand people and
that you can quickly judge and categorize them. Instead, you must
begin with the assumption that you are ignorant and that you have
natural biases that will make you judge people incorrectly. The people
around you present a mask that suits their purposes. You mistake the
mask for reality. Let go of your tendency to make snap judgments.
Open your mind to seeing people in a new light. Do not assume that
you are similar or that they share your values. Each person you meet is
like an undiscovered country, with a very particular psychological
chemistry that you will carefully explore. You are more than ready to
be surprised by what you uncover. This flexible, open spirit is similar
to creative energy—a willingness to consider more possibilities and
options. In fact, developing your empathy will also improve your
creative powers.
The best place to begin this transformation in your attitude is in
your numerous daily conversations. Try reversing your normal
impulse to talk and give your opinion, desiring instead to hear the
other person’s point of view. You have tremendous curiosity in this
direction. Cut off your incessant interior monologue as best you can.
Give full attention to the other. What matters here is the quality of
your listening, so that in the course of the conversation you can mirror
back to the other person things they said, or things that were left
unsaid but that you sensed. This will have a tremendous seductive
effect.
As part of this attitude, you are giving people the same level of
indulgence that you give yourself. For instance, we all have a tendency
to do the following: When we make a mistake, we attribute it to
circumstances that pushed us into doing it. But when others make a
mistake, we tend to see it as a character flaw, as something that flowed
from their imperfect personality. This is known as the attribution bias.
You must work against this. With an empathic attitude, you consider
first the circumstances that might have made a person do what they
did, giving them the same benefit of the doubt as you give yourself.
Finally, adopting this attitude depends on the quality of your self-
love. If you feel terribly superior to others, or gripped by insecurities,
your moments of empathy and absorption in people will be shallow.
What you need is a complete acceptance of your character, including
your flaws, which you can see clearly but even appreciate and love. You
are not perfect. You are not an angel. You have the same nature as
others. With this attitude, you can laugh at yourself and let slights
wash over you. From a position of genuine inner strength and
resilience, you can more easily direct your attention outward.
Visceral empathy: Empathy is an instrument of emotional
attunement. It is hard for us to read or figure out the thoughts of
another person, but feelings and moods are much easier for us to pick
up. We are all prone to catching the emotions of another person. The
physical boundaries between us and other people are much more
permeable than we realize. People are continually affecting our moods.
What you are doing here is turning this physiological response into
knowledge. Pay deep attention to the moods of people, as indicated by
their body language and tone of voice. When they talk, they have a
feeling tone that is either in sync or not in sync with what they are
saying. This tone can be one of confidence, insecurity, defensiveness,
arrogance, frustration, elation. This tone manifests itself physically in
their voice, their gestures, and their posture. In each encounter, you
must try to detect this before even paying attention to what they are
saying. This will register to you viscerally, in your own physical
response to them. A defensive tone on their part will tend to create a
like feeling in you.
A key element you are trying to figure out is people’s intentions.
There is almost always an emotion behind any intention, and beyond
their words, you are attuning yourself to what they want, their goals,
which will also register physically in you if you pay attention. For
instance, someone you know suddenly shows unusual interest in your
life, gives you the kind of attention you’ve never had before. Is it a real
attempt to connect or a distraction, a means of softening you up so
they can use you for their own purposes? Instead of focusing on their
words, which show interest and excitement, focus on the overall
feeling tone that you pick up. How deeply are they listening? Are they
making consistent eye contact? Does it feel like even though they are
listening to you, they are absorbed in themselves? If you are the object
of sudden attention but it seems unreliable, they are probably
intending to ask something of you, to use and manipulate you in some
way.
This kind of empathy depends largely on mirror neurons—those
neurons that fire in our brain when we watch someone do something,
such as picking up an object, just as if we were doing it ourselves. This
allows us to put ourselves in the shoes of others and to feel what it
must be like. Studies have revealed that people who score high on tests
of empathy are generally excellent mimics. When someone smiles or
winces in pain, they tend to unconsciously imitate the expression,
giving them a feel for what others are feeling. When we see someone
smiling and in a good mood, it tends to have a contagious effect on us.
You can consciously use this power in trying to get into the emotions
of others, either by literally mimicking their facial gestures or by
conjuring up memories of similar experiences that stirred such
emotions. Before Alex Haley began writing Roots, he spent some time
in the dark interior of a ship, trying to re-create the claustrophobic
horror slaves must have experienced. A visceral connection to their
feelings allowed him to write himself into their world.
As an adjunct to this, mirroring people on any level will draw out an
empathic response from them. This can be physical, and is known as
the chameleon effect. People who are connecting physically and
emotionally in a conversation will tend to mimic each other’s gestures
and posture, both crossing their legs, for instance. To a degree, you
can do this consciously to induce a connection by deliberately
mimicking someone. Similarly, nodding your head as they talk and
smiling will deepen the connection. Even better, you can enter the
spirit of the other person. You absorb their mood deeply and reflect it
back to them. You create a feeling of rapport. People secretly crave this
emotional rapport in their daily lives, because they get it so rarely. It
has a hypnotic effect and appeals to people’s narcissism as you become
their mirror.
In practicing this type of empathy, keep in mind that you must
maintain a degree of distance. You are not becoming completely
enmeshed in the emotions of another. This will make it hard for you to
analyze what you are picking up and can lead to a loss of control that is
not healthy. Also, doing this too strongly and obviously can create a
creepy effect. The nodding, smiling, and mirroring at selected
moments should be subtle, almost impossible to detect.
Analytic empathy: The reason you are able to understand your
friends or partner so deeply is that you have a lot of information about
their tastes, values, and family background. We have all had the
experience of thinking we know someone but over time having to
adjust our original impression once we get more information. So while
physical empathy is extremely powerful, it must be supplemented by
analytic empathy. This can prove particularly helpful with people
toward whom we feel resistant and whom we have a hard time
identifying with—either because they are very different from us or
because there is something about them that repels us. In such cases we
naturally resort to judging and putting them into categories. There are
people out there who are not worth the effort—supreme fools or true
psychopaths. But for most others who seem hard to figure out, we
should see it as an excellent challenge and a way to improve our skills.
As Abraham Lincoln said, “I don’t like that man. I must get to know
him better.”
Analytic empathy comes mostly through conversation and
gathering information that will allow you to get inside the spirit of
others. Some pieces of information are more valuable than others. For
instance, you want to get a read on people’s values, which are mostly
established in their earliest years. People develop concepts of what
they consider strong, sensitive, generous, and weak often based on
their parents and their relationship to them. One woman will see a
man crying as a sign of sensitivity and be attracted to it, while another
will see it as weak and repulsive. By not understanding people’s values
on this level, or by projecting your own, you will misread their
reactions and create unnecessary conflicts.
Your goal, then, is to gather as much as you can about the early
years of the people you are studying and their relationship to their
parents and siblings. Keep in mind that their current relationship to
family will also speak volumes about the past. Try to get a read on
their reactions to authority figures. This will help you see to what
extent they have a rebellious or submissive streak. Their taste in
partners will also say a lot.
If people seem reluctant to talk, try asking open-ended questions,
or begin with a sincere admission of your own to establish trust. In
general people love to talk about themselves and their past, and it is
usually quite easy to get them to open up. Look for trigger points (see
chapter 1) that indicate points of extreme sensitivity. If they come
from another culture, it is all the more important to understand this
culture from within their experience. Your goal in general is to find out
what makes them unique. You are looking precisely for what is
different from yourself and the other people you know.
The empathic skill: Becoming empathetic involves a process,
like anything. In order to make sure that you are really making
progress and improving your ability to understand people on a deeper
level, you need feedback. This can come in one of two forms: direct
and indirect. In the direct form, you ask people about their thoughts
and feelings to get a sense of whether you have guessed correctly. This
must be discreet and based on a level of trust, but it can be a very
accurate gauge of your skill. Then there is the indirect form—you sense
a greater rapport and how certain techniques have worked for you.
To work on this skill, keep several things in mind: The more people
you interact with in the flesh, the better you will get at this. And the
greater the variety of people you meet, the more versatile your skill
will become. Also, keep a sense of flow. Your ideas about people never
quite settle into a judgment. In an encounter, keep your attention
active to see how the other person changes over the course of a
conversation and the effect you are having on them. Be alive to the
moment. Try to see people as they interact with others besides you—
people are often very different depending on the person they are
involved with. Try to focus not on categories but on the feeling tone
and mood that people evoke in you, which is continually shifting. As
you get better at this, you will discover more and more cues that
people give as to their psychology. You will notice more. Continually
mix the visceral with the analytic.
Seeing improvement in your skill level will excite you greatly and
motivate you to go deeper. In general you will notice a smoother ride
through life, as you avoid unnecessary conflicts and
misunderstandings.
The deepest principle of Human Nature is the craving to be
appreciated.
—William James
Four Examples of Narcissistic Types
1. The Complete Control Narcissist. When most people first met Joseph
Stalin (1879–1953) in the early part of his reign as premier of the
Soviet Union, they found him surprisingly charming. Although older
than most of his lieutenants, he encouraged them all to address him
with the familiar “you” form in Russian. He made himself completely
accessible even to junior officials. When he listened to you, it was with
such intensity and interest, his eyes boring into you. He seemed to
pick up your deepest thoughts and doubts. But his greatest trait was to
make you feel important and part of the inner circle of revolutionaries.
He would put his arm around you as he accompanied you out of his
office, always ending the meeting on an intimate note. As one young
man later wrote, people who saw him were “anxious to see him again,”
because “he created a sense that there was now a bond that linked
them forever.” Sometimes he would turn slightly aloof, and it would
drive his courtiers crazy. Then the mood would pass, and they would
bask again in his affection.
Part of his charm lay in the fact that he epitomized the revolution.
He was a man of the people, rough and a bit rude but someone an
average Russian could identify with. And more than anything, Joseph
Stalin could be quite entertaining. He loved to sing and to tell earthy
jokes. With these qualities it was no wonder that he slowly amassed
power and assumed complete control of the Soviet machinery. But as
the years wore on and his power grew, another side to his character
slowly leaked out. The apparent friendliness was not as simple as it
had seemed. Perhaps the first significant sign of this among his inner
circle was the fate of Sergey Kirov, a powerful member of the Politburo
and, since the suicide of Stalin’s wife in 1932, his closest friend and
confidant.
Kirov was an enthusiastic, somewhat simple man who made friends
easily and had a way of comforting Stalin. But Kirov was starting to
become a little too popular. In 1934, several regional leaders
approached him with an offer: they were tired of Stalin’s brutal
treatment of the peasantry; they were going to instigate a coup and
wanted to make Kirov the new premier. Kirov remained loyal—he
revealed the plot to Stalin, who thanked him profusely. But something
changed in his manner toward Kirov from then on, a coldness that had
never been there before.
Kirov understood the predicament he had created—he had revealed
to Stalin that he was not as popular as he had thought, and that one
person in particular was more liked than him. He felt the danger he
was now in. He tried everything he could to assuage Stalin’s
insecurities. In public appearances he mentioned Stalin’s name more
than ever; his expressions of praise became more fulsome. This only
seemed to make Stalin even more suspicious, as if Kirov were trying
too hard to cover up the truth. Now Kirov remembered the many
rough jokes he had made at Stalin’s expense. At the time, it had been
an expression of their closeness that Kirov dared to laugh at him, but
now Stalin would certainly see these jokes in a different light. Kirov
felt trapped and helpless.
In December 1934, a lone gunman assassinated Kirov outside his
office. Although no one could directly implicate Stalin, it seemed
almost certain that the killing had his tacit approval. In the years after
the assassination, one close friend of Stalin after another was arrested,
all of this leading to the great purge within the party during the late
1930s, in which hundreds of thousands lost their lives. Almost all of
his top lieutenants caught up in the purge were tortured for a
confession, and afterward Stalin would listen eagerly as those who had
conducted the torture would tell him of the desperate behavior of his
once-brave friends. He laughed at the accounts of how some got down
on their knees and, weeping, begged for an audience with Stalin to ask
for forgiveness of their sins and to be allowed to live. He seemed to
relish their humiliation.
What had happened to him? What had changed this once so
congenial man? With his closest friends he could still show
unadulterated affection, but in an instant he could turn against them
and send them to their deaths. Other odd traits became apparent.
Outwardly Stalin was extremely modest. He was the proletariat
incarnate. If someone suggested that he be paid some public tribute,
he would react angrily—one man should not be the center of so much
attention, he would proclaim. But slowly his name and image began to
appear everywhere. The newspaper Pravda ran stories on his every
move, almost deifying him. At a military parade, planes would fly
overhead in a formation spelling the name Stalin. He denied having
any involvement in this growing cult around him, but he did nothing
to stop it.
He increasingly spoke of himself in the third person, as if he had
become an impersonal revolutionary force, and as such he was
infallible. If he happened to mispronounce a word in a speech, every
subsequent speaker from then on would have to pronounce it that
way. “If I’d said it right,” confessed one of his top lieutenants, “Stalin
would have felt I was correcting him.” And that could prove suicidal.
As it seemed certain that Hitler was preparing to invade the Soviet
Union, Stalin began to oversee every detail of the war effort. He
continually berated his lieutenants for slackening their efforts: “I am
the only one dealing with all these problems. . . . I am out there by
myself,” he once complained. Soon many of his generals felt like they
were in a double bind: if they spoke their mind he could be terribly
insulted, but if they deferred to his opinion he would fly into a rage.
“What’s the point of talking to you?” he once shouted to a group of
generals. “Whatever I say, you reply, ‘Yes Comrade Stalin; of course,
Comrade Stalin . . . wise decision, Comrade Stalin.’” In his fury at
feeling alone in the war effort, he fired his most competent and
experienced generals. He now oversaw every detail of the war effort,
down to the size and shape of bayonets.
It soon became a matter of life or death for his lieutenants to
accurately read his moods and whims. It was critical to never make
him anxious, which made him dangerously unpredictable. You had to
look him in the eye so that it did not seem like you were hiding
something, but if you looked for too long, he became nervous and self-
conscious, a very risky blend. You were supposed to take notes when
he talked but not write down everything, or you would seem
suspicious. Some who were blunt with him did well, while others
ended up in prison. Perhaps the answer was to know when to mix in a
touch of bluntness but to largely defer. Figuring him out became an
arcane science that they would discuss with one another.
The worst fate of all was to be invited to dinner and a late-night
movie at his house. It was impossible to refuse such an invitation, and
they became more and more frequent after the war. Outwardly it was
just like before—a warm, intimate fraternity of revolutionaries. But
inwardly it was sheer terror. Here, during all-night drinking bouts (his
own drinks were heavily diluted), he would keep a watchful eye on all
of his top lieutenants. He forced them to drink more and more so they
would lose their self-control. He secretly delighted in their struggles to
not say or do anything that would incriminate them.
The worst was toward the end of the evening, when he would pull
out the gramophone, play some music, and order the men to dance.
He would make Nikita Khrushchev, the future premier, do the gopak,
a highly strenuous dance that included much squatting and kicking. It
would often make Khrushchev sick to his stomach. The others he
would have slow dance together while he smiled and laughed
uproariously at the sight of grown men dancing as a couple. It was the
ultimate form of control: the puppet master choreographing their
every move.
•   •   •
Interpretation: The great riddle that Joseph Stalin and his type
present is how people who are so deeply narcissistic can also be so
charming and, through their charm, gain influence. How can they
possibly connect with others when they are so clearly self-obsessed?
How are they able to mesmerize? The answer lies in the early part of
their careers, before they turn paranoid and vicious.
These types generally have more ambition and energy than the
average deep narcissist. They also tend to have even greater
insecurities. The only way they can mollify these insecurities and
satisfy their ambition is by gaining from others more than the usual
share of attention and validation, which can really only come through
securing social power in either politics or business. Early on in life,
these types stumble upon the best means for doing so. As with most
deep narcissists, they are hypersensitive to any perceived slight. They
have fine antennae attuned to people to probe their feelings and
thoughts—to suss out if there is any hint of disrespect. But what they
discover at some point is that this sensitivity can be tuned to others to
probe their desires and insecurities. Being so sensitive, they can listen
to people with deep attention. They can mimic empathy. The
difference is that from within, they are impelled not by the need to
connect but by the need to control people and manipulate them. They
listen and probe you in order to discover weaknesses to play on.
Their attention is not all faked or it would have no effect. In the
moment, they can feel camaraderie as they put their arm around your
shoulder, but afterward they control and stifle its blossoming into
anything real or deeper. If they did not do so, they would risk losing
control of their emotions and opening themselves up to being hurt.
They pull you in with a display of attention and affection, then lure you
in deeper with the inevitable coldness that follows. Did you do or say
something wrong? How can you regain their favor? It can be subtle—it
can register in a glance that lasts a second or two—but it has its effect.
It is the classic push and pull of the coquette that makes you want to
reexperience the warmth you once felt. Combined with the unusually
high levels of confidence displayed by this type, this can have a
devastatingly seductive effect on people and attract followers.
Complete control narcissists stimulate your desire to get closer to
them but keep you at arm’s distance.
All of this is about control. They control their emotions, and they
control your reactions. At some point, as they get more secure in their
power, they will resent the fact that they had to play the charm game.
Why should they have to pay attention to others when it should be the
other way around? So they will inevitably turn against former friends,
revealing the envy and hatred that was always just below the surface.
They control who is in and who is out, who lives and who dies. By
creating double binds in which nothing you say or do will please them,
or by making it seem arbitrary, they terrorize you with this insecurity.
They now control your emotions.
At some point, they will become total micromanagers—whom can
they trust anymore? People have turned into automatons, incapable of
making decisions, so they must oversee everything. If they reach such
extremes, these types will end up destroying themselves, because it is
actually impossible to rid the human animal of free will. People rebel,
even the most cowed. In Stalin’s last days he suffered a stroke, but
none of his lieutenants dared to help him or call for a doctor. He died
from their neglect, as they had come to both fear and loathe him.
You will almost inevitably encounter this type in your life, because
through their ambition they tend to become bosses and CEOs, political
figures, cult leaders. The danger they represent to you is in the
beginning, when they first apply their charm. You can see through
them by employing your visceral empathy. Their show of interest in
you is never deep, never lasts too long, and is inevitably followed by a
coquettish pullback. If you stop being distracted by the outward
attempt at charm, you can sense this coldness and the degree to which
the attention inevitably flows to them.
Look at their past. You will notice that they do not have one single
deep and intimate relationship in which they exposed any
vulnerability. Look for signs of a troubled childhood. Stalin himself
had a father who beat him mercilessly and a rather cold and unloving
mother. Listen to people who have seen their true nature and have
tried to warn others. Indeed, Stalin’s predecessor, Vladimir Lenin, had
understood his lethal nature, and on his deathbed he tried to signal
this to others, but his warnings went unheeded. Notice the terrified
expressions of those who serve such types on a daily basis. If you
suspect you are dealing with this type, you must keep your distance.
They are like tigers—once you are too close, you cannot get away, and
they will devour you.
2. The Theatrical Narcissist. In 1627, the prioress of the Ursuline
nuns in Loudun, France, welcomed into the house a new sister, Jeanne
de Belciel (1602–1665). Jeanne was a strange creature. Rather
dwarfish in size, she had a pretty, angelic face but a malicious glint in
her eye. In her previous house she had made a lot of enemies with her
continual sarcasm. But to the prioress’s surprise, transferred to this
new house, Jeanne seemed to undergo a transformation. She now
acted like a complete angel, offering to help the prioress in all of her
daily tasks. Moreover, given some books to read on Saint Teresa and
mysticism, Jeanne became engrossed in the subject. She spent long
hours discussing spiritual questions with the prioress. Within months
she had become the house expert on mystical theology. She could be
seen meditating and praying for hours, more than any other sister.
Later that same year the prioress was transferred to another house.
Deeply impressed by Jeanne’s behavior and ignoring the advice of
others who did not think so highly of her, the prioress recommended
Jeanne as her replacement. Suddenly, at the very young age of twenty-
five, Jeanne now found herself the head of the Ursuline nuns in
Loudun.
Several months later, the sisters at Loudun began to hear some very
strange stories from Jeanne. She had had a series of dreams, in which
a local parish priest, Urbain Grandier, had visited and physically
assaulted her. The dreams became increasingly erotic and violent.
What was strange was that before these dreams, Jeanne had invited
Grandier to become the director of the Ursuline house, but he had
politely declined. In Loudun, locals considered Grandier a gallant
seducer of young ladies. Was Jeanne merely indulging in her own
fantasies? She was so pious that it was hard to believe she was making
it all up, and the dreams seemed very real and unusually graphic. Soon
after she began telling them to others, several sisters reported having
similar dreams. One day the house confessor, Canon Mignon, heard a
sister recount such a dream. Mignon, like many others, had long
despised Grandier, and he saw in these dreams an opportunity to
finally do him in. He called in some exorcists to work on the nuns, and
soon almost all of the sisters were reporting nightly visits from
Grandier. To the exorcists it was clear—these nuns were possessed by
devils under the control of Grandier.
For the edification of the citizenry, Mignon and his allies opened
the exorcisms up to the public, who now flocked from far and wide to
witness a most entertaining scene. The nuns would roll on the ground,
writhing, showing their legs, screaming endless obscenities. And of all
the sisters, Jeanne seemed the most possessed. Her contortions were
more violent, and the demons that spoke through her were more
strident in their satanic oaths. It was one of the strongest possessions
they had ever seen, and the public clamored to witness her exorcisms
above all the others. It now seemed apparent to the exorcists that
Grandier, despite never having set foot in the house or having met
Jeanne, had somehow bewitched and debauched the good sisters of
Loudun. He was soon arrested and charged with sorcery.
Based on the evidence, Grandier was condemned to death. After
much torture, he was burned at the stake on August 18, 1634, before
an enormous crowd. Soon the whole business quieted down. The nuns
were suddenly cleared of demons—all except Jeanne. The demons
were not only refusing to leave her but were gaining a stronger hold on
her. The Jesuits, hearing of this notorious possession, decided to take
charge of the affair and sent father Jean-Joseph Surin to exorcise her
once and for all. Surin found her a fascinating subject. She was
completely versed in matters concerning demonology and was clearly
despondent at her fate. And yet she did not seem to resist strongly
enough the demons who inhabited her. Perhaps she had succumbed to
their influence.
One thing was certain: she had taken an unusual liking to Surin and
kept him in the house for hours for spiritual discussions. She started to
pray and meditate with more energy. She got rid of all possible
luxuries: she slept on the hard floor and had vomit-inducing potions of
wormwood poured over her food. She reported to Surin her progress
and confessed to him “that she had come so near to God that she had
received . . . a kiss from his mouth.”
With Surin’s help, one demon after another fled her body. And then
came her first miracle: the name Joseph could be read quite clearly in
the palm of her left hand. When this faded away after several days, it
was replaced by the name of Jesus, and then Mary, and then other
names. It was a stigmata, a sign of true grace from God. After this
Jeanne fell deeply ill and seemed close to death. She reported being
visited by a beautiful young angel with long, flowing blond hair. Then
Saint Joseph himself came to her and touched her side, where she felt
the greatest pain, and anointed her with a fragrant oil. She recovered,
and the oil left a mark on her chemise in the form of five clear drops.
The demons were now gone, to Surin’s enormous relief. The story was
over, but Jeanne surprised him with a strange request: she wanted to
go on a tour of Europe, displaying these miracles to one and all. She
felt it was her duty to do so. It seemed oddly contradictory to her
modest character and ever so slightly worldly, but Surin agreed to
accompany her.
In Paris, enormous crowds filled the streets outside her hotel,
wanting to catch a glimpse of her. She met Cardinal Richelieu, who
seemed quite moved and kissed the fragrant chemise, now a saintly
relic. She showed her stigmata to the King and Queen of France. The
tour moved on. She met the greatest aristocrats and luminaries of her
era. In one town, every day crowds of seven thousand people would
enter the convent where she was staying. The demand to hear her
story was so intense that she decided to issue a printed booklet in
which she described in great detail her possession, her most intimate
thoughts, and the miracle that had occurred.
At her death in 1665, the head of Jeanne des Anges, as she was now
known, was decapitated, mummified, and placed in a silver-gilt box
with crystal windows. It was displayed next to the anointed chemise
for those who wanted to see it, at the Ursuline house in Loudun, until
its disappearance during the French Revolution.
•   •   •
Interpretation: In her earliest years, Jeanne de Belciel displayed an
insatiable appetite for attention. She wearied her parents, who finally
got rid of her by sending her to a convent in Poitiers. There she
proceeded to drive the nuns insane with her sarcasm and incredible air
of superiority. Sent off to Loudun, it seemed she decided to try a
different approach to gaining the recognition she so desperately
needed. Given books on spirituality, she determined she would excel
all others in her knowledge and pious behavior. She made a complete
show of both and gained the good favor of the prioress. But as head of
the house, she felt bored, and the attention she now received
inadequate. Her dreams of Grandier were a mix of fabrication and
autosuggestion. Soon after the exorcists arrived, she was given a book
on demonology, which she devoured, and knowing the various ins and
outs of devil inhabitation, she proceeded to give herself all of the most
dramatic traits, which would be picked up by the exorcists as sure
signs of possession. She became the star of the public spectacle. While
possessed, she went further than all others in her degradation and
lewd behavior.
After Grandier’s gruesome execution, which profoundly affected the
other nuns, who certainly felt guilt at the part they had played in the
death of an innocent man, Jeanne alone felt the sudden lack of
attention as unbearable and so she upped the ante by refusing to let go
of the demons. She had become a master at sensing the weaknesses
and hidden desires of those around her—first the prioress, and then
the exorcists, and now Father Surin. He wanted so badly to be the one
to redeem her that he would fall for the simplest of miracles. As for the
stigmata, some later speculated that she had etched these names with
acid, or traced them through colored starch. It seemed odd that they
appeared only on her left hand, where it would be easy for her to write
them out. It is known that in extreme hysteria the skin becomes
particularly sensitive, and a fingernail can do the trick. As someone
who had long experimented in concocting herbal remedies, it was easy
for her to apply fragrant drops. Once people believed in the stigmata,
it would be hard for them to doubt the anointment.
Even Surin found the need for a tour dubious. At this point, she
could no longer disguise her true appetite for attention. Years later,
Jeanne wrote an autobiography in which she admitted to a completely
theatrical side to her personality. She was continually playing a part,
although she maintained that the final miracle was sincere and real.
Many of the sisters who dealt with her on a daily basis saw through the
façade and described her as a consummate actress addicted to
attention and fame.
One of the strange paradoxes about deep narcissism is that it often
goes unnoticed by others, until the behavior becomes too extreme to
ignore. The reason for this is simple: deep narcissists can be masters of
disguise. They sense early on that if they revealed their true selves to
others—their need for constant attention and to feel superior—they
would repel people. They use their lack of a coherent self as an
advantage. They can play many parts. They can disguise their need for
attention through various dramatic devices. They can go further than
anyone in seeming moral and altruistic. They never just give or
support the right cause—they make a show of it. Who wants to doubt
the sincerity of this display of morality? Or they go in the opposite
direction, reveling in their status as a victim, as someone suffering at
the hands of others or neglected by the world. It is easy to get caught
up in the drama of the moment, only to suffer later as they consume
you with their needs or use you for their purposes. They play on your
empathy.
Your only solution is to see through the trick. Recognize this type
by the fact that the focus always seems to be on them. Notice how they
are always superior in supposed goodness or suffering or squalor. See
the continual drama and the theatrical quality of their gestures.
Everything they do or say is for public consumption. Do not let
yourself become collateral damage in their drama.
3. The Narcissistic Couple. In 1862, several days before thirty-two-
year-old Leo Tolstoy was to wed Sonya Behrs, only eighteen years old
at the time, he suddenly decided that there should be no secrets
between them. As part of that, he brought her his diaries, and to his
surprise, what she read made her weep and get quite angry as well. In
these pages he had written about his many previous love affairs,
including his ongoing infatuation with a nearby peasant woman with
whom he had had a child. He also wrote about the brothels he
frequented, the gonorrhea he had caught, and his endless gambling.
She felt intense jealousy and disgust at the same time. Why make her
read this? She accused him of having second thoughts, of not really
loving her. Taken aback by this reaction, he accused her of the same.
He wanted to share with her his old ways, so that she would
understand he was happily forsaking them for a new life, with her.
Why should she rebuke his attempt at honesty? She clearly did not
love him as much as he had thought. Why was it so painful for her to
say good-bye to her family before the wedding? Did she love them
more than him? They managed to reconcile and the wedding took
place, but a pattern was set that would continue for forty-eight years.
For Sonya, despite their frequent arguments, the marriage
eventually settled into a relatively comfortable rhythm. She had
become his most trusted assistant. Besides bearing eight children in
twelve years, five of whom survived, she carefully copied out his books
for him, including War and Peace and Anna Karenina, and managed
much of the business side of publishing his books. Everything seemed
to be going along well enough—he was a rich man, from both the
family estates he had inherited and the sales of his books. He had a
large family who doted on him. He was famous. But suddenly, at the
age of fifty, he felt immensely unhappy and ashamed of the books he
had written. He no longer knew who he was. He was undergoing a
deep spiritual crisis, and he found the Orthodox Church too strict and
dogmatic to help him. His life had to change. He would write no more
novels, and henceforth he would live like a common peasant. He
would give up his property and renounce all copyrights on his books.
And he asked his family to join him in this new life devoted to helping
others and to spiritual matters.
To his dismay the family, Sonya leading the way, reacted angrily.
He was asking them to give up their style of living, their comforts, and
the children’s future inheritance. Sonya did not feel the need for any
drastic change in their lifestyle, and she resented his accusations that
she was somehow evil and materialistic for resisting. They fought and
fought, and neither budged. Now when Tolstoy looked at his wife, all
he could see was someone who was using him for his fame and his
money. That was clearly why she had married him. And when she
looked at him, all she could see was a rank hypocrite. Although he had
given up his property rights, he continued living like a lord and asking
her for money for his habits. He dressed like a peasant, but if he fell ill
he would travel to the South in a luxury private railway coach to a villa
in which he could convalesce. And despite his new vow of celibacy, he
kept making her pregnant.
Tolstoy craved a simple, spiritual life, and she was now the main
stumbling block to this. He found her presence in the house
oppressive. He wrote her a letter in which he finished by saying, “You
attribute what has happened to everything except the one thing, that
you are the unwitting, unintentional cause of my sufferings. A struggle
to the death is going on between us.” Out of his increasing bitterness at
her materialistic ways, he wrote the novella The Kreutzer Sonata,
clearly based on their marriage and painting her in the worst light. For
Sonya, the effect of all this was that she felt like she was losing her
mind. Finally, in 1894, she snapped. Imitating one of the characters in
a Tolstoy story, she decided to commit suicide by walking out into the
snow and freezing herself to death. A family member caught up with
her and dragged her back to the house. She repeated the attempt twice
more, with no better effect.
Now the pattern became sharper and more violent. Tolstoy would
push her buttons; she would do something desperate; Tolstoy would
feel remorse for his coldness and beg for her forgiveness. He would
give in to her on some issues, for instance, allowing the family to
retain the copyrights on his earlier books. Then some new behavior on
her part would make him regret this. She constantly tried to pit the
children against him. She had to read everything he wrote in his
diaries, and if he hid them, she would somehow find them and read
them on the sly. She watched his every move. He would berate her
wildly for her meddling, sometimes falling ill in the process, which
made her regret her actions. What was holding them together? Each
one craved the acceptance and love of the other, but it seemed
impossible to expect that anymore.
After years of suffering through this, in late October of 1910,
Tolstoy finally had had enough: in the middle of the night he stole
away from the house with a doctor friend accompanying him,
determined to finally leave Sonya. He was trembling all the way, in
terror of being surprised and overtaken by his wife, but finally he
boarded a train and got away from her. When she got the news, Sonya
attempted suicide yet again, throwing herself in the nearby pond, only
to be rescued just in time. She wrote Tolstoy a letter, begging him to
come back. Yes, she would change her ways. She would renounce all
luxuries. She would become spiritual. She would love him
unconditionally. She could not live without him.
For Tolstoy, his taste of freedom was short-lived. The newspapers
were now full of accounts of his running away from his wife.
Everywhere the train stopped, reporters, devoted fans, and the curious
mobbed him. He could not take anymore the packed and freezing
conditions on the train. Soon he fell deathly ill and had to be carried to
a stationmaster’s cottage near the railway tracks in some out-of-the-
way village. In bed, it was clear now he was dying. He heard that Sonya
had arrived in town but could not bear the thought of seeing her now.
The family kept her outside, where she continued to peer through the
window at him as he lay dying. Finally, when he was unconscious, she
was allowed in. She knelt beside him, kissed him continually on the
forehead, and whispered into his ear, “Forgive me. Please forgive me.”
He died shortly thereafter. A month later, a visitor to the Tolstoy house
reported the following words from Sonya: “What happened to me?
What came over me? How could I have done it? . . . You know I killed
him.”
•   •   •
Interpretation: Leo Tolstoy displayed all of the signs of the deep
narcissist. His mother had died when he was two and left a giant hole
in him that he could never fill, although he tried to do so with his
numerous affairs. He behaved recklessly in his youth, as if this could
somehow make him feel alive and whole. He felt continually disgusted
with himself and could not figure out who exactly he was. He poured
this uncertainty into his novels, assuming different roles in the
characters he created. And by the age of fifty, he finally fell into a deep
crisis over his fragmented self. Sonya herself rated high on the self-
absorption scale. But in looking at people we tend to overemphasize
their individual traits and not look at the more complex picture of how
each side in a relationship continually shapes the other. A relationship
has a life and personality all its own. And a relationship can also be
deeply narcissistic, accentuating or even bringing out the narcissistic
tendencies of both sides.
What generally makes a relationship narcissistic is the lack of
empathy that makes the partners retreat deeper and deeper into their
own defensive positions. In the case of the Tolstoys this started right
away, with the reading of his diary. Each side had their divergent
values through which they viewed the other. To Sonya, raised in a
conventional household, this was the act of a man who clearly
regretted his marriage proposal; to Tolstoy, the iconoclastic artist, her
reaction meant she was incapable of seeing into his soul, of trying to
understand his desire for a new married life. They each misunderstood
the other and fell into hardened positions that lasted for forty-eight
years.
Tolstoy’s spiritual crisis epitomized this narcissistic dynamic. If
only in that moment they each could have attempted to see this action
through the eyes of the other. Tolstoy could have clearly foreseen her
reaction. She had lived her whole life in relative comfort, which had
helped her manage the frequent pregnancies and upbringing of so
many children. She had never been deeply spiritual. Their connection
had always been more physical. Why should he expect her to suddenly
change? His demands were almost sadistic. He could have simply
explained his own side without demanding that she follow him, even
expressing his understanding of her own position and needs. That
would have revealed true spirituality on his part. And she, instead of
focusing only on his hypocrisy, could have seen a man who was clearly
unhappy with himself, someone who had never felt loved enough since
early childhood and who was undergoing a very real personal crisis.
She could have offered her love and support for his new life while
gently declining to follow him all the way.
Such use of empathy has the opposite effect of mutual narcissism.
Coming from one side, it tends to soften the other one up and invite
his or her empathy as well. It is hard to stay in one’s defensive position
when the other person is seeing and expressing your side and entering
your spirit. It beckons you to do the same. Secretly people yearn to let
go of their resistance. It is exhausting to continually be so defensive
and suspicious.
The key to employing empathy within a relationship is to
understand the value system of the other person, which inevitably is
different from yours. What they interpret as signs of love or attention
or generosity tends to diverge from your way of thinking. These value
systems are largely formed in early childhood and are not consciously
created by people. Keeping in mind their value system will allow you to
enter their spirit and perspective precisely in the moment you would
normally turn defensive. Even deep narcissists can be pulled out of
their shell in this way, because such attention is so rare. Measure all of
your relationships on the narcissism spectrum. It is not one person or
the other but the dynamic itself that must be altered.
4. The Healthy Narcissist—the Mood Reader. In October of 1915, the
great English explorer Sir Ernest Henry Shackleton (1874–1922)
ordered the abandonment of the ship Endurance, which had been
trapped in an ice floe in Antarctica for over eight months and was
beginning to take on water. For Shackleton this meant he essentially
had to give up on his great dream of leading his men on the first land
crossing of the Antarctic continent. This was to have been the
culmination of his illustrious career as an explorer, but now a much
greater responsibility weighed on his mind—to somehow get the
twenty-seven men of his crew safely back home. Their lives would
depend on his daily decisions.
To realize this goal, he faced many obstacles: the harsh winter
weather about to hit them, the drifting currents that could pull the ice
floe they were to camp on in any direction, the coming days without
any light, the dwindling food supplies, the lack of any radio contact or
ship to transport them. But the greatest danger of all, the one that
filled him with the most dread, was the morale of the men. All it would
take was a few malcontents to spread resentment and negativity; soon
the men would not work as hard; they would tune him out and lose
faith in his leadership. Once that happened, it could be every man for
himself, and in this climate that could easily spell disaster and death.
He would have to monitor their group spirit even more closely than
the changing weather.
The first thing he had to do was get out ahead of the problem and
infect the crew with the proper spirit. It all started from the leader. He
would have to hide all of his own doubts and fears. The first morning
on the ice floe, he got up earlier than anyone and prepared an extra-
large helping of hot tea. As he personally served it to the men, he
sensed they were looking to him for cues on how to feel about their
plight, so he kept the mood light, mixing in some humor about their
new home and the coming darkness. It was not the right time to
discuss his ideas for getting out of this mess. That would make them
too anxious. He would not verbalize his optimism about their chances
but would let the men feel it in his manner and body language, even if
he had to fake it.
They all knew they were trapped there for the coming winter. What
they needed was distractions, something to occupy their minds and
keep their spirits up. For that purpose, every day he drew up a duty
roster outlining who would be doing what. He tried to mix it up as
much as possible, shifting the men around in various groups and
making sure they never did the same task too often. For each day there
was a simple goal to accomplish—some penguins or seals to hunt,
some more stores from the ship to bring to the tents, the construction
of a better campground. At the end of the day, they could sit around
the campfire feeling they had done something to make their lives a
little easier.
As the days wore on, he developed an increasingly sharp
attunement to the men’s shifting moods. Around the campfire, he
would walk up to each man and engage him in a conversation. With
the scientists he talked science; with the more aesthetic types he talked
of his favorite poets and composers. He got into their particular spirit
and was especially attentive to any problems they were experiencing.
The cook seemed particularly aggrieved that he would have to kill his
pet cat; they were out of food to feed it. Shackleton volunteered to do it
for him. It was clear that the physicist on board was having a difficult
time with the hard labor; at night he ate slowly and sighed wearily.
When Shackleton talked to him, he could feel that his spirit was
lowering by the day. Without making him feel like he was shirking,
Shackleton changed the roster around to give him lighter but equally
important tasks.
He quickly recognized a few weak links in the group. First there was
Frank Hurley, the ship’s photographer. He was good at his job and
never complained about doing other chores, but he was a man who
needed to feel important. He had a snobbish bent. So on those first
days on the ice, Shackleton made a point of asking Hurley for his
opinion on all significant matters, such as food stores, and
complimenting him on his ideas. Furthermore he assigned Hurley to
his own tent, which both made Hurley feel more important than the
others and made it easier for Shackleton to keep an eye on him. The
navigator, Huberht Hudson, revealed himself to be very self-centered
and a terrible listener. He needed constant attention. Shackleton
talked with him more than with any of the others and also brought
him into his tent. If there were other men he suspected of being latent
malcontents, he spread them around in different tents, diluting their
possible influence.
As the winter wore on, he doubled his attentiveness. At certain
moments, he could feel the boredom of the men in how they carried
themselves, in how they talked less and less to one another. To combat
this, he organized sporting events on the ice during the sunless days
and entertainments at night—music, practical jokes, storytelling.
Every holiday was carefully observed, with a large feast set out for the
men. The endless days of drifting somehow were filled with highlights,
and soon he began to notice something remarkable: the men were
decidedly cheery and even seemed to be enjoying the challenges of life
on a drifting ice floe.
At one point the floe they were on had become dangerously small,
and so he ordered the men into the three small lifeboats they had
salvaged from the Endurance. They needed to head for land. He kept
the boats together and, braving the rough waters, they managed to
land on the nearby Elephant Island, on a narrow patch of beach. As he
surveyed the island that day, it was clear the conditions on it were in
some ways worse than the ice floe. Time was against them. That same
day, Shackleton ordered one boat to be prepared for an extremely
risky attempt to reach the most accessible and inhabited patch of land
in the area—South Georgia Island, some eight hundred miles to the
northeast. The chances of making it were slim, but the men could not
survive long on Elephant Island, with its exposure to the sea and the
paucity of animals to kill.
Shackleton had to choose carefully the five other men, besides
himself, for this voyage. One man he selected, Harry McNeish, was a
very odd choice. He was the ship’s carpenter and the oldest member of
the crew at fifty-seven. He could be grumpy and did not take well to
hard labor. Even though it would be an extremely rough journey in
their small boat, Shackleton was too afraid to leave him behind. He
put him in charge of fitting out the boat for the trip. With this task, he
would feel personally responsible for the boat’s safety, and on the
journey his mind would be continually occupied with keeping track of
the boat’s seaworthiness.
At one point during the voyage, he noticed McNeish’s spirits
sinking, and suddenly the man stopped rowing. Shackleton sensed the
danger here—if he yelled at McNeish or ordered him to row, he would
probably become even more rebellious, and with so few men crowded
together for so many weeks with so little food, this could turn ugly.
Improvising in the moment, he stopped the boat and ordered the
boiling of hot milk for everyone. He said they were all getting tired,
including himself, and they needed their spirits lifted. McNeish was
spared the embarrassment of being singled out, and for the rest of
journey, Shackleton repeated this ploy as often as necessary.
A few miles from their destination, a sudden storm pushed them
back. As they desperately looked for a new approach to the island, a
small bird kept hovering over them, trying to land on their boat.
Shackleton struggled to maintain his usual composure, but suddenly
he lost it, standing and swinging wildly at the bird while swearing.
Almost immediately he felt embarrassed and sat back down. For
fifteen months he had kept all of his frustrations in check for the sake
of the men and to maintain morale. He had set the tone. Now was not
the time to go back on this. Minutes later, he made a joke at his own
expense and vowed to himself never to repeat such a display, no
matter the pressure.
After a journey over some of the worst ocean conditions in the
world, the tiny boat finally managed to land at South Georgia Island,
and several months later, with the help of the whalers who worked
there, all of the remaining men on Elephant Island were rescued.
Considering the odds against them, the climate, the impossible terrain,
the tiny boats, and their meager resources, it was one of the most
remarkable survival stories in history. Slowly word spread of the role
that Shackleton’s leadership had played in this. As the explorer Sir
Edmund Hillary later summed it up: “For scientific leadership give me
Scott; for swift, efficient travel, Amundsen; but when you are in a
hopeless situation, when there seems no way out, get down on your
knees and pray for Shackleton.”
•   •   •
Interpretation: When Shackleton found himself responsible for the
lives of so many men in such desperate circumstances, he understood
what would spell the difference between life or death: the men’s
attitude. This is not something visible. It is rarely discussed or
analyzed in books. There are no training manuals on the subject. And
yet it was the most important factor of all. A slight dip in their spirit,
some cracks in their unity, and it would become too difficult to make
the right decisions under such duress. One attempt at getting free of
the floe, taken out of the impatience and pressure from a few, would
certainly lead to death. In essence, Shackleton was thrown back into
the most elemental and primal condition of the human animal—a
group in danger, dependent on one another for survival. It was in just
such circumstances that our most distant ancestors evolved superior
social skills, the uncanny human ability to read the moods and minds
of others, and to cooperate. And in the sunless months on the ice floe,
Shackleton himself would rediscover these ancient empathic skills that
lie dormant in us all, because he had to.
How Shackleton went about this task should serve as the model for
all of us. First, he understood the primary role that his own attitude
would play in this. The leader infects the group with his mind-set.
Much of this occurs on the nonverbal level, as people pick up on the
leader’s body language and tone of voice. Shackleton imbued himself
with an air of complete confidence and optimism and watched how
this infected the men’s spirit.
Second, he had to divide his attention almost equally between
individuals and the group. With the group he monitored levels of
chattiness at mealtimes, the amount of swearing he heard during
work, how quickly the mood elevated when some entertainment had
begun. With individuals he read their emotional states in their tone of
voice, how quickly they ate their food, how slowly they rose out of bed.
If he noticed a particular mood of theirs that day, he would try to
anticipate what they might do by putting himself in a similar mood.
He looked for any signs of frustration or insecurity in their words and
gestures. He had to treat each person differently, depending on his
particular psychology. He also had to constantly adjust his readings, as
people’s moods shifted quickly.
Third, in detecting any dips in spirit or negativity, he had to be
gentle. Scolding would only make people feel ashamed and singled
out, which would lead to contagious effects down the road. Better to
engage them in talk, to enter their spirit, and to find indirect ways to
either elevate their mood or isolate them without making them realize
what he was doing. As Shackleton practiced this, he noticed how much
better he became at it. In one quick glance in the morning, he could
almost anticipate how the men would act during the entire day. Some
fellow crew members thought he was psychic.
Understand: What makes us develop these empathic powers is
necessity. If we feel our survival depends on how well we gauge the
moods and minds of others, then we will find the requisite focus and
tap into the powers. Normally we do not feel the need for this. We
imagine that we understand quite well the people we deal with. Life
can be harsh and we have too many other tasks to attend to. We are
lazy and prefer to rely upon predigested judgments. But in fact it is a
matter of life and death and our success does depend on the
development of these skills. We simply are not aware of this because
we do not see the connection between problems in our lives and our
constant misreading of people’s moods and intentions and the endless
missed opportunities that accrue from this.
The first step, then, is the most important: to realize you have a
remarkable social tool that you are not cultivating. The best way to see
this is to try it out. Stop your incessant interior monologue and pay
deeper attention to people. Attune yourself to the shifting moods of
individuals and the group. Get a read on each person’s particular
psychology and what motivates them. Try to take their perspective,
enter their world and value system. You will suddenly become aware of
an entire world of nonverbal behavior you never knew existed, as if
your eyes could now suddenly see ultraviolet light. Once you sense this
power, you will feel its importance and awaken to new social
possibilities.
I do not ask the wounded person how he feels. . . . I myself become
the wounded person.
—Walt Whitman
P
3
See Through People’s Masks
The Law of Role-playing
eople tend to wear the mask that shows them off in the best
possible light—humble, confident, diligent. They say the right
things, smile, and seem interested in our ideas. They learn to conceal
their insecurities and envy. If we take this appearance for reality, we
never really know their true feelings, and on occasion we are
blindsided by their sudden resistance, hostility, and manipulative
actions. Fortunately, the mask has cracks in it. People continually
leak out their true feelings and unconscious desires in the nonverbal
cues they cannot completely control—facial expressions, vocal
inflections, tension in the body, and nervous gestures. You must
master this language by transforming yourself into a superior reader
of men and women. Armed with this knowledge, you can take the
proper defensive measures. On the other hand, since appearances are
what people judge you by, you must learn how to present the best
front and play your role to maximum effect.
The Second Language
One morning in August 1919 seventeen-year-old Milton Erickson,
future pioneer in hypnotherapy and one of the most influential
psychologists of the twentieth century, awoke to discover parts of his
body suddenly paralyzed. Over the next few days the paralysis spread.
He was soon diagnosed with polio, a near epidemic at the time. As he
lay in bed, he heard his mother in another room discussing his case
with two specialists the family had called in. Assuming Erickson was
asleep, one of the doctors told her, “The boy will be dead by morning.”
His mother came into his room, clearly trying to disguise her grief,
unaware that her son had overhead the conversation. Erickson kept
asking her to move the chest of drawers near his bed over here, over
there. She thought he was delusional, but he had his reasons: he
wanted to distract her from her anguish, and he wanted the mirror on
the chest positioned just right. If he began to lose consciousness, he
could focus on the sunset in the reflected mirror, holding on to this
image as long as he could. The sun always returned; maybe he would
as well, proving the doctors wrong. Within hours he fell into a coma.
Erickson regained consciousness three days later. Somehow he had
cheated death, but now the paralysis had spread to his entire body.
Even his lips were paralyzed. He could not move or gesture, nor
communicate to others in any way. The only body parts he could move
were his eyeballs, allowing him to scan the narrow space of his room.
Quarantined in the house on the farm in rural Wisconsin where he
grew up, his only company was his seven sisters, his one brother, his
parents, and a private nurse. For someone with such an active mind,
the boredom was excruciating. But one day as he listened to his sisters
talking among themselves, he became aware of something he had
never noticed before. As they talked, their faces made all kinds of
movements, and the tone of their voices seemed to have a life of its
own. One sister said to another, “Yes, that’s a good idea,” but she said
this in a monotone and with a noticeable smirk, all of which seemed to
say, “I actually don’t think it’s a good idea at all.” Somehow a yes could
really mean no.
Now he paid attention to this. It was a stimulating game. In the
course of the next day he counted sixteen different forms of no that he
heard, indicating various degrees of hardness, all accompanied by
different facial expressions. At one point he noticed one sister saying
yes to something while actually shaking her head no. It was very
subtle, but he saw it. If people said yes but really felt no, it appeared to
show up in their grimaces and body language. On another occasion he
watched closely from the corner of his eye as one sister offered another
an apple, but the tension in her face and tightness in her arms
indicated she was just being polite and clearly wanted to keep it for
herself. This signal was not picked up, and yet it seemed so clear to
him.
Unable to participate in conversations, he found his mind
completely absorbed in observing people’s hand gestures, their raised
eyebrows, the pitch of their voices, and the sudden folding of their
arms. He noticed, for instance, how often the veins in his sisters’ necks
would begin to pulsate when they stood over him, indicating the
nervousness they felt in his presence. Their breathing patterns as they
spoke fascinated him, and he discovered that certain rhythms
indicated boredom and were generally followed by a yawn. Hair
seemed to play an important role with his sisters. A very deliberate
brushing back of strands of hair would indicate impatience—“I’ve
heard enough; now please shut up.” But a quicker, more unconscious
stroke could indicate rapt attention.
Trapped in bed, his hearing became more acute. He could now pick
up conversations in the other room, where people were not trying to
put on a pleasant show in front of him. And soon he noticed a peculiar
pattern—in a conversation people were rarely direct. A sister could
spend minutes beating around the bush, leaving hints to others about
what she really wanted—such as to borrow an article of clothing or
hear an apology from someone. Her hidden desire was clearly
indicated by her tone of voice, which gave emphasis to certain words.
Her hope was that the others would pick this up and offer what she
desired, but often the hints were ignored and she would be forced to
come out and say what she wanted. Conversation after conversation
fell into this recurring pattern. Soon it became a game for him to guess
within as few seconds as possible what the sister was hinting at.
It was as if in his paralysis he had suddenly become aware of a
second channel of human communication, a second language in which
people expressed something from deep within themselves, sometimes
without being aware of it. What would happen if he could somehow
master the intricacies of this language? How would it alter his
perception of people? Could he extend his reading powers to the
nearly invisible gestures people made with their lips, their breath, the
level of tension in their hands?
One day several months later, as he sat near a window in a special
reclining chair his family had designed for him, he listened to his
brother and sisters playing outside. (He had regained movement in his
lips and could speak, but his body remained paralyzed.) He wanted so
desperately to join them. As if momentarily forgetting his paralysis, in
his mind he began to stand up, and for a brief second he experienced
the twitching of a muscle in his leg, the first time he had felt any
movement in his body at all. The doctors had told his mother he would
never walk again, but they had been wrong before. Based on this
simple twitch, he decided to try an experiment. He would focus deeply
on a particular muscle in his leg, remembering the sensation he had
before his paralysis, wanting badly to move it, and imagining it
functioning again. His nurse would massage that area, and slowly,
with intermittent success, he would feel a twitch and then the slightest
bit of movement returning to the muscle. Through this excruciatingly
slow process he taught himself to stand, then take a few steps, then
walk around his room, then walk outside, increasing the distances.
Somehow, by drawing upon his willpower and imagination, he was
able to alter his physical condition and regain complete movement.
Clearly, he realized, the mind and the body operate together, in ways
we are hardly aware of. Wanting to explore this further, he decided to
pursue a career in medicine and psychology, and in the late 1920s he
began to practice psychiatry in various hospitals. Quickly he developed
a method that was completely his own and diametrically opposed to
others trained in the field. Almost all practicing psychiatrists focused
largely on words. They would get patients to talk, particularly going
over their early childhood. In this way they hoped to gain access to
their patients’ unconscious. Erickson instead focused mostly on
people’s physical presence as an entrée into their mental life and
unconscious. Words are often used as a cover-up, a way to conceal
what is really going on. Making his patients completely comfortable,
he would detect signs of hidden tension and unmet desires that came
through in their face, voice, and posture. As he did this, he explored in
greater depth the world of nonverbal communication.
His motto was “observe, observe, observe.” For this purpose he
kept a notebook, writing down all of his observations. One element
that particularly fascinated him was the walking styles of people,
perhaps a reflection of his own difficulties in relearning how to use his
legs. He would watch people walking in every part of the city. He paid
attention to the heaviness of the step—there was the emphatic walk of
those who were persistent and full of resolve; the light step of those
who seemed more indecisive; the loping, fluid walk of those who
seemed rather lazy; the meandering walk of the person lost in thought.
He observed closely the extra swaying of the hips or the strut that
seemed to elevate the head, indicating high levels of confidence in a
person. There was the walk that people put on to cover up some
weakness or insecurity—the exaggerated masculine stride, the
nonchalant shuffle of the rebellious teenager. He took note of the
sudden changes in people’s walk as they became excited or nervous.
All of this supplied him endless information about people’s moods and
self-confidence.
In his office, he placed his desk at the far end of the room, making
his patients walk toward him. He would notice changes in the walk
from before to after the session. He would scrutinize their way of
sitting down, the level of tension in their hands as they grasped the
arms of the chair, the degree to which they would face him as they
talked, and in a matter of a few seconds, without words being
exchanged, he had a profound read on their insecurities and rigidities,
as mapped clearly in their body language.
At one point in his career, Erickson worked in a ward for the
mentally disturbed. In one instance the psychologists there were
perplexed by the case of a particular patient—a former businessman
who had made a fortune and then lost everything because of the
Depression. All the man could do was cry and continually move his
hands back and forth, straight out from his chest. Nobody could figure
out the source of this tic or how to help him. Getting him to talk was
not easy and it led nowhere. To Erickson, however, the moment he
saw the man he understood the nature of the problem—through this
gesture he was literally expressing the futile efforts in his life to get
ahead and the despair this had brought him. Erickson went up to him
and said, “Your life has had many ups and downs,” and as he did so, he
shifted the motion of the arms to up and down. The man seemed
interested in this new motion and it now became his tic.
Working with an occupational therapist on site, Erickson placed
blocks of sandpaper in each of the man’s hands and put a rough piece
of lumber in front of him. Soon the man became enthralled with the
sanding of the wood and the smell of it as he polished it. He stopped
crying and took woodworking classes, carving elaborate chess sets and
selling them. By focusing exclusively on his body language and altering
his physical motion, Erickson could alter the locked position of his
mind and cure him.
One category that fascinated him was the difference in nonverbal
communication between men and women and how this reflected a
different way of thinking. He was particularly sensitive to the
mannerisms of women, perhaps a reflection of the months he had
spent closely observing his sisters. He could dissect every nuance of
their body language. One time, a beautiful young woman came to see
him, saying she had seen various psychiatrists but none of them were
quite right. Could Erickson possibly be the right one? As she talked
some more, never discussing the nature of her problem, Erickson
watched her pick some lint off her sleeve. He listened and nodded,
then posed some rather uninteresting questions.
Suddenly, out of the blue, he said in a very confident tone that he
was the right, in fact the only psychiatrist for her. Taken aback by his
conceited attitude, she asked him why he felt that way. He said he
needed to ask her one more question in order to prove it.
“How long,” he asked, “have you been wearing women’s clothes?”
“How did you know?” the man asked in astonishment. Erickson
explained that he had noticed the way he had picked off the lint,
without making a naturally wide detour around the breast area. He
had seen that motion too many times to be fooled by anything else. In
addition, his assertive way of discussing his need to test Erickson first,
all expressed in a very staccato vocal rhythm, was decidedly masculine.
All of the other psychiatrists had been taken in by the young man’s
extremely feminine appearance and the voice he had worked on so
carefully, but the body does not lie.
On another occasion Erickson entered his office to see a new female
patient waiting for him. She explained that she had sought him out
because she had a phobia of flying. Erickson interrupted her. Without
explaining why, he asked her to leave the office and reenter. She
seemed annoyed but complied, and he studied her walk closely, as well
as her posture as she settled into the chair. He then asked her to
explain her problem.
“My husband is taking me a-broad in September and I have a
deathly fear of being on an airplane.”
“Madam,” Erickson said, “when a patient comes to a psychiatrist
there can be no withholding of information. I know something about
you. I am going to ask you an unpleasant question. . . . Does your
husband know about your love affair?”
“No,” she said with astonishment, “but how did you?”
“Your body language told me.” He explained how her legs were
crossed in a very tight position, with one foot completely tucked
around the ankle. In his experience, every married woman having an
affair locks her body up in a similar way. And she had clearly said “a-
broad” instead of “abroad,” in a hesitant tone, as if she were ashamed
of herself. And her walk indicated a woman who felt trapped in
complicated relationships. In subsequent sessions she brought in her
lover, who was also married. Erickson asked to see the wife of the
lover, and when she came, she sat in the exact same locked position,
with the foot under the ankle.
“So you’re having an affair,” he told her.
“Yes, did my husband tell you?”
“No, I got it from your body language. Now I know why your
husband suffers from chronic headaches.” Soon he was treating them
all and helping them out of their locked and painful positions.
Over the years, his observation powers extended to elements of
nonverbal communication that were nearly imperceptible. He could
determine people’s states of mind by their breathing patterns, and by
mirroring these patterns himself he could lead the patient into a
hypnotic trance and create a feeling of deep rapport. He could read
subliminal and subvocal speech as people would mouth a word or
name in a barely visible manner. This was how fortune-tellers,
psychics, and some magicians would make a living. He could tell when
his secretary was menstruating by the heaviness of her typing. He
could guess the career backgrounds of people by the quality of their
hands, the heaviness of their step, the way they tilted their heads, and
their vocal inflections. To patients and friends it seemed as if Erickson
possessed psychic powers, but they were simply unaware of how long
and hard he had studied this, gaining mastery of the second language.
•   •   •
Interpretation: For Milton Erickson, his sudden paralysis opened
his eyes to not only a different form of communication but also a
completely different way of relating to people. When he listened to his
sisters and picked up new information from their faces and voices, he
not only registered this with his senses but also felt himself
experiencing some of what was going on in their minds. He had to
imagine why they said yes but really meant no, and in doing so he had
to momentarily feel some of their contrary desires. He had to see the
tension in their necks and register it physically as tension within
himself to understand why they were suddenly uncomfortable in his
presence. What he discovered is that nonverbal communication
cannot be experienced simply through thinking and translating
thoughts into words but must be felt physically as one engages with
the facial expressions or locked positions of other people. It is a
different form of knowledge, one that connects with the animal part of
our nature and involves our mirror neurons.
To master this language, he had to relax and control the continual
need to interpret with words or categorize what he was seeing. He had
to tamp down his ego—thinking less of what he wanted to say and
instead directing his attention outward into the other person, attuning
himself to their changing moods as reflected in their body language. As
he discovered, such attention changed him. It made him more alive to
the signs people continually emit and transformed him into a superior
social actor, capable of connecting to others’ inner lives and
developing greater rapport.
As Erickson progressed in this self-transformation, he noticed that
most people go in the opposite direction—becoming more self-
absorbed and unobservant with each passing year. He liked to
accumulate anecdotes from his work that demonstrated this. For
instance, he once asked a group of interns in the hospital where he
worked to silently observe an elderly woman lying under the covers in
a hospital bed until they saw something that would indicate a possible
diagnosis for her bedridden condition. They watched her for three
hours to no avail, none of them taking notice of the obvious fact that
both her legs had been amputated. Or there were the people who
attended his public lectures; many of them would ask why he never
used that strange-looking pointer he carried in his hand as part of his
presentation. They had failed to observe his rather noticeable limp and
need for a cane. As Erickson saw it, the harshness of life makes most
people turn inward. They have no mental space left over for simple
observations, and the second language largely passes them by.
Understand: We are the preeminent social animal on the planet,
depending on our ability to communicate with others for our survival
and success. It is estimated that over 65 percent of all human
communication is nonverbal but that people pick up and internalize
only about 5 percent of this information. Instead, almost all of our
social attention is absorbed by what people say, which more often than
not actually serves to conceal what they are really thinking and feeling.
Nonverbal cues tell us what people are trying to emphasize with their
words and the subtext of their message, the nuances of
communication. These cues tell us what they are actively hiding, their
real desires. They reflect in an immediate way people’s emotions and
moods. To miss this information is to operate blindly, to invite
misunderstanding, and to lose endless opportunities to influence
people by not noticing the signs of what they really want or need.
Your task is simple: First you must recognize your state of self-
absorption and how little you actually observe. With this
understanding you will be motivated to develop observation skills.
Second you must understand, as Erickson did, the different nature of
this form of communication. It requires opening up your senses and
relating to people more on the physical level, absorbing their physical
energy and not just their words. You do not simply observe their facial
expression, but you register it from within, so that the impression
stays with you and communicates. As you gain greater vocabulary in
this language, you will be able to correlate a gesture with a possible
emotion. As your sensitivity increases, you will begin to notice more
and more of what you have been missing. And equally important, you
will discover a new and deeper way of relating to people, with the
increased social powers this will bring you.
You will always be the prey or the plaything of the devils and fools
in this world, if you expect to see them going about with horns or
jangling their bells. And it should be borne in mind that, in their
intercourse with others, people are like the moon: they show you
only one of their sides. Every man has an innate talent for . . .
making a mask out of his physiognomy, so that he can always look
as if he really were what he pretends to be . . . and its effect is
extremely deceptive. He dons his mask whenever his object is to
flatter himself into some one’s good opinion; and you may pay just
as much attention to it as if it were made of wax or cardboard.
—Arthur Schopenhauer
Keys to Human Nature
We humans are consummate actors. We learn at an early age how to
get what we want from our parents by putting on certain looks that
will elicit sympathy or affection. We learn how to conceal from our
parents or siblings exactly what we’re thinking or feeling, to protect
ourselves in vulnerable moments. We become good at flattering those
whom it is important to win over—popular peers or teachers. We learn
how to fit into the group by wearing the same clothes and speaking the
same language. As we get older and strive to carve out a career, we
learn how to create the proper front in order to be hired and to fit into
a group culture. If we become an executive or a professor or a
bartender, we must act the part.
Imagine a person who never develops these acting skills, whose face
instantly grimaces when he dislikes what you say or cannot suppress a
yawn when you fail to entertain him, who always speaks his mind, who
completely goes his own way in his ideas and style, who acts the same
whether he’s talking to his boss or to a child, and you have imagined a
person who would be shunned, ridiculed, and despised.
We are all such good actors that we’re not even aware of this as it
happens. We imagine we are almost always being sincere in our social
encounters, which any good actor will tell you is the secret behind
really believable acting. We take these skills for granted, but to see
them in action, try to look at yourself as you interact with different
members of your family and with your boss and colleagues at work.
You will see yourself subtly changing what you say, your tone of voice,
your mannerisms, your whole body language, to suit each individual
and situation. For people you are trying to impress, you wear a much
different face than with those with whom you are familiar and can let
down your guard. You do this almost without thinking.
Over the centuries various writers and thinkers, looking at humans
from an outside perspective, have been struck by the theatrical quality
of social life. The most famous quote expressing this comes from
Shakespeare: “All the world’s a stage, / And all the men and women
merely players; / They have their exits and their entrances, / And one
man in his time plays many parts.” If the theater and actors were
traditionally represented by the image of masks, writers such as
Shakespeare are implying that all of us are constantly wearing masks.
Some people are better actors than others. Villainous types such as
Iago in the play Othello are able to conceal their hostile intentions
behind a friendly, benign smile. Others are able to act with more
confidence and bravado—they often become leaders. People with
consummate acting skills can better navigate our complex social
environments and get ahead.
Although we are all expert actors, at the same time we secretly
experience this need to act and play a part as a burden. We are the
most successful social animal on the planet. For hundreds of
thousands of years our hunter-gatherer ancestors could survive only
by constantly communicating with one another through nonverbal
cues. Developed over so much time, before the invention of language,
that is how the human face became so expressive, and gestures so
elaborate. This is bred deep within us. We have a continual desire to
communicate our feelings and yet at the same time the need to conceal
them for proper social functioning. With these counterforces battling
inside us, we cannot completely control what we communicate. Our
real feelings continually leak out in the form of gestures, tones of
voice, facial expressions, and posture. We are not trained, however, to
pay attention to people’s nonverbal cues. By sheer habit, we fixate on
the words people say, while also thinking about what we’ll say next.
What this means is that we are using only a small percentage of the
potential social skills we all possess.
Imagine, for instance, conversations with people you’ve recently
met. By paying extra-close attention to the nonverbal cues they emit,
you can pick up their moods and mirror these moods back to them,
getting them to unconsciously relax in your presence. As the
conversation progresses, you can pick up signs that they are
responding to your gestures and mirroring, which gives you license to
go further and deepen the spell. In this way, you can build up rapport
and win over a valuable ally. Conversely, imagine people who almost
immediately reveal signs of hostility toward you. You are able to see
through their fake, tight smiles, to pick up the flashes of irritation that
cross their face and the signs of subtle discomfort in your presence.
Registering all this as it happens, you can then politely disengage from
the interaction and remain wary of them, looking for further signs of
hostile intentions. You have probably saved yourself from an
unnecessary battle or an ugly act of sabotage.
Your task as a student of human nature is twofold: First, you must
understand and accept the theatrical quality of life. You do not
moralize and rail against the role-playing and the wearing of masks so
essential to smooth social functioning. In fact, your goal is to play your
part on the stage of life with consummate skill, attracting attention,
dominating the limelight, and making yourself into a sympathetic hero
or heroine. Second, you must not be naive and mistake people’s
appearances for reality. You are not blinded by people’s acting skills.
You transform yourself into a master decoder of their true feelings,
working on your observation skills and practicing them as much as
you can in daily life.
And so, for these purposes, there are three aspects to this particular
law: understanding how to observe people; learning some basic keys
for decoding nonverbal communication; and mastering the art of what
is known as impression management, playing your role to maximum
effect.
Observational Skills
When we were children, we were almost all great observers of people.
Because we were small and weak, our survival depended on decoding
people’s smiles and tones of voice. We were often struck by the
peculiar walking styles of adults, their exaggerated smiles and affected
mannerisms. We would imitate them for fun. We could sense that an
individual was threatening from something in his or her body
language. This is why children are the bane of inveterate liars, con
artists, magicians, and people who pretend to be something they are
not. Children quickly see through their front. Slowly, from the age of
five onward, this sensitivity is lost as we start to turn inward and
become more concerned with how others see us.
You must realize that it is not a matter of acquiring skills you do not
possess but rather of rediscovering those you once had in your earliest
years. This means slowly reversing the process of self-absorption and
regaining that outward-directed view and curiosity you had as a child.
As with any skill, this will require patience. What you are doing is
slowly rewiring your brain through practice, mapping new neuronal
connections. You do not want to overload yourself in the beginning
with too much information. You need to take baby steps, to see small
but daily progress. In a casual conversation with someone, give
yourself the goal of observing one or two facial expressions that seem
to go against what the person is saying or indicate some additional
information. Be attentive to microexpressions, quick flashes on the
face of tension, or forced smiles (see the next section for more on this).
Once you succeed in this simple exercise with one person, try it with
someone else, always focusing on the face. Once you find it easier to
notice cues from the face, attempt to make a similar observation about
an individual’s voice, noting any changes in pitch or the pace of
talking. The voice says a lot about people’s level of confidence and
their contentment. Later on graduate to elements of body language—
such as posture, hand gestures, positioning of legs. Keep these
exercises simple, having simple goals. Write down any observations,
particularly any patterns you notice.
As you practice these exercises, you must be relaxed and open to
what you see, not champing at the bit to interpret your observations
with words. You must be engaged in the conversation while talking
less and trying to get them to talk more. Try to mirror them, making
comments that play off something they have said and reveal you are
listening to them. This will have the effect of making them relax and
want to talk more, which will make them leak out more nonverbal
cues. But your observing of people must never be obvious. Feeling
scrutinized, people will freeze up and try to control their expressions.
Too much direct eye contact will betray you. You must appear natural
and attentive, using only quick peripheral glances to notice any
changes in the face, voice, or body.
In observing any particular individual over time, you need to
establish their baseline expression and mood. Some people are
naturally quiet and reserved, their facial expression revealing this.
Some are more animated and energetic, while still others continually
wear an anxious look. Aware of a person’s usual demeanor, you can
pay greater attention to any deviations—for instance, sudden
animation in someone who is generally reserved, or a relaxed look
from the habitually nervous. Once you know a person’s baseline, it will
be much easier to see signs of dissimulation or distress in them. The
ancient Roman Mark Antony was naturally a jovial person, always
smiling, laughing, and poking fun at people. It was when he suddenly
turned silent and sullen in their meetings after the assassination of
Julius Caesar that Antony’s rival Octavius (later Augustus) understood
that Antony was up to something and had hostile intentions.
Related to the baseline expression, try to observe the same person
in different settings, noticing how their nonverbal cues change if they
are talking to a spouse, a boss, an employee.
For another exercise, observe people who are about to do
something exciting—a trip to some alluring place, a date with someone
they’ve been pursuing, or any event for which they have high
expectations. Note the looks of anticipation, how the eyes open wider
and stay there, the face flushed and generally animated, a slight smile
on the lips as they think of what’s about to come. Contrast this with
the tension exhibited by a person about to take a test or go on a job
interview. You are increasing your vocabulary when it comes to
correlating emotions and facial expressions.
Pay great attention to any mixed signals you pick up: a person
professes to love your idea, but their face shows tension and their tone
of voice is strained; or they congratulate you on your promotion, but
the smile is forced and the expression seems sad. Such mixed signals
are very common. They can also involve different parts of the body. In
the novel The Ambassadors by Henry James, the narrator notices that
a woman who has visited him smiles at him during most of the
conversation but holds her parasol with a great deal of tension. Only
by noticing this can he sense her real mood—discomfort. With mixed
signals, you need to be aware that a greater part of nonverbal
communication involves the leakage of negative emotions, and you
need to give greater weight to the negative cue as indicative of the
person’s true feelings. At some point, you can then ask yourself why
they might feel sadness or antipathy.
To take your practice further, try a different exercise. Sit in a café or
some public space, and without the burden of having to be involved in
a conversation, observe the people around you. Listen in on their
conversations for vocal cues. Take note of walking styles and overall
body language. If possible, take notes. As you get better at this, you
can try to guess people’s profession by the cues you pick up, or
something about their personality from their body language. It should
be a pleasurable game.
As you progress, you will be able to split your attention more easily
—listening attentively to what people have to say, but also taking
careful note of nonverbal cues. You will also become aware of signals
you had not noticed before, continually expanding your vocabulary.
Remember that everything people do is a sign of some sort; there is no
such thing as a gesture that does not communicate. You will pay
attention to people’s silences, the clothes they wear, the arrangement
of objects on their desk, their breathing patterns, the tension in certain
muscles (particularly in the neck), the subtext in their conversations—
what is not said or what is implied. All of these discoveries should
excite and impel you to go further.
In practicing this skill you must be aware of some common errors
you can fall into. Words express direct information. We can argue
about what people mean when they say something, but the
interpretations are fairly limited. Nonverbal cues are much more
ambiguous and indirect. There is no dictionary to tell you what this or
that means. It depends on the individual and the context. If you are
not careful, you will glean signs but quickly interpret them to fit your
own emotional biases about people, which will make your
observations not only useless but also dangerous. If you are observing
someone you naturally dislike, or who reminds you of someone
unpleasant in your past, you will tend to see almost any cue as
unfriendly or hostile. You will do the opposite for people you like. In
these exercises you must strive to subtract your personal preferences
and prejudices about people.
Related to this is what is known as Othello’s error. In the play
Othello by Shakespeare, the main character, Othello, assumes that his
wife, Desdemona, is guilty of adultery based on her nervous response
when questioned about some evidence. In truth Desdemona is
innocent, but the aggressive, paranoid nature of Othello and his
intimidating questions make her nervous, which he interprets as a sign
of guilt. What happens in such cases is that we pick up certain
emotional cues from the other person—nervousness, for instance—and
we assume they come from a certain source. We rush to the first
explanation that fits what we want to see. But the nervousness could
have several explanations, could be a temporary reaction to our
questioning or the overall circumstances. The error is not in the
observing but in the decoding.
In 1894 Alfred Dreyfus, a French military officer, was wrongly
arrested for passing along secrets to the Germans. Dreyfus was a Jew,
and many French at the time had anti-Semitic feelings. When first
appearing before the public for questioning, Dreyfus answered in a
calm, efficient tone that was part of his training as a bureaucrat and
was also a result of his trying to contain his nervousness. Most of the
public assumed that an innocent man would protest loudly. His
demeanor was seen as a sign of his guilt.
Keep in mind that people from different cultures will consider
different forms of behavior acceptable. These are known as display
rules. In some cultures people are conditioned to smile less or touch
more. Or their language involves greater emphasis on vocal pitch.
Always consider the cultural background of people, and interpret their
cues accordingly.
As part of your practice, try to observe yourself as well. Notice how
often and when you tend to put on a fake smile, or how your body
registers nervousness—in your voice, the drumming of your fingers,
the twiddling with your hair, the quivering of your lips, and so on.
Becoming acutely aware of your own nonverbal behavior will make
you more sensitive and alert to the signals of others. You will be better
able to imagine the emotions that go with the cue. And you will also
gain greater control of your nonverbal behavior, something very
valuable for playing the right social role (see the last section of this
chapter).
Finally, in developing these observational skills you will notice a
physical change in yourself and in your relation to people. You will
become increasingly sensitive to people’s shifting moods and even
anticipate them as you feel inside something of what they’re feeling.
Taken far enough, such powers can make you seem almost psychic, as
they did with Milton Erickson.
Decoding Keys
Remember that people are generally trying to present the best possible
front to the world. This means concealing their possible antagonistic
feelings, their desires for power or superiority, their attempts at
ingratiation, and their insecurities. They will use words to hide their
feelings and distract you from the reality, playing on people’s verbal
fixation. They will also use certain facial expressions that are easy to
put on and that people assume mean friendliness. Your task is to look
past the distractions and become aware of those signs that leak out
automatically, revealing something of the true emotion beneath the
mask. The three categories of the most important cues to observe and
identify are dislike/like, dominance/submission, and deception.
Dislike/like cues: Imagine the following scenario: Someone in a
group dislikes you, whether out of envy or mistrust, but in the group
environment they cannot express this overtly or they will look bad—
not a team player. And so they smile at you, engage you in
conversation, and even seem to support your ideas. At times you might
feel something is not quite right, but the signs are subtle and you
forget them as you pay attention to the front they present. Then
suddenly, as if out of the blue, they obstruct you or display an ugly
attitude. The mask has come off. The price you pay is not only
difficulties in your work or personal life, but also the emotional toll,
which can have a lingering effect.
Understand: People’s hostile or resistant actions never come out
of the blue. There are always signs before they take any action. It is too
much of a strain for them to completely suppress such strong
emotions. The problem is not only that we are not paying attention but
also that we inherently do not like the thought of conflict or
disagreement. We prefer to avoid thinking about it and to assume that
people are on our side, or at least neutral. Most often, we feel
something is not quite right with the other person but ignore the
feeling. We must learn to trust such intuitive responses and to look for
those signs that should trigger a closer examination of the evidence.
People give out clear indications in their body language of active
dislike or hostility. These include the sudden squinting of the eyes at
something you have said, the glare, the pursing of the lips until they
nearly disappear, the stiff neck, the torso or feet that turn away from
you while you are still engaged in a conversation, the folding of the
arms as you try to make a point, and an overall tenseness in the body.
The problem is that you will not usually see such signs unless a
person’s displeasure has become too strong to conceal at all. Instead,
you must train yourself to look for the microexpressions and the other
more subtle signs that people give out.
The microexpression is a recent discovery among psychologists
who have been able to document its existence through film. It lasts less
than a second. There are two varieties of this: The first comes when
people are aware of a negative feeling and try to suppress it, but it
leaks out in a fraction of a second. The other comes when we are
unaware of their hostility and yet it shows itself in quick flashes on the
face or in the body. These expressions will be a momentary glare,
tensing of the facial muscles, pursing of the lips, the beginnings of a
frown or sneer or look of contempt, with the eyes looking down. Aware
of this phenomenon, we can look for these expressions. You will be
surprised at how often they occur, because it is nearly impossible to
completely control the facial muscles and repress the signs in time.
You must be relaxed and attentive, not obviously looking for them but
catching them out of the corner of your eye. Once you begin to notice
such expressions, you will find it easier to catch them.
Equally eloquent are those signs that are subtle but can last for
several seconds, revealing tension and coldness. For instance, when
you first approach someone who harbors negative thoughts toward
you, if you surprise them by coming up on them from an angle, you
will clearly see signs of displeasure at your approach before they have
had time to fit on their affable mask. They are not so happy to see you
and it shows for a second or two. Or you are expressing a strong
opinion and their eyes begin to roll, which they try to quickly cover up
with a smile.
Sudden silence can say a lot. You have said something that triggers
a twinge of envy or dislike, and they cannot help but lapse into silence
and brood. They may try to hide this with a smile as they inwardly
fume. As opposed to simple shyness or having nothing to say, you will
detect definite signs of irritation. In this case, it is best to notice this a
few times before coming to any conclusions.
People will often give themselves away with the mixed signal—a
positive comment to distract you but some clearly negative body
language. This offers them relief from the tension of always having to
be pleasant. They are betting on the fact that you will tend to focus on
the words and gloss over the grimace or lopsided smile. Pay attention
as well to the opposite configuration—someone says something
sarcastic and pointed, directed at you, but they do this with a smile
and a jokey tone of voice, as if to signal it is all in good humor. It would
be impolite to not take it in this vein. But in fact, particularly if this
occurs a few times, you should pay attention to the words and not the
body language. It is their repressed way of expressing their hostility.
Take notice of people who praise or flatter you without their eyes
lighting up. This could be a sign of hidden envy.
In the novel The Charterhouse of Parma by Stendhal, Count Mosca
receives an anonymous letter designed to stir up jealous feelings about
his mistress, whom he is desperately in love with. In thinking over who
could have sent it, he recalls a conversation earlier that day with the
Prince of Parma. The prince was talking about how the pleasures of
power pale in comparison with the pleasures afforded by love, and as
he said this, the count detected a particularly malicious glint in his eye,
accompanied by an ambiguous smile. The words were about love in
general but the look was directed at him. From that he correctly
deduces that the prince had sent the letter; he could not completely
contain his venomous glee at what he had done, and it had leaked out.
This is a variation on the mixed signal. People say something relatively
strong about a general topic, but with subtle looks they point at you.
An excellent gauge for decoding antagonism is to compare people’s
body language toward you and toward others. You might detect that
they are noticeably friendlier and warmer toward other people and
then put on a polite mask with you. In a conversation they cannot help
showing brief flashes of impatience and irritation in their eyes, but
only when you talk. Also keep in mind that people will tend to leak out
more of their true feelings, and certainly hostile ones, when they are
drunk, sleepy, frustrated, angry, or under stress. They will later tend to
excuse this, as if they weren’t themselves for the moment, but in fact
they were actually being more themselves than ever.
In looking for these signs, one of the best methods is to set up tests,
even traps for people. King Louis XIV was a master of this. He stood at
the top of a court in Versailles filled with members of the nobility
seething with hostility and resentment toward him and the absolute
authority he was trying to impose. But in the civilized realm of
Versailles they all had to be consummate actors and hide their
feelings, particularly toward the king. Louis had his ways, however, of
testing them. He would suddenly appear in their presence, without
warning, and look for the immediate expressions on their faces. He
would request a nobleman to move himself and his family to the
palace of Versailles, knowing that this was costly and unpleasant. He
carefully observed any signs of annoyance in the face or voice. He
would say something negative about another courtier, an ally of theirs,
and notice their immediate reaction. Enough signs of discomfort
indicated secret hostility.
If you suspect someone of feeling envy, talk about the latest good
news for you without appearing to brag. Look for microexpressions of
disappointment on their face. Use similar tests to probe for hidden
anger and resentments, eliciting the responses that people cannot
suppress so quickly. In general, people will want to see more of you,
want to see less of you, or be rather indifferent. They may fluctuate
among the three states, but they will tend to veer toward one. They will
reveal this in how quickly they respond to your emails or texts, their
body language on first seeing you, and the overall tone they take in
your presence.
The value in detecting possible hostility or negative feelings early
on is that it increases your strategic options and room to maneuver.
You can lay a trap for people, intentionally stirring their hostility and
goading them into some aggressive action that will embarrass them in
the long run. Or you can work doubly hard to neutralize their dislike of
you and even win them over through a charm offensive. Or you can
simply create distance—not hiring them, firing them, refusing to
interact with them. In the end, you will make your path much
smoother by avoiding surprise battles and acts of sabotage.
On the other side of the coin, we generally have less of a need to
hide positive emotions from others, but nonetheless we often do not
like to emit obvious signs of joy and attraction, especially in work
situations, or even in courtship. People often prefer to display a cool
social front. So there is great value in being able to detect the signs
that people are falling under your spell.
According to research studies on facial cues by psychologists such
as Paul Ekman, E. H. Hess, and others, people who feel positive
emotions for you will display noticeable signs of relaxation in the facial
muscles, particularly in the lines of the forehead and the area around
the mouth; their lips will appear more fully exposed and the whole
area around their eyes will widen. These are all involuntary
expressions of comfort and openness. If the feelings are more intense,
such as falling in love, blood rushes to the face, animating all of the
features. As part of this excited state the pupils will dilate, an
automatic response in which the eyes let in more light. It is a sure sign
that a person is comfortable and likes what they are seeing. Along with
the dilation the eyebrows will rise, making the eyes look even bigger.
We do not usually pay attention to eye pupils because looking intently
into another’s eyes has an overtly sexual connotation. We must train
ourselves to glance quickly at the pupils when we notice any widening
of the eyes.
In developing your skills in this arena, you must learn to
distinguish between the fake and the genuine smile. In trying to hide
our negative feelings, we most often resort to the fake smile, because it
is easy and people generally do not pay attention to the subtleties of
smiles. Because the genuine variety is less common, you must know
how to recognize it. The genuine smile will affect the muscles around
the eyes and widen them, often revealing crow’s-feet on the sides of
the eyes. It will also tend to pull the cheeks upward. There is no
genuine smile without a definite change in the eyes and cheeks. Some
people will try to create the impression of the genuine variety by
putting on a very broad smile, which will partially alter the eyes as
well. So in addition to the physical signs, you must look at the context.
The genuine smile usually comes from some action or words that
suddenly elicit the response; it is spontaneous. Is the smile in this case
somewhat unrelated to the circumstances, not warranted by what was
said? Is it a situation in which a person is straining to impress or has
strategic goals in mind? Is the timing of the smile slightly off?
Perhaps the most telling indication of positive emotions comes
from the voice. It is much easier for us to control the face; we can look
in a mirror for such purposes. But unless we are professional actors,
the voice is very difficult to consciously modulate. When people are
engaged and excited to talk to you, the pitch of their voice rises,
indicating emotional arousal. Even if people are nervous, the tone of
the voice will be warm and natural, as opposed to the simulated
warmth of a salesman. You can detect an almost purring quality to the
voice, which some have likened to a vocal smile. You will notice also an
absence of tension and hesitation. In the course of a conversation
there is an equal level of banter, with the pace quickening, indicating
increasing rapport. A voice that is animated and happy tends to infect
us with the mood and elicit a similar response. We know it when we
feel it, but often we ignore these feelings and instead concentrate on
the friendly words or sales pitch.
Finally, monitoring nonverbal cues is essential in your attempts at
influencing and seducing people. It is the best way to gauge the degree
to which a person is falling under your spell. When people start to feel
comfortable in your presence, they will stand closer to you or lean in,
their arms not folded or revealing any tension. If you are giving a talk
or telling a story, frequent head nods, attentive gazes, and genuine
smiles will indicate that people agree with what you are saying and are
losing their resistance. They exchange more looks. Perhaps the best
and most exciting sign of all is synchrony, the other person
unconsciously mirroring you. Their legs cross in the same direction,
the head tilts in a similar manner, one smile inducing another. At the
deepest level of synchrony, as Milton Erickson discovered, you will
find breathing patterns falling into the same rhythm, which can
sometimes end in the complete synchrony of a kiss.
You can also train yourself to not only monitor these changes that
show your influence but induce them as well by displaying positive
cues yourself. You begin to slowly stand or lean closer, revealing subtle
signs of openness. You nod and smile as others talk. You mirror their
behavior and their breathing patterns. As you do so, you watch for
signs of emotional infection, going further only when you detect the
slow crumbling of resistance.
With expert seducers who use all of the positive cues to mimic the
appearance that they are falling in love only to bring you more deeply
under their control, keep in mind that very few people naturally reveal
so much emotion so early on. If your supposed effect on them seems a
bit too rushed and perhaps contrived, tell them to slow down and
monitor their face for microexpressions of frustration.
Dominance/submission cues: As the most complex social animal on
the planet, we humans form elaborate hierarchies based on position,
money, and power. We are aware of these hierarchies, but we do not
like talking explicitly about relative power positions, and we are
generally uncomfortable when others talk about their superior rank.
Instead, signs of dominance or weakness are more often expressed in
nonverbal communication. We have inherited this communication
style from other primates, notably chimpanzees, who have elaborate
signals to denote an individual chimp’s place in the social rank. Keep
in mind that the feeling of being in a superior social position gives
people a confidence that will radiate outward in their body language.
Some feel this confidence before they attain a position of power, and it
becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy as others are drawn to them. Some
who are ambitious might try to simulate these cues, but it has to be
done well. Fake confidence can be quite off-putting.
Confidence usually comes with a greater feeling of relaxation that is
clearly reflected in the face, and with a greater freedom of movement.
Those who are powerful will feel allowed to look around more at
others, choosing to make eye contact with whomever they please.
Their eyelids are more closed, a sign of seriousness and competence. If
they feel bored or annoyed, they show it more freely and openly. They
often smile less, frequent smiling being a sign of overall insecurity.
They feel more entitled to touch people, such as with friendly pats on
the back or on the arm. In a meeting, they will tend to take up more
space and create more distance around themselves. They stand taller,
and their gestures are relaxed and comfortable. Most important,
others feel compelled to imitate their style and mannerisms. The
leader will tend to impose a form of nonverbal communication on the
group in very subtle ways. You will notice people mimicking not only
their ideas but also their calm or more frenetic energy.
Alpha males like to signal their superior position in the rank in
several ways: They speak faster than others and feel entitled to
interrupt and control the flow of the conversation. Their handshake is
extra vigorous, almost crushing. When they walk in the office, you will
see them assume a taller stance and a purposeful stride, generally
making inferiors walk behind them. Watch chimpanzees in a zoo and
you will notice similar behavior on the part of the alpha chimp.
For women in leadership positions, what often works best is a calm,
confident expression, warm yet businesslike. Perhaps the best example
of this would be current German chancellor Angela Merkel. Her smiles
are even less frequent than the average male politician, but when they
occur they are especially meaningful. They never seem fake. She
listens to others with looks of complete absorption, her face
remarkably still. She has a way of getting others to do most of the
talking while always seeming to be in control of the course of the
conversation. She does not need to interrupt to assert herself. When
she wants to attack someone, it is with looks of boredom, iciness, or
contempt, never with blustery words. When Russian president
Vladimir Putin tried to intimidate her by bringing his pet dog into a
meeting, knowing Merkel had once been bitten and had a fear of dogs,
she visibly tensed, then quickly composed herself and looked him
calmly in the eye. She put herself in the one-up position in relation to
Putin by not making anything of his ploy. He seemed rather childish
and petty in comparison. Her style does not include all of the alpha
male body posturing. It is quieter and yet extremely powerful in its
own way.
As women come to attain more leadership positions, this less
obtrusive style of authority might begin to alter our perception of some
of the dominance cues so long associated with power.
It is worth observing those in positions of power in your group for
signs of dominance cues and for their absence. Leaders who display
tension and hesitation in their nonverbal cues are generally insecure in
their power and feel it threatened. Signs of such anxiety and insecurity
are generally easy to spot. They will talk in a more halting manner,
with long pauses. Their voice will rise in pitch and stay there. They will
tend to avert their gaze and control their eye movements, although
they will often blink more. They will put on more forced smiles and
emit nervous laughs. As opposed to feeling entitled to touch others,
they will tend to touch themselves in what is known as pacifying
behavior. They will touch their hair, their neck, their forehead, all in
an attempt to soothe their nerves. People trying to hide their
insecurities will assert themselves a little too loudly in a conversation,
their voices rising. As they do this, they look around nervously, eyes
wide open. Or as they talk in an animated way, their hands and bodies
are unusually still, always a sign of anxiety. They will inevitably give
off mixed signals, and you must pay greater attention to those that
signal underlying insecurity.
Nicolas Sarkozy, president of France (2007–2012), was someone
who liked to assert his presence through body language. He would pat
people on the back, be the one to direct them where to stand, fix them
with his stare, interrupt what they were saying, and generally try to
dominate the room. During one meeting with him in the midst of the
euro crisis, Chancellor Merkel saw his usual domineering act but could
not help but notice his foot nervously jiggling the entire time. The
extra assertive style was perhaps his way of distracting others from his
insecurities. This was valuable information Merkel could put to use.
People’s actions will often contain dominance and submission cues.
For instance, people will often show up late to indicate their
superiority, real or imagined. They are not obligated to be on time.
Also, conversation patterns reveal the relative position people feel they
occupy. For instance, those who feel dominant will tend to talk more
and interrupt frequently, as a means of asserting themselves. When
there’s an argument that turns personal, they will resort to what is
known as punctuation—they will find an action on the other side that
started it all, even though clearly it is part of the relationship pattern.
They assert their interpretation of who is to blame through their tone
of voice and piercing looks. If you observe a couple from the outside,
you will frequently notice one person who is in the dominant position.
If you converse with them, the dominant one will make eye contact
with you but not with his or her partner, and will appear to only half
listen to what the partner says. Smiles can also be a subtle cue for
indicating superiority, especially through what we shall call the tight
smile. This usually comes in response to something someone said, and
it is a smile that tightens the facial muscles and indicates irony and
contempt for the person they see as inferior but gives them the cover
of appearing friendly.
One final but very subtle nonverbal means of asserting dominance
in a relationship comes through the symptom. One partner suddenly
develops headaches or some other illness, or starts drinking, or
generally falls into a negative pattern of behavior. This forces the other
side to play by their rules, to tend to their weaknesses. It is the willful
use of sympathy to gain power and it is extremely effective.
Finally, use the knowledge you glean from these cues as a valuable
means of gauging the levels of confidence in people and acting
appropriately. With leaders who are riddled with insecurities that poke
through nonverbally, you can play to their insecurities and gain power
through this, but often it is best to avoid attaching yourself too closely
to such types, as they tend to do poorly over time and can drag you
down with them. With those who are not leaders but are trying to
assert themselves as if they were, your response should depend on
their personality type. If they are rising stars, full of self-belief and a
sense of destiny, it might be wise to try to rise with them. You will
notice such types by the positive energy that surrounds them. On the
other hand, if they are simply arrogant and petty despots, these are
precisely the types you should always strive to avoid, as they are
masters at making others pay lip service to them without giving
anything in return.
Deception cues: We humans are by nature quite gullible. We want
to believe in certain things—that we can get something for nothing;
that we can easily regain or rejuvenate our health thanks to some new
trick, perhaps even cheat death; that most people are essentially good
and can be trusted. This propensity is what deceivers and
manipulators thrive on. It would be immensely beneficial for the
future of our species if we were all less gullible, but we cannot change
human nature. Instead, the best we can do is to learn to recognize
certain telltale signs of an attempt at deception and maintain our
skepticism as we examine the evidence further.
The most clear and common sign comes when people assume an
extra-animated front. When they smile a lot, seem more than friendly,
and even are quite entertaining, it is hard for us to not be drawn in and
lower ever so slightly our resistance to their influence. When Lyndon
Johnson was trying to pull the wool over the eyes of a fellow senator,
he would go an extra mile with his physical presence, cornering them
in the cloakroom, telling some off-color jokes, touching them on the
arm, looking extra sincere, and cracking the biggest smiles he could
muster. Similarly, if people are trying to cover something up, they tend
to become extra vehement, righteous, and chatty. They are playing on
the conviction bias (see chapter 1)—if I deny or say something with so
much gusto, with an air of being a victim, it is hard to doubt me. We
tend to take extra conviction for truth. In fact, when people try to
explain their ideas with so much exaggerated energy, or defend
themselves with an intense level of denial, that is precisely when you
should raise your antennae.
In both cases—the cover-up and the soft sell—the deceiver is
striving to distract you from the truth. Although an animated face and
gestures might come from sheer exuberance and genuine friendliness,
when they come from someone you don’t know well, or from someone
who just might have something to hide, you must be on your guard.
Now you are looking for nonverbal signs to confirm your suspicions.
With such deceivers you will often notice that one part of the face or
the body is more expressive to attract your attention. This will often be
the area around the mouth, with large smiles and changing
expressions. This is the easiest area of the body for people to
manipulate and create an animated effect. But it could also be
exaggerated gestures with the hands and arms. The key is that you will
detect tension and anxiety in other parts of the body, because it is
impossible for them to control all of the muscles. When they flash a big
smile, the eyes are tense with little movement or the rest of the body is
unusually still, or if the eyes are trying to fool you with looks to garner
your sympathy, the mouth quivers slightly. These are signs of
contrived behavior, of trying too hard to control one part of the body.
Sometimes really clever deceivers will attempt to create the
opposite impression. If they are covering up a misdeed, they will hide
their guilt behind an extremely serious and competent exterior, the
face becoming unusually still. Instead of loud denials, they will offer a
highly plausible explanation of the chain of events, even going through
the “evidence” that confirms this. Their picture of reality is nearly
seamless. If they are trying to gain your money or support, they will
pose as the highly competent professional, to the point of being
somewhat boring, even hitting you with a lot of numbers and statistics.
Con artists often employ this front. The great con artist Victor Lustig
would lull his victims to sleep with a professional patter, making
himself come off as a bureaucrat or the dull expert in bonds and
securities. Bernie Madoff seemed so bland nobody could possibly
suspect him of such an audacious con game as the one he pulled off.
This form of deception is harder to see through because there is less
to notice. But once again you are looking for contrived impressions.
Reality is never so pat and seamless. Real events involve sudden
random intrusions and accidents. Reality is messy and the pieces
rarely fit so perfectly. That was what was wrong with the Watergate
cover-up and raised suspicions. When the explanation or the come-on
is just a little too slick or professional, that is what should trigger your
skepticism. Looking at this from the other side, as a character in
Dostoyevsky’s novel The Idiot advised, “When you are lying, if you
skillfully put in something not quite ordinary, something eccentric,
something, you know, that never has happened, or very rarely, it
makes the lie sound much more probable.”
In general, the best thing to do when you suspect people of trying to
distract you from the truth is not to actively confront them in the
beginning, but in fact to encourage them to continue by showing
interest in what they are saying or doing. You want them to talk more,
to reveal more signs of tension and contrivance. At the right moment
you must surprise them with a question or remark that is designed to
make them uncomfortable, revealing you are onto them. Pay attention
to the microexpressions and body language they emit at such
moments. If they are really deceiving, they will often have a freeze
response as they take this in, and then quickly try to mask the
underlying anxiety. This was the favorite strategy of detective
Columbo in the television series of the same name—facing criminals
who had tried to reverse engineer the evidence to make it look like
someone else had done it, Columbo would pretend to be perfectly
friendly and harmless but then would suddenly ask an uncomfortable
question and then pay extra attention to the face and body.
Even with the most practiced deceivers, one of the best ways to
unmask them is to notice how they give emphasis to their words
through nonverbal cues. It is very difficult for humans to fake this.
Emphasis comes through raised vocal pitch and assertive tone,
forceful hand gestures, the raising of eyebrows and the widening of
eyes. We might also lean forward or rise up on the balls of our feet. We
engage in such behavior when we are filled with emotion and trying to
add an exclamation point to what we are saying. It is hard for
deceivers to mimic this. The emphasis they place with their voice or
body is not exactly correlated to what they are saying, does not quite
fit the context of the moment, or comes a little too late. When they
pound the table with their fist, it is not at the moment they should be
feeling the emotion, but a little earlier, as if on cue, as if to create an
effect. These are all cracks in the veneer of the realness they are trying
to project.
Finally, with deception keep in mind that there is always a scale
involved. At the bottom of the scale we find the most harmless
varieties, little white lies. These could include all forms of flattery in
daily life: “You look great today”; “I loved your screenplay.” They could
include not revealing to people exactly what you did that day or
withholding bits of information because it is annoying to be
completely transparent and have no privacy. These small forms of
deception can be detected if we pay attention, such as by noticing the
genuineness of a smile. But in fact it is best to simply ignore this lower
end. Polite, civilized society depends on the ability to say things that
are not always sincere. It would be too damaging socially to become
constantly aware of this subrealm of deception. Save your alertness for
those situations in which the stakes are higher and people might be
angling to get something valuable out of you.
The Art of Impression Management
In general the word role-playing has negative connotations. We
contrast it with authenticity. A person who is truly authentic doesn’t
need to play a role in life, we think, but can simply be him- or herself.
This concept has value in friendships and in our intimate
relationships, where, hopefully, we can drop the masks we wear and
feel comfortable in displaying our unique qualities. But in our
professional life it is much more complicated. When it comes to a
specific job or role to play in society, we have expectations about what
is professional. We would be made to feel uncomfortable if our
airplane pilot suddenly started to act like a car salesman, or a
mechanic like a therapist, or a professor like a rock musician. If such
people acted completely like themselves, dropping their masks and
refusing to play their roles, we would question their competence.
A politician or public figure whom we see as more authentic than
others is generally better at projecting such a quality. They know that
appearing humble, or discussing their private life, or telling an
anecdote that reveals some vulnerability will have the “authentic”
effect. We are not seeing them as they are in the privacy of their home.
Life in the public sphere means wearing a mask, and sometimes some
people wear the mask of “authenticity.” Even the hipster or the rebel is
playing a role, with prescribed poses and tattoos. They do not have the
freedom to suddenly wear a business suit, because others in their
circle would begin to question their sincerity, which depends on
displaying the right appearance. People have more freedom to bring
more of their personal qualities into the role they play once they have
established themselves and their competence is no longer in question.
But this is always within limits.
Consciously or unconsciously most of us adhere to what is expected
of our role because we realize our social success depends on this. Some
may refuse to play this game, but in the end they are marginalized and
forced to play the outsider role, with limited options and decreasing
freedom as they get older. In general, it is best to simply accept this
dynamic and derive some pleasure from it. You are not only aware of
the proper appearances you must present but know how to shape them
for maximum effect. You can then transform yourself into a superior
actor on the stage of life and enjoy your moment in the limelight.
The following are some basics in the art of impression
management.
Master the nonverbal cues. In certain settings, when people want to
get a fix on who we are, they pay greater attention to the nonverbal
cues we emit. This could be in a job interview, a group meeting, or a
public appearance. Aware of this, smart social performers will know
how to control these cues to some degree and consciously emit the
signs that are suitable and positive. They know how to seem likable,
flash genuine smiles, use welcoming body language, and mirror the
people they deal with. They know the dominance cues and how to
radiate confidence. They know that certain looks are more expressive
than words in conveying disdain or attraction. In general, you want to
be aware of your nonverbal style so you can consciously alter certain
aspects for better effect.
Be a method actor. In method acting you train yourself to be able to
display the proper emotions on command. You feel sad when your part
calls for it by recalling your own experiences that caused such
emotions, or if necessary by simply imagining such experiences. The
point is that you have control. In real life it is not possible to train
ourselves to such a degree, but if you have no control, if you are
continually emoting whatever comes to you in the moment, you will
subtly signal weakness and an overall lack of self-mastery. Learn how
to consciously put yourself in the right emotional mood by imagining
how and why you should feel the emotion suitable to the occasion or
performance you are about to give. Surrender to the feeling for the
moment so that the face and body are naturally animated. Sometimes
by actually making yourself smile or frown, you will experience some
of the emotions that go with these expressions. Just as important,
train yourself to return to a more neutral expression at a natural
moment, careful to not go too far with your emoting.
Adapt to your audience. Although you conform to certain
parameters set by the role you play, you must be flexible. A master
performer like Bill Clinton never lost sight of the fact that as president
he had to project confidence and power, but if he was speaking to a
group of autoworkers he would adjust his accent and his words to fit
the audience, and he would do the same for a group of executives.
Know your audience and shape your nonverbal cues to their style and
taste.
Create the proper first impression. It has been demonstrated how
much people tend to judge based on first impressions and the
difficulties they have in reassessing these judgments. Knowing this,
you must give extra attention to your first appearance before an
individual or group. In general it is best to tone down your nonverbal
cues and present a more neutral front. Too much excitement will
signal insecurity and might make people suspicious. A relaxed smile,
however, and looking people in the eye in these first encounters can do
wonders for lowering their natural resistance.
Use dramatic effects. This mostly involves mastering the art of
presence/absence. If you are too present, if people see you too often or
can predict exactly what you will do next, they will quickly grow bored
with you. You must know how to selectively absent yourself, to
regulate how often and when you appear before others, making them
want to see more of you, not less. Cloak yourself in some mystery,
displaying some subtly contradictory qualities. People don’t need to
know everything about you. Learn to withhold information. In general,
make your appearances and your behavior less predictable.
Project saintly qualities. No matter what historical period we are
living through, there are certain traits that are always seen as positive
and that you must know how to display. For instance, the appearance
of saintliness never goes out of fashion. Appearing saintly today is
certainly different in content from the sixteenth century, but the
essence is the same—you embody what is considered good and above
reproach. In the modern world, this means showing yourself as
progressive, supremely tolerant, and open-minded. You will want to be
seen giving generously to certain causes and supporting them on social
media. Projecting sincerity and honesty always plays well. A few public
confessions of your weaknesses and vulnerabilities will do the trick.
For some reason people see signs of humility as authentic, even
though people might very well be simulating them. Learn how to
occasionally lower your head and appear humble. If dirty work must
be done, get others to do it. Your hands are clean. Never overtly play
the Machiavellian leader—that only works well on television. Use the
appropriate dominance cues to make people think you are powerful,
even before you reach the heights. You want to seem like you were
destined for success, a mystical effect that always works.
The master of this game has to be Emperor Augustus (63 BC–AD
14) of ancient Rome. Augustus understood the value of having a good
enemy, a villain with whom he could contrast himself. For this
purpose he used Mark Antony, his early rival for power, as the perfect
foil. Augustus personally allied himself with everything traditional in
Roman society, even placing his home near the spot where the city had
supposedly been founded. While Antony was off in Egypt, dallying
with Queen Cleopatra and giving in to a life of luxury, Augustus could
continually point to their differences, showing himself off as the
embodiment of Roman values, which Antony had betrayed. Once he
became the supreme leader of Rome, Augustus made a public show of
humility, of giving back powers to the Senate and to the people. He
spoke a more vernacular Latin and lived simply, like a man of the
people. And for all this he was revered. It was, of course, all a show. In
fact he spent most of his time in a luxurious villa outside Rome. He
had many mistresses, who came from places as exotic as Egypt. And
while seeming to give away power, he held on tightly to the real reins
of control, the military. Obsessed with the theater, Augustus was a
master showman and wearer of masks. He must have realized this, for
these were the last words he spoke on his deathbed: “Have I played my
part in the farce of life well enough?”
Realize the following: The word personality comes from the Latin
persona, which means “mask.” In the public we all wear masks, and
this has a positive function. If we displayed exactly who we are and
spoke our minds truthfully, we would offend almost everyone and
reveal qualities that are best concealed. Having a persona, playing a
role well, actually protects us from people looking too closely at us,
with all of the insecurities that would churn up. In fact, the better you
play your role, the more power you will accrue, and with power you
will have the freedom to express more of your peculiarities. If you take
this far enough, the persona you present will match many of your
unique characteristics, but always heightened for effect.
“
d
d
d d
l
h
hi h
i
“You appeared to read a good deal upon her which was quite
invisible to me.” “Not invisible but unnoticed, Watson. You did not
know where to look, and so you missed all that was important. I
can never bring you to realize the importance of sleeves, the
suggestiveness of thumbnails, or the great issues that may hang
from a boot-lace.”
—Sir Arthur Conan Doyle, “A Case of Identity”
W
4
Determine the Strength of
People’s Character
The Law of Compulsive Behavior
hen choosing people to work and associate with, do not be
mesmerized by their reputation or taken in by the surface
image they try to project. Instead, train yourself to look deep within
them and see their character. People’s character is formed in their
earliest years and by their daily habits. It is what compels them to
repeat certain actions in their lives and fall into negative patterns.
Look closely at such patterns and remember that people never do
something just once. They will inevitably repeat their behavior.
Gauge the relative strength of their character by how well they
handle adversity, their ability to adapt and work with other people,
their patience and ability to learn. Always gravitate toward those
who display signs of strength, and avoid the many toxic types out
there. Know thoroughly your own character so you can break your
compulsive patterns and take control of your destiny.
The Pattern
To his aunts, uncles, and grandparents who watched him grow up in
Houston, Texas, Howard Hughes Jr. (1905–1976) was a rather shy and
awkward boy. His mother had nearly died giving birth to him and
consequently could not have other children, so she completely doted
on her son. Continually anxious that he might catch some illness, she
watched his every move and did all she could to protect him. The boy
seemed in awe of his father, Howard Sr., who in 1909 had started the
Sharp-Hughes Tool Company, which would soon make the family a
fortune. His father was not home much, always traveling for business,
so Howard spent a great deal of time with his mother. To the relatives
he could seem nervous and hypersensitive, but as he got older he
became a remarkably polite, soft-spoken young man, completely
devoted to his parents.
Then in 1922 his mother, at the age of thirty-nine, suddenly died.
His father never quite recovered from her early death and passed away
two years later. Now, at the age of nineteen, young Howard was alone
in the world, having lost the two people who had been his closest
companions and who had directed every phase of his life. His relatives
decided they would have to fill the void and give the young man the
guidance he needed. But in the months after the death of his father,
they suddenly had to confront a Howard Hughes Jr. they had never
seen before or suspected. The soft-spoken young man suddenly
became rather abusive. The obedient boy was now the complete rebel.
He would not continue college as they advised. He would not follow
any of their recommendations. The more they insisted, the more
belligerent he became.
Inheriting the family wealth, young Howard could now become
completely independent, and he meant to take this as far as he could.
He immediately went to work to buy out all of the shares in the Sharp-
Hughes Tool Company that his relatives possessed and to gain
complete control of the highly lucrative business. Under Texas law he
could petition the courts to declare him an adult, if he could prove
himself competent enough to assume the role. Hughes befriended a
local judge and soon got the declaration he wanted. Now he could run
his own life and the tool company with no interference. His relatives
were shocked by all of this, and soon both sides would cut off almost
all contact with each other for the rest of their lives. What had changed
the sweet boy they had known into this hyperaggressive, rebellious
young man? It was a mystery they would never solve.
Shortly after declaring his independence, Howard settled in Los
Angeles, where he was determined to follow his two newest passions—
filmmaking and piloting airplanes. He had the money to indulge
himself in both of these interests, and in 1927 he decided to combine
them, producing an epic, high-budget film about airmen during World
War I, to be called Hell’s Angels. He hired a director and a team of
writers to come up with the script, but he had a falling-out with the
director and fired him. He then hired another director, Luther Reed, a
man who was also an aviation buff and could relate better to the
project, but soon he quit, tired of Hughes’s constant interfering in the
project. His last words to Hughes were “If you know so much, why
don’t you direct it yourself?” Hughes followed his advice and named
himself the director.
The budget began to soar as he strove for the utmost in realism.
Month after month, year after year went by as Hughes ran through
hundreds of crewmembers and stunt pilots, three of whom died in
fiery accidents. After endless battles, he ended up firing almost every
head of a department and running things himself. He fussed over
every shot, every angle, every storyboard. Finally Hell’s Angels
premiered in 1930 and it was a smash hit. The story was a mess, but
the flying and action sequences thrilled audiences. Now the legend of
Howard Hughes was born. He was the dashing young maverick who
had bucked the system and created a hit. He was the rugged
individualist who did everything himself.
The film had cost a whopping $3.8 million to make and had lost
close to $2 million, but nobody paid attention to this. Hughes himself
was humble and claimed to have learned his lesson on the production:
“Making Hell’s Angels by myself was my biggest mistake. . . . Trying to
do the work of twelve men was just dumbness on my part. I learned by
bitter experience that no one man can know everything.”
During the 1930s the Hughes legend only seemed to grow as he
piloted planes to several world records in speed, courting death on
several occasions. Hughes had spun off from his father’s company a
new business venture called Hughes Aircraft, which he hoped to
transform into the biggest manufacturer of airplanes in the world. At
the time, this required procuring large military contracts for planes,
and as the U.S. entered World War II Hughes made a big play for such
a contract.
In 1942 various officials in the Defense Department, impressed by
his aviation feats, the meticulous attention to detail he revealed in his
interviews, and his tireless lobbying efforts, decided to award Hughes
Aircraft an $18 million grant to produce three enormous transport
planes, called the Hercules, which would be used to ferry soldiers and
supplies to various fronts in the war. The planes were called flying
boats and were to have wingspans longer than a football field and
stand over three stories high at the hull. If the company did a good job
on this, bringing the planes in on time and on budget, they would
order many more and Hughes could corner the market in transport
planes.
Less than a year later, there was more good news. Impressed with
the beautiful and sleek design of his smaller D-2 plane, the air force
put in an order for one hundred photo-reconnaissance planes for $43
million, to be reconfigured along the lines of the D-2. But soon word
began to spread of trouble at Hughes Aircraft. The company had
started as a sort of hobby for Hughes. He had placed various
Hollywood friends and aviation buddies in high-level positions. As the
company grew, so did the number of departments, but there was little
communication among them. Everything had to flow through Hughes
himself. He had to be consulted on the smallest decision. Frustrated by
all of his interference in their work, several top-notch engineers had
already quit.
Hughes saw the problem and hired a general manager to help with
the Hercules project and straighten the company out, but the general
manager quit after two months. Hughes had promised him carte
blanche in restructuring the company, but only several days into the
job he began vetoing his decisions and undermining his authority. By
the late summer of 1943, $6 million of the $9 million set aside for the
production of the first Hercules plane had already been spent, but the
plane was nowhere near completion. Those in the Defense Department
who had endorsed Hughes for the job began to panic. The photo-
reconnaissance order was a critical one for the war effort. Did the
internal chaos and delays with the Hercules bode problems with the
more important reconnaissance order? Had Hughes duped them with
his charm and his publicity campaign?
By early 1944, the order for the reconnaissance planes had fallen
hopelessly behind schedule. The military now insisted he hire a new
general manager to salvage something from the order. Fortunately one
of the best men for the job was available at the time: Charles Perelle,
the “boy wonder” of aircraft production. Perelle did not want the job.
He knew, like everyone in the business, of the chaos within Hughes
Aircraft. Now Hughes himself, feeling desperate, went on a charm
offensive. He insisted he had realized the error of his ways. He needed
Perelle’s expertise. He was not what Perelle had expected—he was
completely humble and made it seem as if he were the victim of
unscrupulous executives within the company. He knew all the
technical details of producing a plane, which impressed Perelle. He
promised to give Perelle the authority he needed. Against his better
judgment, Perelle took the job.
After only a few weeks, however, Perelle regretted his decision. The
planes were further behind schedule than he had been led to believe.
Everything he saw reeked of a lack of professionalism, down to the
shoddy drawings of the planes. He went to work, cutting wasteful
spending and streamlining departments, but nobody respected his
authority. Everybody knew who really ran the company, as Hughes
kept undermining Perelle’s reforms. As the order fell further behind
and the pressure mounted, Hughes disappeared from the scene,
apparently having a nervous breakdown. By the end of the war, not a
single reconnaissance plane had been produced, and the air force
canceled the contract. Perelle himself, broken by the experience, quit
his job in December of that year.
Hughes, trying to salvage something from the war years, could
point to the completion of one of the flying boats, later known as the
Spruce Goose. It was a marvel, he claimed, a brilliant piece of
engineering on a massive scale. To prove the doubters wrong, he
decided to test-fly the plane himself. As he flew over the ocean,
however, it became painfully clear that the plane did not have nearly
enough power for its enormous weight, and after a mile he gently set it
down on the water and had it towed back. The plane would never fly
again and would be dry-docked in a hangar at a cost of $1 million per
year, Hughes refusing to take it apart for scrap.
By 1948 the owner of RKO Pictures, Floyd Odlum, was looking to
sell. RKO was one of Hollywood’s most profitable and prestigious
studios, and Hughes was itching to get back in the limelight by
establishing himself in the film business. He bought Odlum’s shares
and gained a controlling interest. Within RKO there was panic.
Executives there knew of his reputation for meddling. The company
had just brought in a new regime, headed by Dore Schary, that was
going to transform RKO into the hottest studio for young directors.
Schary decided to quit before being humiliated, but he agreed to first
meet Hughes, mostly out of curiosity.
Hughes was all charm. He took hold of Schary’s hand, looked him
straight in the eye, and said, “I want no part of running the studio.
You’ll be left alone.” Schary, surprised by his sincerity and agreement
with Schary’s proposed transformation of the studio, relented, and for
the first few weeks all was as Hughes had promised. But then the
phone calls began. Hughes wanted Schary to replace an actress on the
latest film in production. Realizing his mistake, Schary immediately
resigned, taking with him many of his own staff.
Hughes began filling positions with men who followed his orders,
hiring exactly the actors and actresses that he himself liked. He bought
a screenplay called Jet Pilot and planned on making it the 1949
version of Hell’s Angels. It was to star John Wayne, and the great Josef
von Sternberg was to direct. After a few weeks Sternberg could not
endure one more phone call and quit. Hughes took over. In a complete
repeat of the production of Hell’s Angels, it took nearly three years to
finish, mostly because of the aerial photography, and the budget
soared to $4 million. Hughes had shot so much footage he could not
decide how to cut it down. It took six years before it was ready, and by
then the jet scenes were completely out of date and Wayne looked
considerably older. The film subsequently fell into complete obscurity.
Soon the once-bustling studio was losing substantial sums, and in
1955, with stockholders furious at his mismanagement, Hughes sold
RKO to the General Tire Company.
In the 1950s and early ’60s, the U.S. military decided to adapt some
of its fighting philosophy to the times. To wage war in places like
Vietnam it needed helicopters, including a light observation helicopter
to help in reconnaissance. The army searched out potential
manufacturers and in 1961 selected two of them that had submitted
the best proposals, rejecting the design of Hughes’s second aircraft
company, which he had spun off from Hughes Tool (the original
version of Hughes Aircraft was now run completely independently
from Hughes himself). Hughes refused to accept this setback. His
publicity team went on a massive lobbying campaign, wining and
dining army brass, much as they had done some twenty years earlier
with the photo-reconnaissance planes, spending money lavishly. The
campaign was a success and the Hughes entry was now in the running
along with the other two. The army decided that the company that
came in with the best price would win.
The price Hughes submitted surprised the military—it was so low it
seemed impossible for the company to make any money on the
manufacture of the helicopters. It seemed clear that his strategy was to
lose money on the initial production in order to win the auction, get
the contract, and then raise the price on subsequent orders. In 1965
the army finally awarded the contract to Hughes, an incredible coup
for a company that had had so little success in airplane production. If
they were made well and on time, the army could potentially order
thousands of helicopters, and Hughes could use this as a springboard
into the production of commercial helicopters, an expanding business.
As the Vietnam War heated up, the army was certain to increase its
order and Hughes would reap the bonanza, but as they waited for the
delivery of the first helicopters, those who had awarded the contract to
Hughes began to panic: the company was falling way behind the
schedule they had agreed upon, and so they launched an investigation
to find out what was going on. To their horror, there seemed to be no
organized production line. The plant was too small to handle such an
order. The details were all wrong—the drawings were unprofessional,
the tools inadequate, and there were too few skilled workers on site. It
was as if the company had no experience in designing planes and was
trying to figure it out as it went. It was the exact same predicament as
with the photo-reconnaissance planes, which only a few in the military
could remember. It was clear that Hughes had not learned a single
lesson from the earlier fiasco.
As they now could predict, the helicopters only trickled in. Feeling
desperate, army brass decided to conduct a new auction for the much
larger order of the 2,200 helicopters they now needed, hoping a more
experienced company would come in with a lower price and force out
Hughes. Hughes went into panic mode. To lose this follow-on bid
would spell ruin. The company was counting on raising its price for
this new order to recoup the enormous losses it had incurred with the
initial production. That was the bet Hughes had placed. If he tried to
come in with a low price for the additional helicopters, he could not
return a profit, and yet if his bid was not low enough, he would be
underbid, which was what eventually happened. The loss to Hughes in
the end for the helicopters he produced was an astronomical $90
million and had a devastating effect on the company.
In 1976 Howard Hughes died in an airplane en route from Acapulco
to Houston, and as the autopsy was performed on his body, the public
finally became aware of what had happened to him in the last decade
of his life. For years he had been addicted to pain pills and narcotics.
He had lived in tightly sealed hotel rooms, deathly afraid of the
slightest possible contamination by germs. At the time of his death he
weighed a mere ninety-three pounds. He had lived in near-total
isolation, attended to by a few assistants, desperately trying to keep all
of this out of the public eye. It was the ultimate irony that the man who
feared more than anything the slightest loss of control had ended up in
his last years at the complete mercy of a handful of assistants and
executives, who oversaw his slow death by drugs and wrested essential
control of the company from him.
•   •   •
Interpretation: The pattern of Howard Hughes’s life was set from
very early on. His mother had an anxious nature, and after learning
she could have no more children, she directed a great deal of her
anxiety toward her only son. She smothered him with constant
attention; she became his closest companion, almost never letting him
out of sight. The father placed tremendous expectations on his son to
carry on the family name. His parents determined everything he did—
what he wore, what he ate, and who his friends were (although they
were few). They shuttled him from school to school looking for the
perfect environment for their son, who had shown himself to be
hypersensitive and not easy to get along with. He was completely
dependent on them for everything, and out of a tremendous fear of
disappointing them, he became supremely polite and obedient.
The truth, however, was that he bitterly resented his total
dependence. Once his parents died, his true character could finally
emerge from beneath the smiles and obedience. He felt no love toward
his relatives. He would rather face the future alone than have the
slightest bit of authority above him. He had to have complete control,
even at the age of nineteen, over his fate; anything less would stir up
the old anxieties from childhood. And with the money he inherited, he
had the power to realize his dream of total independence. His love of
flying reflected this character trait. Only in the air, alone and at the
helm, could he really experience the exhilaration of control and release
from his anxieties. He could soar high above the masses, whom he
secretly despised. He could brave death, which he did many times,
because it would be a death under his own power.
His character came out even more clearly in the leadership style
that he evolved in Hollywood and his other business ventures. If
writers, directors, or executives came forward with their own ideas, he
could only see this as a personal challenge to his authority. This would
stir up his old anxieties about being helpless and dependent on others.
To combat this anxiety he would have to keep control of all aspects of
the business, overseeing even the spelling and grammar of the smallest
publicity notice. He would have to create a very loose structure within
his companies, making all of the executives fight among themselves for
his attention. Better to have some internal chaos as long as everything
flowed through him.
The paradox of this was that by trying to gain such total control he
tended to lose it; one man could not possibly keep on top of
everything, and so all kinds of unforeseen problems would arise. And
when projects fell apart and the heat became intense, he would
disappear from the scene or conveniently fall ill. His need to control
everything around him even extended to the women he dated—he
scrutinized their every action, had them followed by private
investigators.
The problem that Howard Hughes presented to all those who chose
to work with him in some capacity was that he carefully constructed a
public image that concealed the glaring weaknesses in his character.
Instead of the irrational micromanager, he could present himself as
the rugged individualist and the consummate American maverick.
Most damaging of all was his ability to portray himself as a successful
businessman leading a billion-dollar empire. In truth, he had inherited
a highly profitable tool business from his father. Over the years, the
only parts of his empire that ran substantial profits were the tool
company and an earlier version of Hughes Aircraft that he had spun
out of the tool company. For various reasons, both of these businesses
were run completely independently of Hughes; he had no input on
their operations. The many other businesses he personally ran—his
later aircraft division, his film ventures, his hotels and real estate in
Las Vegas—all lost substantial amounts that were fortunately covered
by the other two.
In fact, Hughes was a terrible businessman, and the pattern of
failures that revealed this was plain for everyone to see. But this is the
blind spot in human nature: we are poorly equipped to gauge the
character of the people we deal with. Their public image, the
reputation that precedes them, easily mesmerizes us. We are
captivated by appearances. If they surround themselves with some
alluring myth, as Hughes did, we want to believe in it. Instead of
determining people’s character—their ability to work with others, to
keep to their promises, to remain strong in adverse circumstances—we
choose to work with or hire people based on their glittering résumé,
their intelligence, and their charm. But even a positive trait such as
intelligence is worthless if the person also happens to be of weak or
dubious character. And so, because of our blind spot, we suffer under
the irresolute leader, the micromanaging boss, the conniving partner.
This is the source of endless tragedies in history, our pattern as a
species.
At all costs, you must alter your perspective. Train yourself to
ignore the front that people display, the myth that surrounds them,
and instead plumb their depths for signs of their character. This can be
seen in the patterns they reveal from their past, the quality of their
decisions, how they have chosen to solve problems, how they delegate
authority and work with others, and countless other signs. A person of
strong character is like gold—rare but invaluable. They can adapt,
learn, and improve themselves. Since your success depends on the
people you work with and for, make their character the primary object
of your attention. You will spare yourself the misery of discovering
their character when it is too late.
Character is destiny.
—Heraclitus
Keys to Human Nature
For thousands of years, we humans believed in fate: some kind of force
—spirits, gods, or God—compelled us to act in a certain way. At birth
our entire lives were laid out in advance; we were fated to succeed or
fail. We see the world much differently now. We believe that we are
largely in control of what happens to us, that we create our own
destiny. Upon occasion, however, we might have a fleeting sensation
that approximates what our ancestors must have felt. Perhaps a
personal relationship goes bad or our career path hits a snag, and
these difficulties are uncannily similar to something that happened to
us in the past. Or we realize that our way of working on a project needs
some improvement; we could do things better. We try to alter our
methods, only to find ourselves doing things in exactly the same way,
with nearly the same results. We might feel for a moment that some
kind of malignant force in the world, some curse, compels us to relive
the same situations.
We can often notice this phenomenon more clearly in the actions of
others, particularly those closest to us. For instance, we see friends
continually fall for exactly the wrong person or unconsciously push
away the right person. We cringe at some foolish behavior of theirs,
such as an ill-considered investment or career choice, only to see them
repeat the foolishness a few years later, once they have forgotten the
lesson. Or we know someone who always manages to offend the wrong
person at the wrong time, creating hostility wherever he or she goes.
Or they crumble under pressure, always in the same way, but blaming
others or bad luck for what happens. And of course we know the
addicts who get out of their addiction, only to fall back in or find some
other form of addiction. We see these patterns and they don’t, because
nobody likes to believe that they are operating under some kind of
compulsion beyond their control. It is too disturbing a thought.
If we are honest with ourselves, we must admit there is some truth
to the concept of fate. We are prone to repeat the same decisions and
methods of dealing with problems. There is a pattern to our life,
particularly visible in our mistakes and failures. But there is a different
way of looking at this concept: it is not spirits or gods that control us
but rather our character. The etymology of the word character, from
the ancient Greek, refers to an engraving or stamping instrument.
Character, then, is something that is so deeply ingrained or stamped
within us that it compels us to act in certain ways, beyond our
awareness and control. We can conceive of this character as having
three essential components, each layered on top of the other, giving
this character depth.
The earliest and deepest layer comes from genetics, from the
particular way our brains are wired, which predisposes us toward
certain moods and preferences. This genetic component can make
some people prone to depression, for instance. It makes some people
introverts and others extroverts. It might even incline some toward
becoming especially greedy—for attention or privilege or possessions.
The psychoanalyst Melanie Klein, who studied infants, believed that
the greedy and grasping type of child came into the world predisposed
toward this character trait. There might be other genetic factors as well
that predispose us toward hostility or anxiety or openness.
The second layer, which forms above this, comes from our earliest
years and from the particular type of attachments we formed with our
mother and caregivers. In these first three or four years our brains are
especially malleable. We experience emotions much more intensely,
creating memory traces that are much deeper than anything that will
follow. In this period of life we are at our most susceptible to the
influence of others, and the stamp from these years is profound.
John Bowlby, an anthropologist and psychoanalyst, studied
patterns of attachment between mothers and children and came up
with four basic schemas: free/autonomous, dismissing, enmeshed-
ambivalent, and disorganized. The free/autonomous stamp comes
from mothers who give their children freedom to discover themselves
and are continually sensitive to their needs but also protect them.
Dismissing mothers are often distant, even sometimes hostile and
rejecting. Such children are stamped with a feeling of abandonment
and the idea that they must continually fend for themselves. The
enmeshed-ambivalent mothers are not consistent with their attention
—sometimes suffocating and overinvolved, other times retreating
because of their own problems or anxieties. They can make their
children feel as if they have to take care of the person who should be
taking care of them. Disorganized mothers send highly conflicting
signals to their children, reflecting their own inner chaos and perhaps
early emotional traumas. Nothing their children do is right, and such
children can develop powerful emotional problems.
There are, of course, many gradations within each type and
combinations of them, but in every case the quality of attachment that
we had in our earliest years will create deep tendencies within us, in
particular the way we use relationships to handle or modulate our
stress. For instance, children of the dismissing parent will tend to
avoid any kind of negative emotional situation and to wall themselves
off from feelings of dependency. They might find it harder to commit
to a relationship or will unconsciously push people away. The children
of the enmeshed variety will experience a great deal of anxiety in
relationships and will feel many conflicting emotions. They will always
be ambivalent toward people, and this will set noticeable patterns in
their life in which they pursue people and then unconsciously retreat.
In general, from these earliest years people will display a particular
tone to their character—hostile and aggressive, secure and confident,
anxious and avoidant, needy and enmeshing. These two layers are so
deep that we have no real conscious awareness of them and the
behavior they compel, unless we expend great effort in examining
ourselves.
Above this a third layer will form from our habits and experiences
as we get older. Based on the first two layers, we will tend to rely on
certain strategies for dealing with stress, looking for pleasure, or
handling people. These strategies now become habits that are set in
our youth. There will be modifications to the particular nature of our
character depending on the people we deal with—friends, teachers,
romantic partners—and how they respond to us. But in general these
three layers will establish certain noticeable patterns. We will make a
particular decision. This is engraved in our brains neurologically. We
are compelled to repeat this because the path is already laid. It
becomes a habit, and our character is formed out of these thousands of
habits, the earliest ones set well before we could be conscious of them.
There is a fourth layer as well. It often is developed in late
childhood and adolescence as people become aware of their character
flaws. They do what they can to cover them up. If they sense that deep
inside they are an anxious, timid type of person, they come to realize
that this is not a socially acceptable trait. They learn to disguise it with
a front. They compensate by trying to appear outgoing or carefree or
even domineering. This makes it all the more difficult for us to
determine the nature of their character.
Some character traits can be positive and reflect inner strength. For
instance, some people have a propensity toward being generous and
open, empathetic, and resilient under pressure. But these stronger,
more flexible qualities often require awareness and practice to truly
become habits that can be relied upon. As we get older, life tends to
weaken us. Our empathy is harder to hold on to (see chapter 2). If we
are reflexively generous and open to everyone we meet, we can end up
in a lot of trouble. Confidence without self-awareness and control can
become grandiosity. Without conscious effort, these strengths will
tend to wear down or turn into weaknesses. What this means is that
the weakest parts of our character are the ones that create habits and
compulsive behavior, because they do not require effort or practice to
maintain.
Finally, we can develop conflicting character traits, perhaps
stemming from a difference between our genetic predispositions and
our earliest influences, or from parents who stamp in us different
values. We might feel both idealistic and materialistic, the two parts
fighting within us. The law remains the same. The conflicted character,
which is developed in the earliest years, will merely reveal a different
kind of pattern, with decisions that tend to reflect a person’s
ambivalence, or that swing back and forth.
As a student of human nature your task is twofold: First you must
come to understand your own character, examining as best you can
the elements in your past that have gone into forming it, and the
patterns, mostly negative, that you can see recurring in your life. It is
impossible to get rid of this stamp that constitutes your character. It is
too deep. But through awareness, you can learn to mitigate or stop
certain negative patterns. You can work to transform the negative and
weak aspects of your character into actual strengths. You can try to
create new habits and patterns that go with them through practice,
actively shaping your character and the destiny that goes with it. (For
more on this, see the last section of this chapter.)
Second, you must develop your skill in reading the character of the
people you deal with. To do so, you must consider character as a
primary value when it comes to choosing a person to work for or with
or an intimate partner. This means giving it more value than their
charm, intelligence, or reputation. The ability to observe people’s
character—as seen in their actions and patterns—is an absolutely
critical social skill. It can help you avoid precisely those kinds of
decisions that can spell years of misery—choosing an incompetent
leader, a shady partner, a scheming assistant, or the kind of
incompatible spouse who can poison your life. But it is a skill you must
consciously develop, because we humans are generally inept when it
comes to such assessments.
The general source of our ineptness is that we tend to base our
judgments of people on what is most apparent. But as stated earlier,
people often try to cover up their weaknesses by presenting them as
something positive. We see them brimming with self-confidence, only
to later discover that they are actually arrogant and incapable of
listening. They seem frank and sincere, but over time we realize that
they are actually boorish and unable to consider the feelings of others.
Or they seem prudent and thoughtful, but eventually we see that they
are in fact timid at their core and afraid of the slightest criticism.
People can be quite adept at creating these optical illusions, and we
fall for them. Similarly, people will charm and flatter us and, blinded
by our desire to like them, we fail to look deeper and see the character
flaws.
Related to this, when we look at people we often are really seeing
only their reputation, the myth that surrounds them, the position they
occupy, and not the individual. We come to believe that a person who
has success must by nature be generous, intelligent, and good, and
that they deserve everything they have gotten. But successful people
come in all shapes. Some are good at using others to get where they
have gotten, masking their own incompetence. Some are completely
manipulative. Successful people have just as many character flaws as
anyone else. Also, we tend to believe that someone who adheres to a
particular religion or political belief system or moral code must have
the character to go with this. But people bring the character they have
to the position they occupy or to the religion they practice. A person
can be a progressive liberal or a loving Christian and still be an
intolerant tyrant at heart.
The first step, then, in studying character is to be aware of these
illusions and façades and to train ourselves to look through them. We
must scrutinize everybody for signs of their character, no matter the
appearance they present or the position they occupy. With this firmly
in mind, we can then work on several key components to the skill:
recognizing certain signs that people emit in certain situations and
that clearly reveal their character; understanding some general
categories that people fit into (strong versus weak character, for
instance), and finally being aware of certain types of characters that
often are the most toxic and should be avoided if possible.
Character Signs
The most significant indicator of people’s character comes through
their actions over time. Despite what people say about the lessons they
have learned (see Howard Hughes), and how they have changed over
the years, you will inevitably notice the same actions and decisions
repeating in the course of their life. In these decisions they reveal their
character. You must take notice of any salient forms of behavior—
disappearing when there is too much stress, not completing an
important piece of work, turning suddenly belligerent when
challenged, or, conversely, suddenly rising to the occasion when given
responsibility. With this fixed in your mind, you do some research into
their past. You look at other actions you have observed that fit into this
pattern, now in retrospect. You pay close attention to what they do in
the present. You see their actions not as isolated incidents but as parts
of a compulsive pattern. If you ignore the pattern it is your own fault.
You must always keep in mind the primary corollary of this law:
people never do something just once. They might try to excuse
themselves, to say they lost their heads in the moment, but you can be
sure they will repeat whatever foolishness they did on another
occasion, compelled by their character and habits. In fact, they will
often repeat actions when it is completely against their self-interest,
revealing the compulsive nature of their weaknesses.
Cassius Severus was an infamous lawyer-orator who flourished in
the time of the Roman Emperor Augustus. He first gained attention
with his fiery speeches that attacked high-ranking Romans for their
extravagant lifestyles. He gained a following. His style was bombastic
but full of humor that pleased the public. Encouraged by the attention
he received, he began to insult other officials, always raising the tone
of his attacks. The authorities warned him to stop. The novelty wore
off and the crowds grew thinner, but this only made Severus try
harder.
Finally the authorities had had enough—in AD 7 they ordered his
books to be burned and him to be banished to the island of Crete. To
the dismay of the Roman authorities, on Crete he simply continued his
obnoxious campaign, sending copies to Rome of his latest diatribes.
They warned him yet again. He not only ignored this, but he began to
harangue and insult local Cretan officials, who wanted him put to
death. In AD 24 the Senate wisely banished him to the unpopulated
rock of Serifos in the middle of the Aegean Sea. There he would spend
the last eight years of his life, and we can imagine him still concocting
more insulting speeches that no one would hear.
It is hard for us to believe that people cannot control tendencies
that are so self-destructive, and we want to give them the benefit of the
doubt, as the Romans did. But we must remember the wise words in
the Bible: “Like a dog that returns to his vomit is a fool that repeats his
folly.”
You can see eloquent signs of people’s character in how they handle
everyday affairs. If they are late in finishing simple assignments, they
will be late with larger projects. If they become irritated by little
inconveniences, they will tend to crumble under larger ones. If they
are forgetful on small matters and inattentive to details, they will be so
on more important ones. Look at how they treat employees in
everyday settings and notice if there are discrepancies between the
persona they present and their attitude toward underlings.
In 1969 Jeb Magruder came to San Clemente for a job interview in
the Nixon administration. The man giving the interview was Bob
Haldeman, chief of staff. Haldeman was very earnest, completely
devoted to the Nixon cause, and impressed Magruder with his
honesty, sharpness, and intelligence. But as they left the interview to
get in a golf cart for a tour of San Clemente, Haldeman suddenly
became frantic—there were no carts available. He railed at those in
charge of the carts, and his manner was insulting and harsh. He was
almost hysterical. Magruder should have seen this incident as a sign
that Haldeman was not what he appeared, that he had control issues
and a vicious streak, but charmed by the aura of power at San
Clemente and wanting the job, he chose to ignore this, much to his
later dismay.
In everyday life people can often do well at disguising their
character flaws, but in times of stress or crisis these flaws can
suddenly become very apparent. People under stress lose their normal
self-control. They reveal their insecurities about their reputation, their
fear of failure and lack of inner resilience. On the other hand, some
people rise to the occasion and reveal strength under fire. There’s no
way to tell until the heat is on, but you must pay extra attention to
such moments.
Similarly, how people handle power and responsibility will tell you
a lot about them. As Lincoln said, “If you want to test a man’s
character, give him power.” On the way to gaining power, people will
tend to play the courtier, to seem deferential, to follow the party line,
to do what it takes to make it to the top. Once at the top, there are
fewer restraints and they will often reveal something about themselves
you had not noticed before. Some people stay true to the values they
had before attaining a high position—they remain respectful and
empathetic. On the other hand, far more people suddenly feel entitled
to treat others differently now that they have the power.
That is what happened to Lyndon Johnson once he attained a
position of ultimate security in the Senate, as Senate majority leader.
Tired of the years he had to spend playing the perfect courtier, he now
relished the power he had to upset or humiliate those who had crossed
him in the past. Now he would go up to such a senator and make a
point of talking only to his assistant. Or he would get up and leave the
floor when a senator he did not like was giving an important speech,
making other senators follow him. In general there are always signs of
these character traits in the past if you look closely enough (Johnson
had revealed such nasty signs in the earliest parts of his political
career), but, more important, you need to take notice of what people
reveal once they are in power. So often we think that power has
changed people, when in fact it simply reveals more of who they are.
People’s choice of spouse or partner says a lot about them. Some
look for a partner they can dominate and control, perhaps someone
younger, less intelligent or successful. Some choose a partner they can
rescue from a bad situation, playing the savior role, another form of
control. Yet others look for someone to fill the mommy or daddy role.
They want more pampering. These choices are rarely intellectual; they
reflect people’s earliest years and attachment schemas. They are
sometimes surprising, as when people select someone who seems very
different and outwardly incompatible, but there is always an internal
logic to such choices. For instance, a person has a tremendous fear of
being abandoned by the one they love, reflecting anxieties from
infancy, and so they select a person who is noticeably inferior in looks
or intelligence, knowing that person will cling to them no matter what.
Another realm to examine is how people behave in moments away
from work. In a game or sport they might reveal a competitive nature
that they cannot turn off. They have a fear of being overtaken in
anything, even when they are driving. They must be ahead, out in
front. This can be channeled functionally into their work, but in off
hours it reveals deep layers of insecurities. Look at how people lose in
games. Can they do so graciously? Their body language will say a lot
on that front. Do they try whatever they can to circumvent the rules or
bend them? Are they looking to escape and relax from work or to
assert themselves even in such moments?
In general, people can be divided into introverts and extroverts,
and this will play a large role in the character they develop. Extroverts
are largely governed by external criteria. The question that dominates
them is “What do others think of me?” They will tend to like what
other people like, and the groups they belong to frequently determine
the opinions they hold. They are open to suggestion and new ideas, but
only if they are popular in the culture or asserted by some authority
they respect. Extroverts value external things—good clothes, great
meals, concrete enjoyment shared with others. They are in search of
new and novel sensations and have a nose for trends. They are not
only comfortable with noise and bustle but actively search it out. If
they are bold, they love physical adventure. If they are not so bold,
they love creature comforts. In any event, they crave stimulation and
attention from others.
Introverts are more sensitive and easily exhausted by too much
outward activity. They like to conserve their energy, to spend time
alone or with one or two close friends. As opposed to extroverts, who
are fascinated by facts and statistics for their own sake, introverts are
interested in their own opinions and feelings. They love to theorize
and come up with their own ideas. If they produce something, they do
not like to promote it; they find the effort distasteful. What they make
should sell itself. They like to keep a part of their life separate from
others, to have secrets. Their opinions do not come from what others
think or from any authority but from their inner criteria, or at least
they think so. The bigger the crowd, the more lost and lonely they feel.
They can seem awkward and mistrustful, uncomfortable with
attention. They also tend to be more pessimistic and worried than the
average extrovert. Their boldness will be expressed by the novel ideas
they come up with and their creativity.
You might notice tendencies in both directions in individuals or
yourself, but in general people trend in one or the other direction. It is
important to gauge this in others for a simple reason: introverts and
extroverts do not naturally understand each other. To the extrovert,
the introvert has no fun, is stubborn, even antisocial. To the introvert,
the extrovert is shallow, flighty, and overly concerned with what
people think. Being one or the other is generally something genetic
and will make two people see the same thing in a totally different light.
Once you understand you are dealing with someone of the other
variety than yourself, you must reassess their character and not foist
your own preferences on them. Also, sometimes introverts and
extroverts can work well together, particularly if people have a mix of
both qualities and they complement each other, but more often than
not they do not get along and are prone to constant
misunderstandings. Keep in mind that there are generally more
extroverts than introverts in the world.
Finally, it is critical that you measure the relative strength of
people’s character. Think of it in this way: such strength comes from
deep within the core of the person. It could stem from a mixture of
certain factors—genetics, secure parenting, good mentors along the
way, and constant improvement (see the final section of this chapter).
Whatever the cause, this strength is not something displayed on the
outside in the form of bluster or aggression but manifests itself in
overall resilience and adaptability. Strong character has a tensile
quality like a good piece of metal—it can give and bend but still retains
its overall shape and never breaks.
The strength emanates from a feeling of personal security and self-
worth. This allows such people to take criticism and learn from their
experiences. This means they do not give up so easily, since they want
to learn how to get better. They are rigorously persistent. People of
strong character are open to new ideas and ways of doing things
without compromising the basic principles they adhere to. In adversity
they can retain their presence of mind. They can handle chaos and the
unpredictable without succumbing to anxiety. They keep their word.
They have patience, can organize a lot of material, and complete what
they start. Not continually insecure about their status, they can also
subsume their personal interests to the good of the group, knowing
that what works best for the team will in the end make their life easier
and better.
People of weak character begin from the opposite position. They are
easily overwhelmed by circumstances, making them hard to rely upon.
They are slippery and evasive. Worst of all, they cannot be taught
because learning from others implies criticism. This means you will
continually hit a wall in dealing with them. They may appear to listen
to your instructions, but they will simply revert to what they think is
best.
We are all a mix of strong and weak qualities, but some people
clearly veer in one or the other direction. As much as you can, you
want to work and associate with strong characters and avoid weak
ones. This has been the basis for almost all of Warren Buffett’s
investment decisions. He looks beyond the numbers to the CEOs he
will be dealing with, and what he wants to gauge above all else is their
resilience, their dependability, and their self-reliance. If only we used
such measurements in those we hired, the partners we take in, and
even the politicians we choose.
Although in intimate relationships there are certainly other factors
that will guide our choices, strength of character should also be
considered. This was largely what led Franklin Roosevelt to choose
Eleanor as his wife. As a handsome young man of wealth, he could
have chosen many other more beautiful young women, but he admired
Eleanor’s openness to new experiences and her remarkable
determination. Looking far into the future, he could see the value of
her character mattering more than anything else. And it ended up
being a very wise choice.
In gauging strength or weakness, look at how people handle
stressful moments and responsibility. Look at their patterns: what
have they actually completed or accomplished? You can also test
people. For instance, a good-natured joke at their expense can be quite
revealing. Do they respond graciously to this, not so easily caught up
in their insecurities, or do their eyes flash resentment or even anger?
To gauge their trustworthiness as a team player, give them strategic
information or share with them some rumor—do they quickly pass
along the information to others? Are they quick to take one of your
ideas and package it as their own? Criticize them in a direct manner.
Do they take this to heart and try to learn and improve, or do they
show overt signs of resentment? Give them an open-ended assignment
with less direction than usual and monitor how they organize their
thoughts and their time. Challenge them with a difficult assignment or
some novel way of doing something, and see how they respond, how
they handle their anxiety.
Remember: weak character will neutralize all of the other possible
good qualities a person might possess. For instance, people of high
intelligence but weak character may come up with good ideas and even
do a job well, but they will crumble under pressure, or they will not
take to kindly to criticism, or they will think first and foremost of their
own agenda, or their arrogance and annoying qualities will cause
others around them to quit, harming the general environment. There
are hidden costs to working with them or hiring them. Someone less
charming and intelligent but of strong character will prove more
reliable and productive over the long run. People of real strength are
as rare as gold, and if you find them, you should respond as if you had
a discovered a treasure.
Toxic Types
Although each person’s character is as unique as a fingerprint, we can
notice throughout history certain types that keep recurring and that
can be particularly pernicious to deal with. As opposed to the more
obviously evil or manipulative characters that you can spot a mile
away, these types are trickier. They often lure you in with an
appearance that presents their weaknesses as something positive. Only
over time do you see the toxic nature beneath the appearance, often
when it is too late. Your best defense is to be armed with knowledge of
these types, to notice the signs earlier on, and to not get involved or to
disengage from them as quickly as possible.
The Hyperperfectionist: You are lured into their circle by how hard
they work, how dedicated they are to making the best of whatever it is
they produce. They put in longer hours than even the lowliest
employee. Yes, they might explode and yell at people below them for
not doing the job right, but that is because they want to maintain the
highest standards, and that should be a good thing. But if you have the
misfortune of agreeing to work with or for such a type, you will slowly
discover the reality. They cannot delegate tasks; they have to oversee
everything. It is less about high standards and dedication to the group
than about power and control.
Such people often have dependency issues stemming from their
family background, similar to Howard Hughes. Any feeling that they
might have to depend on someone for something opens up old wounds
and anxieties. They can’t trust anyone. Once their back is turned, they
imagine everyone slacking off. Their compulsive need to micromanage
leads to people feeling resentful and secretly resistant, which is
precisely what they fear the most. You will notice that the group they
lead is not very well organized, since everything must flow through
them. This leads to chaos and political infighting as the courtiers
struggle to get closer to the king, who controls everything.
Hyperperfectionists will often have health problems, as they work
themselves to the bone. They like to blame others for everything that
goes wrong—nobody is working hard enough. They have patterns of
initial success followed by burnout and spectacular failures. It is best
to recognize the type before getting enmeshed on any level. They
cannot be satisfied by anything you do and will chew you up slowly
with their anxieties, abusiveness, and desire to control.
The Relentless Rebel: At first glance such people can seem quite
exciting. They hate authority and love the underdog. Almost all of us
are secretly attracted to such an attitude; it appeals to the adolescent
within us, the desire to snub our nose at the teacher. They don’t
recognize rules or precedents. Following conventions is for those who
are weak and stodgy. These types will often have a biting sense of
humor, which they might turn on you, but that is part of their
authenticity, their need to deflate everyone, or so you think. But if you
happen to associate with this type more closely, you will see that it is
something they cannot control; it is a compulsion to feel superior, not
some higher moral quality.
In their childhood a parent or father figure probably disappointed
them. They came to mistrust and hate all those in power. In the end,
they cannot accept any criticism from others because that reeks of
authority. They cannot ever be told what to do. Everything must be on
their terms. If you cross them in some way, you will be painted as the
oppressor and be the brunt of their vicious humor. They gain attention
with this rebel pose and soon become addicted to the attention. In the
end it is all about power—no one shall be above them, and anyone who
dares will pay the price. Look at their past history—they will tend to
split with people on very bad terms, made worse by their insults. Do
not be lured in by the hipness of their rebel pose. Such types are
eternally locked in adolescence, and to try work with them will prove
as productive as trying to lock horns with a sullen teenager.
The Personalizer: These people seem so sensitive and thoughtful, a
rare and nice quality. They might seem a little sad, but sensitive people
can have it rough in life. You are often drawn in by this air of theirs,
and want to help. Also, they can appear quite intelligent, considerate,
and good to work with. What you come to realize later on is that their
sensitivity really only goes in one direction—inward. They are prone to
take everything that people say or do as personal. They tend to brood
over things for days, long after you have forgotten some innocuous
comment that they have taken personally. As children, they had a
gnawing feeling that they never got enough from their parents—love,
attention, material possessions. As they get older, everything tends to
remind them of what they didn’t get. They go through life resenting
this and wanting others to give them things without their having to
ask. They are constantly on guard—are you paying them attention, do
you respect them, are you giving them what they paid for? Being
somewhat irritable and touchy, they inevitably push people away,
which makes them even more sensitive. At some point they start to
have a look of perpetual disappointment.
You will see in their life a pattern of many falling-outs with people,
but they will always see themselves as the wronged party. Do not ever
inadvertently insult such a type. They have a long memory and can
spend years getting back at you. If you can recognize the type early
enough, it’s better to avoid them, as they will inevitably make you feel
guilty for something.
The Drama Magnet: They will draw you in with their exciting
presence. They have unusual energy and stories to tell. Their features
are animated and they can be quite witty. They are fun to be around,
until the drama turns ugly. As children, they learned that the only way
to get love and attention that lasted was to enmesh their parents in
their troubles and problems, which had to be large enough to engage
the parents emotionally over time. This became a habit, their way of
feeling alive and wanted. Most people shrink from any kind of
confrontation, but they seem to live for it. As you get to know them
better, you hear more stories of bickering and battles in their life, but
they manage to always position themselves as the victim.
You must realize that their greatest need is to get their hooks into
you by any means possible. They will embroil you in their drama to the
point that you will feel guilty for disengaging. It is best to recognize
them as early as possible, before you become enmeshed and dragged
down. Examine their past for evidence of the pattern and run for the
hills if you suspect you are dealing with such a type.
The Big Talker: You are impressed by their ideas, the projects that
they are thinking about. They need help, they need backers, and you
are sympathetic, but step back for a moment and examine their record
for signs of past achievements or anything tangible. You might be
dealing with a type that is not overtly dangerous but can prove
maddening and waste your valuable time. In essence, these people are
ambivalent. On the one hand they are secretly afraid of the effort and
responsibility that go with translating their ideas into action. On the
other hand, they crave attention and power. The two sides go to war
within them, but the anxious part inevitably wins out and they slip
away at the last moment. They come up with some reason for getting
out of it, after you have committed to them. They themselves never
finish anything. In the end, they tend to blame others for not realizing
their visions—society, nebulous antagonistic forces, or bad luck. Or
they try to find a sucker who will do all of the hard work in bringing to
life their vague idea but who will take the blame if it all goes wrong.
Often such people had parents who were inconsistent, would turn
on them suddenly for the smallest misdeed. Consequently their goal in
life is to avoid situations in which they might open themselves up to
criticism and judgment. They handle this by learning to talk well and
impressing people with stories but running away when called to
account, always with an excuse. Look carefully at their past for signs of
this, and if they seem the type, be amused by their stories but take it
no further.
The Sexualizer: They seem charged with sexual energy, in a way
that is refreshingly unrepressed. They have a tendency to mix work
with pleasure, to blur the usual boundaries for when it is appropriate
to use this energy, and you might imagine that this is healthy and
natural. But in truth it is compulsive and comes from a dark place. In
their earliest years such people probably suffered sexual abuse in some
way. This could have been directly physical or something more
psychological, which the parent expressed through looks and touching
that was subtle but inappropriate.
A pattern is deeply set from within and cannot be controlled—they
will tend to see every relationship as potentially sexual. Sex becomes a
means of self-validation, and when they are young, such types can lead
an exciting, promiscuous life, as they will tend to find people to fall
under their spell. But as they get older, any long periods without this
validation can lead to depression and suicide, so they become more
desperate. If they occupy positions of leadership, they will use their
power to get what they want, all under the guise of being natural and
unrepressed. The older they get, the more pathetic and frightening this
becomes. You cannot help or save them from their compulsion, only
save yourself from entanglement with them on any level.
The Pampered Prince/Princess: They will draw you in with their
regal air. They are calm and ever so slightly imbued with a feeling of
superiority. It is pleasant to meet people who appear confident and
destined to wear a crown. Slowly you might find yourself doing favors
for them, working extra hard for no pay, and not really understanding
how or why. Somehow they express the need to be taken care of, and
they are masters at getting others to pamper them. In childhood, their
parents indulged them in their slightest whim and protected them
from any kind of harsh intrusion from the outside world. There are
also some children who incite this behavior in their parents by acting
especially helpless. Whatever the cause, as adults their greatest desire
is to replicate this early pampering. It remains their lost paradise. You
will notice often that when they don’t get what they want, they display
baby-like behavior, pouting, or even tantrums.
This is certainly the pattern for all of their intimate relationships,
and unless you have a deep need to pamper others, you will find the
relationship maddening, always on their terms. They are not equipped
to handle the harsh aspects of adult life and either manipulate a
person into the pampering role or resort to drinking and drugs to
soothe themselves. If you feel guilty for not helping them, it means you
are hooked and should look to take care of yourself instead.
The Pleaser: You have never met anyone so nice and considerate.
You almost can’t believe how accommodating and charming they are.
Then slowly you begin to have some doubts, but nothing you can put
your finger on. Perhaps they don’t show up as promised or don’t do a
job so well. It is subtle. The further this goes, however, the more it
seems like they are sabotaging you or talking behind your back. These
types are consummate courtiers, and they have developed their
niceness not out of a genuine affection for their fellow humans but as a
defense mechanism. Perhaps they had harsh and punishing parents
who scrutinized their every action. Smiling and a deferential front was
their way of deflecting any form of hostility, and it becomes their
pattern for life. They also probably resorted to lying to their parents,
and they are generally practiced and expert liars.
Just as when they were children, behind the smiles and flattery is a
great deal of resentment at the role they have to play. They secretly
yearn to harm or steal from the person they serve or defer to. You
must be on your guard with people who actively exert so much charm
and politeness, past the point of what is natural. They can turn out to
be quite passive-aggressive, particularly hitting you when your guard
is down.
The Savior: You cannot believe your good luck—you have met
someone who will save you from your difficulties and troubles.
Somehow they recognized your need for help and here they are with
books to read, strategies to employ, the right foods to eat. In the
beginning it is all quite seductive, but your doubts begin the moment
you want to assert your independence and do things on your own.
In childhood, these types often had to become the caregivers of
their own mother, father, or siblings. The mother, for instance, made
her own needs the primary concern of the family. Such children
compensate for the lack of care that they receive with the feeling of
power that they derive from the inverted relationship. This sets a
pattern: they gain their greatest satisfaction from rescuing people,
from being the caregiver and savior. They have a nose for those in
possible need of salvation. But you can detect the compulsive aspect of
this behavior by their need to control you. If they are willing to let you
stand on your own two feet after some initial help, then they are truly
noble. If not, it is really about the power they can exercise. In any
event, it is always best to cultivate self-reliance and tell saviors to save
themselves.
The Easy Moralizer: They communicate a sense of outrage at this
bit of injustice or that, and they are quite eloquent. With such
conviction they find followers, including you. But sometimes you
detect cracks in their righteous veneer. They don’t treat their
employees so well; they are condescending to their spouse; they may
have a secret life or vice you catch glimpses of. As children, they were
often made to feel guilty for their own strong impulses and desires for
pleasure. They were punished and tried to repress these impulses.
Because of this they develop some self-loathing and are quick to
project negative qualities onto others or look enviously at people who
are not so repressed. They don’t like other people enjoying themselves.
Instead of expressing their envy, they choose to judge and condemn.
You will notice in the adult version a complete lack of nuance. People
are good or evil, no middle ground. They are in fact at war with human
nature, incapable of coming to terms with our less-than-perfect traits.
Their morality is as easy and compulsive as drinking or gambling, and
it requires no sacrifices on their part, just a lot of noble words. They
thrive in a culture of political correctness.
In truth they are secretly drawn toward what they condemn, which
is why they will inevitably have a secret side. You will certainly be the
target of their inquisition at some point if you get too close to them.
Notice their lack of empathy early on and keep your distance.
(For more toxic types, see the chapters on envy, 10; grandiosity, 11;
and aggression, 16.)
The Superior Character
This law is simple and inexorable: you have a set character. It was
formed out of elements that predate your conscious awareness. From
deep within you, this character compels you to repeat certain actions,
strategies, and decisions. The brain is structured to facilitate this: once
you think and take a particular action, a neural pathway is formed that
leads you to do it again and again. And in relation to this law, you can
go in one of two directions, each one determining more or less the
course of your life.
The first direction is ignorance and denial. You don’t take notice of
the patterns in your life; you don’t accept the idea that your earliest
years left a deep and lasting imprint that compels you to behave in
certain ways. You imagine that your character is completely plastic,
and that you can re-create yourself at will. You can follow the same
path to power and fame as someone else, even though they come from
very different circumstances. The concept of a set character can seem
like a prison, and many people secretly want to be taken outside
themselves, through drugs, alcohol, or video games. The result of such
denial is simple: the compulsive behavior and the patterns become
even more set into place. You cannot move against the grain of your
character or wish it away. It is too powerful.
This was precisely the problem for Howard Hughes. He imagined
himself a great businessman, establishing an empire that would outdo
his father’s. But by his nature, he was not a good manager of people.
His real strength was more technical—he had a great feel for the
design and engineering aspects of airplane production. If he had
known and accepted this, he could have carved out a brilliant career as
the visionary behind his own aircraft company and left the day-to-day
operations to someone truly capable. But he lived with an image of
himself that did not correlate with his character. This led to a pattern
of failures and a miserable life.
The other direction is harder to take, but it is the only path that
leads to true power and the formation of a superior character. It works
in the following manner: You examine yourself as thoroughly as
possible. You look at the deepest layers of your character, determining
whether you are an introvert or extrovert, whether you tend to be
governed by high levels of anxiety and sensitivity, or hostility and
anger, or a profound need to engage with people. You look at your
primal inclinations—those subjects and activities you are naturally
drawn to. You examine the quality of attachments you formed with
your parents, looking at your current relationships as the best sign of
this. You look with rigorous honesty at your own mistakes and the
patterns that continually hold you back. You know your limitations—
those situations in which you do not do your best. You also become
aware of the natural strengths in your character that have survived
past adolescence.
Now, with this awareness, you are no longer the captive of your
character, compelled to endlessly repeat the same strategies and
mistakes. As you see yourself falling into one of your usual patterns,
you can catch yourself in time and step back. You may not be able to
completely eliminate such patterns, but with practice you can mitigate
their effects. Knowing your limitations, you will not try your hand at
things for which you have no capacity or inclination. Instead, you will
choose career paths that suit you and mesh with your character. In
general, you accept and embrace your character. Your desire is not to
become someone else but to be more thoroughly yourself, realizing
your true potential. You see your character as the clay that you will
work with, slowly transforming your very weaknesses into strengths.
You do not run away from your flaws but rather see them as a true
source of power.
Look at the career of the actress Joan Crawford (1908–1977). Her
earliest years would seem to mark her as someone extremely unlikely
to make it in life. She never knew her father, who abandoned the
family shortly after her birth. She grew up in poverty. Her mother
actively disliked Joan and constantly beat her. As a child she learned
that the stepfather she adored was not really her father, and shortly
thereafter he too abandoned the family. Her childhood was an endless
series of punishments, betrayals, and abandonments, which scarred
her for life. As she began her career as a film actress at a very young
age, she examined herself and her flaws with ruthless objectivity: she
was hypersensitive and fragile; she had a lot of pain and sadness she
could not get rid of or disguise; she wanted desperately to be loved;
she had a continual need for a father figure.
Such insecurities could easily be the death of someone in a place as
ruthless as Hollywood. Instead, through much introspection and work,
she managed to transform these very weaknesses into the pillars of her
highly successful career. She decided, for instance, to bring her own
feelings of sadness and betrayal into all of the different roles she
played, making women around the world identify with her; she was
unlike so many of the other actresses, who were so falsely cheerful and
superficial. She directed her desperate need to be loved toward the
camera itself, and audiences could feel it. The film directors became
father figures whom she adored and treated with extreme respect. And
her most pronounced quality, her hypersensitivity, she turned outward
instead of inward. She developed intensely fine antennae tuned to the
likes and dislikes of the directors she worked with. Without looking at
them or hearing a word they said, she could sense their displeasure
with her acting, ask the right questions, and quickly incorporate their
criticisms. She was a director’s dream. She coupled all of this with her
fierce willpower, forging a career that spanned over forty years,
something unheard of for an actress in Hollywood.
This is the alchemy that you must use on yourself. If you are a
hyperperfectionist who likes to control everything, you must redirect
this energy into some productive work instead of using it on people.
Your attention to detail and high standards are a positive, if you
channel them correctly. If you are a pleaser, you have developed
courtier skills and real charm. If you can see the source of this trait,
you can control the compulsive and defensive aspect of it and use it as
a genuine social skill that can bring you great power. If you are highly
sensitive and prone to take things personally, you can work to redirect
this into active empathy (see chapter 2), and transform this flaw into
an asset to use for positive social purposes. If you have a rebellious
character, you have a natural dislike of conventions and the usual ways
of doing things. Channel this into some kind of innovative work,
instead of compulsively insulting and alienating people. For each
weakness there is a corresponding strength.
Finally, you need to also refine or cultivate those traits that go into
a strong character—resilience under pressure, attention to detail, the
ability to complete things, to work with a team, to be tolerant of
people’s differences. The only way to do so is to work on your habits,
which go into the slow formation of your character. For instance, you
train yourself to not react in the moment by repeatedly placing
yourself in stressful or adverse situations in order to get used to them.
In boring everyday tasks, you cultivate greater patience and attention
to detail. You deliberately take on tasks slightly above your level. In
completing them, you have to work harder, helping you establish more
discipline and better work habits. You train yourself to continually
think of what is best for the team. You also search out others who
display a strong character and associate with them as much as
possible. In this way you can assimilate their energy and their habits.
And to develop some flexibility in your character, always a sign of
strength, you occasionally shake yourself up, trying out some new
strategy or way of thinking, doing the opposite of what you would
normally do.
With such work you will no longer be a slave to the character
created by your earliest years and the compulsive behavior it leads to.
Even further, you can now actively shape your very character and the
fate that goes with it.
In anything, it is a mistake to think one can perform an action or
behave in a certain way once and no more. (The mistake of those
who say: “Let us slave away and save every penny till we are thirty,
then we will enjoy ourselves.” At thirty they will have a bent for
avarice and hard work, and will never enjoy themselves any
more . . . .) What one does, one will do again, indeed has probably
already done in the distant past. The agonizing thing in life is that
it is our own decisions that throw us into this rut, under the
wheels that crush us. (The truth is that, even before making those
decisions, we were going in that direction.) A decision, an action,
are infallible omens of what we shall do another time, not for any
vague, mystic, astrological reason but because they result from an
automatic reaction that will repeat itself.
—Cesare Pavese
A
5
Become an Elusive Object of
Desire
The Law of Covetousness
bsence and presence have very primal effects upon us. Too much
presence suffocates; a degree of absence spurs our interest. We
are marked by the continual desire to possess what we do not have—
the object projected by our fantasies. Learn to create some mystery
around you, to use strategic absence to make people desire your
return, to want to possess you. Dangle in front of others what they
are missing most in life, what they are forbidden to have, and they
will go crazy with desire. The grass is always greener on the other
side of the fence. Overcome this weakness in yourself by embracing
your circumstances, your fate.
The Object of Desire
In 1895 eleven-year-old Gabrielle Chanel sat by her mother’s bedside
for several days and watched her slowly die from tuberculosis at the
age of thirty-three. Gabrielle’s life had been hard, but now it could only
get worse. She and her siblings had grown up in poverty, shuttled from
one relative’s house to another. Their father was an itinerant peddler
of goods who hated any kind of ties or responsibility and was rarely at
home. Their mother, who often accompanied her husband on the road,
was the only comforting force in their lives.
As Gabrielle had feared, a few days after the mother’s death her
father showed up and deposited Gabrielle and her two sisters at a
convent in central France. He promised to return for them quite soon,
but they would never see him again. The nuns at the convent, housed
in a former medieval monastery, took in all sorts of girls to care for,
mostly orphans. They enforced strict discipline. Within the somber
walls of the monastery, which was sparsely decorated, the girls were to
live a life of austerity and spiritual practice. They each had only two
dresses they could wear, both alike and formless. Luxuries were
forbidden. The only music was church music. The food was
exceptionally plain. In her first few months there, Gabrielle tried to
accommodate herself to this new world, but she felt impossibly
restless.
One day, she discovered a series of romance novels that somehow
had been smuggled into the convent, and soon they became her only
salvation. They were written by Pierre Decourcelle, and almost all of
them involved a Cinderella-like story—a young girl growing up in
poverty, shunned and despised, suddenly finds herself whisked into a
world of wealth through some clever plot twist. Gabrielle could
completely identify with the protagonists, and she particularly loved
the endless descriptions of the dresses that the heroines would wear.
The world of palaces and châteaux seemed so very far away from her,
but in those moments in which she drifted through novel after novel
she could feel herself participating in the plot, and it gave her an
overwhelming desire to make it come to life, even though it was
forbidden for her to want such things and seemingly impossible to
ever have them.
At the age of eighteen she left the convent for a boarding school,
also run by nuns. There she was trained for a career as a seamstress.
The school was in a small town, and as she explored it she quickly
discovered a new passion to pursue, the theater. She loved everything
about it—the costumes, the sets, the performers in makeup. It was a
world of transformation, where somebody could become anybody.
Now all she wanted was to be an actress and make her name in the
theater. She took the stage name Coco and she tried everything—
acting, singing, and dancing. She had a lot of energy and charisma, but
she realized quickly enough that she lacked the talent for the kind of
success she desired.
Coming to terms with this, she soon hit upon a new dream. Many of
the actresses who could not make a living from their work had become
courtesans who were supported by wealthy lovers. Such women had
enormous wardrobes, could go where they pleased, and, although they
were shunned by good society, they were not shackled with some
despotic husband. As luck would have it, one of the young men who
enjoyed her on the stage, Etienne Balsan, invited her to stay in his
nearby château. He had inherited a family fortune and lived a life of
total leisure. Gabrielle, now known as Coco to one and all, accepted the
offer.
The château was filled with courtesans who floated in and out from
all over Europe. Some of them were famous. They were all beautiful
and worldly. It was a relatively simple life that centered on riding
horses in the country, then lavish parties in the evening. The class
differences were noticeable. Whenever aristocrats or important people
came to the château, women like Coco were to eat with the servants
and make themselves scarce.
With nothing to do and feeling restless yet again, she began to
analyze herself and the future ahead of her. Her ambitions were great,
but she was always searching for something beyond her grasp,
continually dreaming about a future that was just not possible. At first
it was the palaces in the romance novels, then it was a grand life on the
stage, becoming another Sarah Bernhardt. Now her latest dream was
just as absurd. The great courtesans were all voluptuous, beautiful
women. Coco looked more like a boy. She had no curves and was not a
classic beauty. It was more her presence and energy that charmed
men, but that would not last. She always wanted what other people
had, imagining it contained some hidden treasure. Even when it came
to other women and their boyfriends or husbands, her greatest desire
was to steal the man away, which she had done on several occasions.
But whenever she got what she wanted, including the boyfriend or the
life in a château, she inevitably felt disappointed by the reality. It was a
mystery what in the end could satisfy her.
Then one day, without thinking of what exactly she was up to, she
wandered into Balsan’s bedroom and pilfered some of his clothes. She
started to wear outfits that were totally her own invention—his open-
collared shirts and tweed coats, paired with some of her own clothes,
all topped with a man’s straw boater hat. In wearing the clothes she
noticed two things: She felt an incredible sense of freedom as she left
behind the corsets, constricting gowns, and fussy headpieces women
were wearing. And she reveled in the new kind of attention she
received. The other courtesans now watched her with unconcealed
envy. They were captivated by this androgynous style. These new
outfits suited her figure well, and nobody had ever seen a woman
dressed quite in this manner. Balsan himself was charmed. He
introduced her to his tailor, and on her instructions the tailor custom-
made for her a boy’s riding costume with jodhpurs. She taught herself
to ride horses, but not sidesaddle like the other women. She had
always had an athletic bent to her character and within months had
become an expert rider. Now she could be seen everywhere in her
strange riding costume.
As she progressed with this new persona, it finally became clear to
her the nature of her vague longings: what she wanted was the power
and freedom that men possessed, which was reflected in the less
constricting clothes that they wore. And she could sense that the other
courtesans and women at the château could identify with this. It was
something in the air, a repressed desire she had tapped into. Within a
few weeks several of the courtesans began to visit her in her room and
try on the straw hats that she had decorated with ribbons and feathers.
Compared with the elaborate hats that women had to pin on their
heads, these were simple and easy to wear. The courtesans now strode
around town with Chanel’s hats on their heads, and soon other women
in the area were asking where they could buy them. Balsan offered her
the use of his apartment in Paris, where she could begin to make many
more of her hats and perhaps go into business. She happily took up the
offer.
Soon another man entered her life—a wealthy Englishman named
Arthur Capel, who was excited by the novelty of her look and her great
ambitions. They became lovers. Capel started sending his aristocratic
lady friends to Coco’s studio, and soon her hats became a craze. Along
with the hats she began to sell some clothes that she designed, all with
the same androgynous look that she had worn herself, made out of the
cheapest jersey fabric but seeming to offer a kind of freedom of
movement so different from the prevailing styles. Capel encouraged
her to open up a shop in the seaside town of Deauville, where all the
fashionable Parisians spent their summers. It turned out to be the
perfect idea: there in the relatively small town, filled with people-
watchers and the most fashionable women of all, she could create a
sensation.
She shocked the locals by swimming in the ocean. Women did not
do such things, and swimming costumes for women were almost
nonexistent, so she created her own out of the same jersey fabric.
Within weeks women were at her store clamoring to buy them. She
sauntered through Deauville wearing her own distinctive outfits—
androgynous, easy to move in, and ever so slightly provocative as they
hugged the body. She became the talk of the town. Women were
desperate to find out where she got her wardrobe. She kept
improvising with men’s clothing to create new looks. She took one of
Capel’s sweaters and cut it open, added some buttons, and created a
modern version of the cardigan, for women. This now became the
rage. She cut her own hair to a short length, knowing how it suited her
face, and suddenly this became the new trend. Sensing momentum,
she gave her clothes without charge to beautiful and well-connected
women, all sporting hairstyles similar to her own. Attending the most
sought-after parties, these women, all looking like Chanel clones,
spread the desire for this new style well beyond Deauville, to Paris
itself.
By 1920 she had become one of the leading fashion designers in the
world, and the greatest trendsetter of her time. Her clothes had come
to represent a new kind of woman—confident, provocative, and ever so
slightly rebellious. Although they were cheap to make and still out of
jersey material, she sold some of her dresses at extremely high prices,
and wealthy women were more than willing to pay to share in the
Chanel mystique. But quickly her old restlessness returned. She
wanted something else, something larger, a faster way to reach women
of all classes. To realize this dream she decided upon a most unusual
strategy—she would create and launch her own perfume.
At the time it was unusual for a fashion house to market its own
perfume, and unheard of to give it so much emphasis. But Chanel had
a plan. This perfume would be as distinctive as her clothes yet more
ethereal, literally something in the air that would excite men and
women and infect them with the desire to possess it. To accomplish
this she would go in the opposite direction from all the other perfumes
out there, which were associated with some natural, floral scent.
Instead, she wanted to create something that was not identifiable as a
particular flower. She wanted it to smell like “a bouquet of abstract
flowers,” something pleasant but completely novel. More than any
other perfume, it would smell different on each woman. To take this
further, she decided to give it a most unusual name. Perfumes of the
time had very poetic, romantic titles. Instead, she would name it after
herself, attaching a simple number, Chanel No. 5, as if it were a
scientific concoction. She packaged the perfume in a sleek modernist
bottle and added to the label her new logo of interlocking C’s. It looked
like nothing else out there.
To launch the perfume, she decided upon a subliminal campaign.
She began by spraying the scent everywhere in her store in Paris. It
filled the air. Women kept asking what it was and she would feign
ignorance. She would then slip bottles of the perfume, without labels,
into the bags of her wealthiest and best-connected clients. Soon
women began to talk of this strange new scent, rather haunting and
impossible to identify as any known flower. The word of yet another
Chanel creation began to spread like wildfire and women were soon
showing up at her store begging to buy the new scent, which she now
began to place discreetly on shelves. In the first few weeks they could
not stock enough. Nothing like this had ever happened in the industry,
and it would go on to become the most successful perfume in history,
making her a fortune.
Over the next two decades the house of Chanel reigned supreme in
the fashion world, but during World War II she flirted with Nazism,
staying in Paris during the Nazi occupation and visibly siding with the
occupiers. She had closed her store at the beginning of the war, and by
the end of the war she had been thoroughly disgraced in the eyes of the
French by her political sympathies. Aware and perhaps ashamed, she
fled to Switzerland, where she would remain in self-imposed exile. By
1953, however, she felt the need not only for a comeback but for
something even greater. Although she was now seventy, she had
become disgusted at the latest trends in fashion, which she felt had
returned to the old constrictions and fussiness of women’s clothing
that she had sought to destroy. Perhaps this also signaled a return to a
more subservient role for women. To Chanel it would be the ultimate
challenge—after some fourteen years out of business, she was now
largely forgotten. No one thought of her anymore as a trendsetter. She
would have to start almost completely over.
Her first move was to encourage rumors that she was planning a
return, but she gave no interviews. She wanted to stimulate talk and
excitement but surround herself with mystery. Her new show debuted
in 1954, and an enormous crowd filled her store to watch it, mostly out
of curiosity. Almost immediately there was a sense of disappointment.
The clothes were mostly a rehash of her 1930s styles with a few new
touches. The models were all Chanel look-alikes and mimicked her
way of walking. To the audience, Chanel seemed a woman hopelessly
locked in a past that would never return. The clothes seemed passé
and the press pilloried her, dredging up at the same time her Nazi
associations during the war.
For almost any designer this would have been a devastating blow,
but she appeared remarkably unfazed by it all. As always, she had a
plan and she knew better. She had decided well before the debut in
Paris that the United States was to be the target of this new line of
clothes. American women reflected her sensibility best of all—athletic,
into ease of movement and unfussy silhouettes, eminently practical.
And they had more money to spend than anyone else in the world.
Sure enough, the new line created a sensation in the States. Soon the
French began to tone down their criticisms. Within a year of her
return she had reestablished herself as the most important designer in
the world, and fashions now returned to the simpler and more
classical shapes she had always promoted. When Jacqueline Kennedy
began to wear her suits in many of her public appearances, it was the
most apparent symbol of the power Chanel had reclaimed.
As she resumed her place at the top, she revealed another practice
that was so against the times and the industry. Piracy was a great
problem in fashion, as knockoffs of established designs would appear
all over the world after a show. Designers carefully guarded all of their
secrets and fought through the courts any form of imitation. Chanel
did the opposite. She welcomed all sorts of people into her shows and
allowed them to take photographs. She knew this would only
encourage the many people who made a living out of creating cheap
versions of her clothes, but she wanted this. She even invited wealthy
women to bring along their seamstresses, who would make sketches of
the designs and then create replicas of them. More than making
money, what she wanted most of all was to spread her fashions
everywhere, to feel herself and her work to be objects of desire by
women of all classes and nations. It would be the ultimate revenge for
the girl who had grown up ignored, unloved, and shunned. She would
clothe millions of women; her look, her imprint would be seen
everywhere—as indeed it was a few years after her comeback.
•   •   •
Interpretation: The moment Chanel tried on Etienne Balsan’s
clothes and elicited a new kind of attention, something clicked in her
brain that would forever change the course of her life. Prior to this she
was always coveting something transgressive that stimulated her
fantasies. It was not socially acceptable for a lowly orphan girl to
aspire to mingle with the upper classes. Actress and courtesan were
not suitable roles to pursue, especially for someone raised in a
convent.
Now, as she rode around the château in her jodhpurs and boater
hat, she was suddenly the object that other people coveted. And they
were drawn to the transgressive aspect of her clothing, the deliberate
flouting of gender roles. Instead of being locked in her imaginary
world full of dreams and fantasies, she could be the one stimulating
such fantasies in other people. All that was required was to reverse her
perspective—to think of the audience first and to strategize how to play
on their imagination. The objects she had desired since childhood
were all somewhat vague, elusive, and taboo. That was their allure.
That is the nature of human desire. She simply had to turn this around
and incorporate such elements into the objects she created.
This is how she performed such magic: First, she surrounded
herself and what she made with an aura of mystery. She never talked
about her impoverished childhood. She made up countless
contradictory stories about her past. Nobody really knew anything
concrete about her. She carefully controlled the number of her public
appearances, and she knew the value of disappearing for a while. She
never revealed the recipe for her perfume or her creative process in
general. Her oddly compelling logo was designed to stimulate
interpretations. All of this gave endless space for the public to imagine
and speculate about the Coco myth. Second, she always associated her
designs with something vaguely transgressive. The clothes had a
distinct masculine edge but remained decidedly feminine. They gave
women the sense that they were crossing some gender boundaries—
physically and psychologically loosening constrictions. The clothes
also conformed more to the body, combining freedom of movement
with sex. These were not your mother’s clothes. To wear the overall
Chanel look was to make a statement about youth and modernity.
Once this took hold, it was hard for young women to resist the call.
Finally, from the beginning she made sure her clothes were seen
everywhere. Observing other women wearing such clothes stimulated
competitive desires to have the same and not be left out. Coco
remembered how deeply she had desired men who were already taken.
They were desirable because someone else desired them. Such
competitive impulses are powerful in all of us, and certainly among
women.
In truth, the boater hats she originally designed were nothing more
than common objects anyone could buy in a department store. The
clothes she first designed were made out of the cheapest materials.
The perfume was a mix of ordinary flowers, such as jasmine, and
chemicals, nothing exotic or special. It was pure psychological magic
that transformed them into objects that stimulated such intense
desires to possess them.
Understand: Just like Chanel, you need to reverse your
perspective. Instead of focusing on what you want and covet in the
world, you must train yourself to focus on others, on their repressed
desires and unmet fantasies. You must train yourself to see how they
perceive you and the objects you make, as if you were looking at
yourself and your work from the outside. This will give you the almost
limitless power to shape people’s perceptions about these objects and
excite them. People do not want truth and honesty, no matter how
much we hear such nonsense endlessly repeated. They want their
imaginations to be stimulated and to be taken beyond their banal
circumstances. They want fantasy and objects of desire to covet and
grope after. Create an air of mystery around you and your work.
Associate it with something new, unfamiliar, exotic, progressive, and
taboo. Do not define your message but leave it vague. Create an
illusion of ubiquity—your object is seen everywhere and desired by
others. Then let the covetousness so latent in all humans do the rest,
setting off a chain reaction of desire.
At last I have what I wanted. Am I happy? Not really. But what’s
missing? My soul no longer has that piquant activity conferred by
desire. . . . Oh, we shouldn’t delude ourselves—pleasure isn’t in the
fulfillment, but in the pursuit.
—Pierre-Augustin Caron de Beaumarchais
Keys to Human Nature
By nature, we humans are not easily contented with our
circumstances. By some perverse force within us, the moment we
possess something or get what we want, our minds begin to drift
toward something new and different, to imagine we can have better.
The more distant and unattainable this new object, the greater is our
desire to have it. We can call this the grass-is-always-greener
syndrome, the psychological equivalent of an optical illusion—if we get
too close to the grass, to that new object, we see that is not really so
green after all.
This syndrome has very deep roots in our nature. The earliest
recorded example can be found in the Old Testament, in the story of
the exodus from Egypt. Chosen by God to bring the Hebrews to the
Promised Land, Moses led them into the wilderness, where they would
wander for forty years. In Egypt the Hebrews had served as slaves and
their lives had been difficult. Once they suffered hardships in the
desert, however, they suddenly grew nostalgic for their previous life.
Facing starvation, God provided them with manna from heaven, but
they could only compare it unfavorably to the delicious melons and
cucumbers and meats they had known in Egypt. Not sufficiently
excited by God’s other miracles (the parting of the Red Sea, for
example), they decided to forge and worship a golden calf, but once
Moses punished them for this, they quickly dropped their interest in
this new idol.
All along the way they griped and complained, giving Moses endless
headaches. The men lusted after foreign women; the people kept
looking for some new cult to follow. God himself was so irritated by
their endless discontent that he barred this entire generation,
including Moses, from ever entering the Promised Land. But even
after the next generation established itself in the land of milk and
honey, the grumbling continued unabated. Whatever they had, they
dreamed of something better over the horizon.
Closer to home, we can see this syndrome at work in our daily lives.
We continually look at other people who seem to have it better than us
—their parents were more loving, their careers more exciting, their
lives easier. We may be in a perfectly satisfying relationship, but our
minds continually wander toward a new person, someone who doesn’t
have the very real flaws of our partner, or so we think. We dream of
being taken out of our boring life by traveling to some culture that is
exotic and where people are just happier than in the grimy city where
we live. The moment we have a job, we imagine something better. On a
political level, our government is corrupt and we need some real
change, perhaps a revolution. In this revolution, we imagine a
veritable utopia that replaces the imperfect world we live in. We don’t
think of the vast majority of revolutions in history in which the results
were more of the same, or something worse.
In all these cases, if we got closer to the people we envy, to that
supposed happy family, to the other man or woman we covet, to the
exotic natives in a culture we wish to know, to that better job, to that
utopia, we would see through the illusion. And often when we act on
these desires, we realize this in our disappointment, but it doesn’t
change our behavior. The next object glittering in the distance, the
next exotic cult or get-rich-quick scheme will inevitably seduce us.
One of the most striking examples of this syndrome is the view we
take of our childhood as it recedes into the past. Most of us remember
a golden time of play and excitement. As we get older, it becomes even
more golden in our memory. Of course, we conveniently forget the
anxieties, insecurities, and hurts that plagued us in childhood and
more than likely consumed more of our mental space than the fleeting
pleasures we remember. But because our youth is an object that grows
more distant as we age, we are able to idealize it and see it as greener
than green.
Such a syndrome can be explained by three qualities of the human
brain. The first is known as induction, how something positive
generates a contrasting negative image in our mind. This is most
obvious in our visual system. When we see some color—red or black,
for instance—it tends to intensify our perception of the opposite color
around us, in this case green or white. As we look at the red object, we
often can see a green halo forming around it. In general, the mind
operates by contrasts. We are able to formulate concepts about
something by becoming aware of its opposite. The brain is continually
dredging up these contrasts.
What this means is that whenever we see or imagine something,
our minds cannot help but see or imagine the opposite. If we are
forbidden by our culture to think a particular thought or entertain a
particular desire, that taboo instantly brings to mind the very thing we
are forbidden. Every no sparks a corresponding yes. (It was the
outlawing of pornography in Victorian times that created the first
pornographic industry.) We cannot control this vacillation in the mind
between contrasts. This predisposes us to think about and then desire
exactly what we do not have.
Second, complacency would be a dangerous evolutionary trait for a
conscious animal such as humans. If our early ancestors had been
prone to feeling content with present circumstances, they would not
have been sensitive enough to possible dangers that lurked in the most
apparently safe environments. We survived and thrived through our
continual conscious alertness, which predisposed us to thinking and
imagining the possible negative in any circumstance. We no longer live
in savannas or forests teeming with life-threatening predators and
natural dangers, but our brains are wired as if we were. We are
inclined therefore toward a continual negative bias, which often
consciously is expressed through complaining and griping.
Finally, what is real and what is imagined are both experienced
similarly in the brain. This has been demonstrated through various
experiments in which subjects who imagine something produce
electrical and chemical activity in their brains that is remarkably
similar to when they actually live out what they are imagining, all of
this shown through functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI).
Reality can be quite harsh and is full of limits and problems. We all
must die. Every day we get older and less strong. To become successful
requires sacrifice and hard work. But in our imagination we can
voyage beyond these limits and entertain all kinds of possibilities. Our
imagination is essentially limitless. And what we imagine has almost
the force of what we actually experience. And so we become creatures
who are continually prone to imagining something better than present
circumstances and feeling some pleasure in the release from reality
that our imagination brings us.
All of this makes the grass-is-always-greener syndrome inevitable
in our psychological makeup. We should not moralize or complain
about this possible flaw in human nature. It is a part of the mental life
of each one of us, and it has many benefits. It is the source of our
ability to think of new possibilities and innovate. It is what has made
our imagination such a powerful instrument. And on the flip side it is
the material out of which we can move, excite, and seduce people.
Knowing how to work on people’s natural covetousness is a
timeless art that we depend on for all forms of persuasion. The
problem we face today is not that people have suddenly stopped
coveting but quite the opposite: that we are losing our connection to
this art and the power that goes with it.
We see evidence of this in our culture. We live in an age of
bombardment and saturation. Advertisers blanket us with their
messages and brand presence, directing us here or there to click and
buy. Movies bludgeon us over the head, attacking our senses.
Politicians are masters at stirring up and exploiting our discontent
with present circumstances, but they have no sense of how to spark
our imagination about the future. In all of these cases subtlety is
sacrificed, and all of this has an overall hardening effect on our
imaginations, which secretly crave something else.
We see evidence of this in personal relationships as well. More and
more people have come to believe that others should simply desire
them for who they are. This means revealing as much as they can
about themselves, exposing all of their likes and dislikes, and making
themselves as familiar as possible. They leave no room for imagination
or fantasy, and when the man or woman they want loses interest in
them, they go online to rant at the superficiality of men or the
fecklessness of women. Increasingly self-absorbed (see chapter 2), we
find it harder than ever to get into the psychology of the other person,
to imagine what they want from us instead of what we want from
them.
Understand: People may point to all of this as evidence that we
humans are becoming more honest and truthful, but human nature
does not change within a few generations. People have become more
obvious and forthright not out of some deep moral calling but out of
increasing self-absorption and overall laziness. It requires no effort to
simply be oneself or to blast one’s message. And the lack of effort
simply results in a lack of effect on other people’s psychology. It means
that people’s interest in you will be paper thin. Their attention will
quickly move on and you will not see the reason for this. Do not
swallow the easy moralism of the day, which urges honesty at the
expense of desirability. Go in the opposite direction. With so few
people out there who understand the art of desirability, it affords you
endless opportunities to shine and exploit people’s repressed fantasies.
Strategies for Stimulating Desire
The key to making this law work for you is to objectify yourself and
what you produce. Normally you are locked in your own thoughts and
dreams. You imagine people should love and respect you for who you
are. You believe that what you produce should naturally excite people.
After all, you have invested a lot of effort and have high hopes for
success. But others see none of this. To them, you are just a person
among others, and as a person you inspire either curiosity and
excitement or indifference, and, even hostility. They project onto you
their own fantasies and preconceptions. Once made public, your work
is also an object completely divorced from your own hopes and
dreams, and it inspires emotions that are weak or strong. To the
degree that you can see yourself and what you produce as objects that
people perceive in their own manner, you have the power to alter their
perceptions and create objects of desire.
The following are the three main strategies for creating such
objects.
Know how and when to withdraw. This is the essence of the art. You
have a presence that people see and interpret. If you are too obvious
with this, if people can read you too easily and figure you out, if you
show your needs too visibly, then they will unconsciously begin to have
a degree of disrespect; over time they will lose interest. Your presence
must have a touch of coldness to it, as if you feel like you could do
without others. This signals to people that you consider yourself
worthy of respect, which unconsciously heightens your value in their
eyes. It makes people want to chase after you. This touch of coldness is
the first form of withdrawal that you must practice. Add to this a bit of
blankness and ambiguity as to who you are. Your opinions, values, and
tastes are never too obvious to people. This gives them room to read
into you what they want. Movie stars are masters of this. They turn
their faces and their presence into screens upon which people can
project their own fantasies. What you want in general is to create an
air of mystery and to attract interpretations.
Once you sense that you have engaged people’s imagination, that
you have your hooks in them, then you must use physical absence and
withdrawal. You are not so available. A day or week can go by without
your presence. You create a feeling of emptiness inside them, a touch
of pain. You occupy increasing amounts of their mental space in these
absences. They come to want more of you, not less.
The musician Michael Jackson played this game to perfection on
the social level. He was deeply aware of the dangers of saturating the
market with his music and public appearances. He spread out the
releases of his albums, making the public hungry for more. He
carefully managed the frequency of his interviews and performances
and never talked about the meaning of his lyrics or propagated any
overt message. He occasionally had his publicists leak to the press
some new story surrounding him, such as his use of hyperbaric
chambers as a way to maintain eternal youthfulness. He would neither
confirm nor deny these stories and the press would run wild. He was
someone who sparked stories and rumors, but nothing concrete.
Through this strategic elusiveness he made himself an object of
continual desire—both to know him better and to possess his music.
With the work you produce you can create similar covetous effects.
Always leave the presentation and the message relatively open-ended.
People can read into your work several interpretations. Never define
exactly how they should take or use it. This is why the work of great
dramatists such as Shakespeare and Chekhov has lasted for so many
centuries and always seem so fresh and exciting; each generation can
read into their plays what they want to. These writers described
timeless elements of human nature, but without judging or directing
the audience to what they should feel or think. Take that as the model
for whatever you produce.
Keep in mind the following: the more active our imagination
becomes, the greater the pleasure we derive from it. When we were
children, if we were given a game with explicit instructions and rules,
we quickly lost interest. But if the game was something we invented or
was loosely structured, allowing us to inject our own ideas and
fantasies, we could sustain our interest for much longer. When we
view an abstract painting that evokes dreams or fantasies, or see a film
that is not easily interpreted, or hear a joke or advertisement that is
ambiguous, we are the ones who do the interpreting, and we find it
exciting to be able to exercise our imagination in this way. Through
your work you want to stimulate this pleasure for people to the
maximum degree.
Create rivalries of desire. Human desire is never an individual
phenomenon. We are social creatures and what we want almost always
reflects what other people want. This stems from our earliest years.
We saw the attention that our parents could give us (the object we first
coveted) as a zero-sum game. If our siblings received a lot of attention,
then there would be less for us. We had to compete with them and
with others to get attention and affection. When we saw our siblings or
friends receive something—a gift or a favor—it sparked a competitive
desire to have the same thing. If some object or person was not desired
by others, we tended to see it as something indifferent or distasteful—
there must be something wrong with it.
This becomes a lifelong pattern. For some it is more overt. In
relationships they are interested only in men or women who are
already taken, who are clearly desired by a third party. Their desire is
to take away this loved object, to triumph over the other person, a
dynamic that most certainly has roots in their childhood. If other
people are making money through some new gimmick, they want not
only to participate but to corner the market. For others it is subtler.
They see people possessing something that seems exciting, and their
desire is not to take but to share and participate in the experience. In
either direction, when we see people or things desired by others, it
drives up their value.
You must learn how to exploit this. If you can somehow create the
impression that others desire you or your work, you will pull people
into your current without having to say a word or impose yourself.
They will come to you. You must strive to surround yourself with this
social aura, or at least create the illusion.
You can create this effect in several ways. You manage it so that
your object is seen or heard everywhere, even encouraging piracy if
necessary, as Chanel did. You don’t directly intervene. This will
inevitably spark some kind of viral pull. You can speed up this process
by feeding rumors or stories about the object through various media.
People will begin to talk and the word of mouth will spread the effect.
Even negative comments or controversy will do the trick, sometimes
even better than praise. It will give your object a provocative and
transgressive edge. Anyway, people are drawn toward the negative.
Your silence or lack of overt direction of the message will allow people
to run wild with their own stories and interpretations. You can also get
important people or tastemakers to talk about it and fan the flames.
What you are offering, they say, is new, revolutionary, something not
seen or heard of before. You are trafficking in the future, in trends. At
a certain point, enough people will feel the pull and will not want to be
left out, which will pull in others. The only problem in this game is that
in the world today you have much competition for these viral effects
and the public is incredibly fickle. You must be a master not only at
setting off these chain reactions but at renewing them or creating new
ones.
As an individual you must make it clear that people desire you, that
you have a past—not too much of a past to inspire mistrust but enough
to signal that others have found you desirable. You want to be indirect
in this. You want them to hear stories of your past. You want them to
literally see the attention you receive from men or women, all of this
without your saying a word. Any bragging or explicit signaling of this
will neutralize the effect.
In any negotiating situation you must always strive to bring in a
third or fourth party to vie for your services, creating a rivalry of
desire. This will immediately enhance your value, not just in terms of a
bidding war but also in the fact that people will see that others covet
you.
Use induction. We may think we live in a time of great freedom
compared with the past, but in fact we live in a world that is more
regulated than ever before. Our every move is followed digitally. There
are more laws than ever governing all aspects of human behavior.
Political correctness, which has always existed, can be more intense
because of how visible we have become on social media. Secretly most
of us feel bothered or crushed by all of these constraints on our
physical and mental movement. We yearn for what is transgressive
and beyond the limits that are set for us. We can easily be pulled
toward that repressed no or yes.
You want to associate your object with something ever so slightly
illicit, unconventional, or politically advanced. Chanel did this with her
overt androgynous appeal and flouting of gender roles. The fight
between generations is always ripe material for this. What you offer is
in bold contrast to the stodgy previous generation. John F. Kennedy
did this by setting himself off against the 1950s and the Eisenhower
era—a time of stultifying conformity. By contrast, voting for him
meant youth, vigor, and a lost masculinity. In essence he played to the
secret resentment of the father figure and the transgressive desire to
get rid of him. This desire is always tacitly out there among the young,
and it always has a taboo element attached.
One illicit desire that almost all people share is voyeurism. To peek
inside the private lives of others violates strict social taboos on privacy,
and yet everyone feels the pull to see what is going on behind people’s
doors. Theater and film depend upon these voyeuristic desires. They
put us inside people’s rooms, and we experience this almost as if we
were literally spying on people. You can incorporate this into your
work by giving the impression you are revealing secrets that should
really not be shared. Some will be outraged but everyone will be
curious. These could be secrets about yourself and how you
accomplished what you did, or it could be about others, what happens
behind the closed doors of powerful people and the laws that they
operate by.
In any event, what you offer should be new, unfamiliar, and exotic,
or at least presented as such. The contrast to what is out there, so
numbingly conventional, will create a covetous pull.
Finally, dangle in front of people the prospect of grasping the
unattainable or the impossible. Life is full of all kinds of irritating
limits and difficulties. To become wealthy or successful requires great
effort. We are locked inside our own character (see chapter 4) and
cannot become someone else. We cannot recover our lost youth or the
health that went with it. Every day brings us closer to death, the
ultimate limit. Your object, however, offers the fantasy of a quick path
to wealth and success, of recovering lost youth, of becoming a new
person, and even of conquering death itself. People will grasp greedily
at such things because they are considered so impossible. By the law of
induction we can imagine all of these shortcuts and fantasies (just as
we can imagine a unicorn), which gives us the desire to reach them,
and imagining them is almost like experiencing them.
Remember: it is not possession but desire that secretly impels
people. To possess something inevitably brings about some
disappointment and sparks the desire for something new to pursue.
You are preying upon the human need for fantasies and the pleasures
of chasing after them. In this sense your efforts must be continually
renewed. Once people get what they want or possess you, your value
and their respect for you immediately begin to lower. Keep
withdrawing, surprising, and stimulating the chase. As long as you do,
you have the power.
The Supreme Desire
Our path must always be toward greater awareness of our nature. We
must see within ourselves the grass-is-always-greener syndrome at
work and how it continually impels us to certain actions. We need to
be able to distinguish between what is positive and productive in our
covetous tendencies and what is negative and counterproductive. On
the positive side, feeling restless and discontented can motivate us to
search for something better and to not settle for what we have. It
enlarges our imagination as we consider other possibilities instead of
the circumstances we face. As we get older, we tend to become more
complacent, and renewing the restlessness of our earlier years can
keep us youthful and our minds active.
This restlessness, however, must be under conscious control. Often
our discontent is merely chronic; our desire for change is vague and a
reflection of our boredom. This leads to a waste of precious time. We
are unhappy with the way our career is going and so we make a big
change, which requires learning new skills and acquiring new contacts.
We enjoy the newness of it all. But several years later we again feel the
stirring of discontent. This new path isn’t right either. We would have
been better off thinking about this more deeply, homing in on those
aspects of our previous career that did not click and trying for a more
gentle change, choosing a line of work related to the previous one but
requiring an adaptation of our skills.
With relationships, we can spend our life searching for the perfect
man or woman and end up largely alone. There is nobody perfect.
Instead, it is better to come to terms with the flaws of the other person
and accept them or even find some charm in their weaknesses.
Calming down our covetous desires, we can then learn the arts of
compromise and how to make a relationship work, which never come
easily or naturally.
Instead of constantly chasing after the latest trends and modeling
our desires on what others find exciting, we should spend our time
getting to know our own tastes and desires better, so that we can
distinguish what is something we truly need or want from that which
has been manufactured by advertisers or viral effects.
Life is short and we have only so much energy. Led by our covetous
desires, we can waste so much time in futile searches and changes. In
general, do not constantly wait and hope for something better, but
rather make the most of what you have.
Consider it this way: You are embedded in an environment that
consists of the people you know and the places you frequent. This is
your reality. Your mind is being continually drawn far away from this
reality, because of human nature. You dream of traveling to exotic
places, but if you go there, you merely drag with you your own
discontented frame of mind. You search for entertainment that will
bring you new fantasies to feed upon. You read books filled with ideas
that have no relation to your daily life, that are full of empty
speculations about things that only half exist. And none of this turmoil
and ceaseless desire for what is most distant ever leads to anything
fulfilling—it only stirs up more chimeras to pursue. In the end you
cannot escape from yourself.
On the other hand, reality beckons you. To absorb your mind in
what is nearest, instead of most distant, brings a much different
feeling. With the people in your circle, you can always connect on a
deeper level. There is much you will never know about the people you
deal with, and this can be a source of endless fascination. You can
connect more deeply to your environment. The place where you live
has a deep history that you can immerse yourself in. Knowing your
environment better will present many opportunities for power. As for
yourself, you have mysterious corners you can never fully understand.
In trying to know yourself better, you can take charge of your own
nature instead of being a slave to it. And your work has endless
possibilities for improvement and innovation, endless challenges for
the imagination. These are the things that are closest to you and
compose your real, not virtual world.
In the end what you really must covet is a deeper relationship to
reality, which will bring you calmness, focus, and practical powers to
alter what it is possible to alter.
It is advisable to let everyone of your acquaintance—whether man
or woman—feel now and then that you could very well dispense
with their company. This will consolidate friendship. Nay, with
most people there will be no harm in occasionally mixing a grain
of disdain with your treatment of them; that will make them value
your friendship all the more. . . . But if we really think very highly
of a person, we should conceal it from him like a crime. This is not
a very gratifying thing to do, but it is right. Why, a dog will not
bear being treated too kindly, let alone a man!
—Arthur Schopenhauer
I
6
Elevate Your Perspective
The Law of Shortsightedness
t is in the animal part of your nature to be most impressed by what
you can see and hear in the present—the latest news reports and
trends, the opinions and actions of the people around you, whatever
seems the most dramatic. This is what makes you fall for alluring
schemes that promise quick results and easy money. This is also what
makes you overreact to present circumstances—becoming overly
exhilarated or panicky as events turn one direction or the other.
Learn to measure people by the narrowness or breadth of their
vision; avoid entangling yourself with those who cannot see the
consequences of their actions, who are in a continual reactive mode.
They will infect you with this energy. Your eyes must be on the larger
trends that govern events, on that which is not immediately visible.
Never lose sight of your long-term goals. With an elevated
perspective, you will have the patience and clarity to reach almost
any objective.
Moments of Madness
All through the summer and early fall of 1719 the Englishman John
Blunt (1665–1733), one of the lead directors of the South Sea
Company, followed the latest news from Paris with increasing anxiety.
The French were in the midst of a spectacular economic boom, fueled
primarily by the success of the Mississippi Company, an enterprise
started by the expatriate Scotsman John Law to exploit the riches in
the Louisiana territories controlled by the French. Law sold shares in
the company, and as its price kept rising, Frenchmen of all classes
were cashing out and becoming fabulously wealthy. The word
millionaire itself was coined in these months to refer to such nouveaux
riches.
Such news made Blunt angry and envious. He was a loyal
Englishman. With the success of the Mississippi Company, Paris was
drawing in investment capital from all over Europe. If this continued,
France would soon become the finance capital of the world, surpassing
Amsterdam and London. Such newfound power for the French could
only spell disaster for England, its archenemy, particularly if another
war broke out between them.
More personally, Blunt was a man of great ambition. He was the
son of a humble shoemaker; from early on in his life he aimed to
ascend to the highest levels of English society. His means of getting
there, he believed, would be through the financial revolution sweeping
Europe, which centered on the increasing popularity of joint-stock
corporations like Law’s and like the South Sea Company. As opposed
to building wealth through the traditional means of owning land,
which was expensive to manage and highly taxable, it was relatively
easy to earn money through purchasing stock, and profits were tax
free. Such investments were all the rage in London. Blunt had plans to
turn the South Sea Company into the biggest and most prosperous
joint-stock company in Europe, but John Law had stolen his thunder
with a bold venture, and with the full backing of the French
government. Blunt would simply have to come up with something
bigger and better, for his sake and for the future of England.
The South Sea Company had been formed in 1710 as an enterprise
that would handle and manage part of the English government’s
enormous debts, in exchange for which the company was to be granted
a monopoly on all English trade with South America. Over the years
the company did almost no trading but served as an informal bank for
the government. Through his leadership of the company, Blunt had
forged relationships with the wealthiest and most powerful
Englishmen, most notably King George I (1660–1727) himself, who
became one of its biggest investors and was named governor of the
company. Blunt’s motto in life had always been “Think big,” and it had
served him well. And so, as he racked his brain for a way to outdo the
French, he finally hit upon a scheme in October of 1719 that was
worthy of his motto and that he felt certain would change the course of
history.
The greatest problem facing the English government, headed by the
king, was the massive debts it had incurred over the course of thirty
years during the wars that had been fought with France and Spain, all
financed through borrowing. Blunt’s proposal was simple and quite
astounding: The South Sea Company would pay the government a nice
fee in order to completely take over the debt, valued at a whopping £31
million. (The company would receive in exchange an annual interest
payment on the debt.) The company would then privatize this £31
million debt and sell it as if it were a commodity, as shares in the
South Sea Company—one share equaling £100 of debt. Those who had
lent the government money could convert their IOUs into equivalent
shares in the South Sea Company. The shares that were left over would
be sold to the public.
The price for one share would start at £100. As with any stock, the
price could rise and fall, but in this case, if played right, the price
would only go up. The South Sea Company had an intriguing name
and held out the possibility that it would also begin trading in the vast
wealth in South America. It was also the patriotic duty of English
creditors to participate in the scheme, since they would be helping to
cancel the debt while potentially making much more money than the
annual interest payments the government paid them. If the share price
rose, as it almost certainly would, buyers could cash out for a profit
and the company could afford to pay nice dividends. Like magic, debt
could be transformed into wealth. This would be the answer to all of
the government’s problems, and it would assure Blunt lasting fame.
When King George first heard of Blunt’s proposal in November of
1719, he was quite confused. He could not understand how such a
negative (debt) could be instantly turned into a positive. Besides, this
new jargon of finance went straight over his head. But Blunt spoke
with such conviction that he found himself swept up in his
enthusiasm. After all, he was promising to solve George’s two greatest
problems in one fell swoop, and it was hard to resist such a prospect.
King George was massively unpopular, one of the most unpopular
English kings of all time. It was not totally his fault: he was not English
by birth but German. His title previously had been the Duke of
Brunswick and Elector of Hanover. When Queen Anne of England
died in 1714, George was her closest living Protestant relative. But the
moment he ascended the throne his new subjects found him not to
their liking. He spoke English with a horrific accent, and his manners
were so coarse, and he was always avid for more money. Despite his
advanced age he was constantly chasing after women other than his
wife, none of whom were particularly attractive. In the first years of his
reign there were several coup attempts, and the public might have
welcomed the change if they had succeeded.
George desperately wanted to prove to his new subjects that he
could be a great king, in his own way. What he hated most of all was
the crushing debts the government had incurred before he ascended
the throne. George had an almost allergic reaction to any kind of debt,
as if his own blood were being leeched.
Now here was Blunt offering him the chance to cancel the debt and
bring prosperity to England, strengthening the monarchy in the
process. It was almost too good to be true, and he threw his full weight
behind the proposal. He assigned the chancellor of the exchequer,
John Aislabie, the task of presenting the proposal to Parliament in
January 1720. Parliament would have to approve it in the form of a
bill. Almost immediately Blunt’s proposal stirred up fierce opposition
among several MPs, some of whom found it ludicrous. But in the
weeks after Aislabie’s speech, opponents of the bill watched in dismay
as support for their side slowly withered away. Advance shares in the
venture had been virtually gifted to the wealthiest and most powerful
Englishmen, including prominent members of Parliament, who,
sensing the sure profits they personally would gain, now gave their
approval to the bill.
When the bill passed in April of that year, King George himself
showed up at the South Sea House and deposited £100,000 for shares
in the new venture. He wanted to display his confidence in it, but such
a step was hardly necessary, as the buildup to the bill’s passage had
captured the public and interest in South Sea Company shares had
already reached a fever pitch. The center of activity was an area of
London known as Exchange Alley, where almost all stocks were sold.
Now the narrow streets in and around the alley were clogged with
traffic growing thicker by the day.
At first it was mostly the wealthy and influential who came in their
fancy coaches to buy up shares. Among the buyers were also artists
and intellectuals—including John Gay, Alexander Pope, and Jonathan
Swift. Soon Sir Isaac Newton felt the pull and invested a good chunk of
his savings, £7,000. A few weeks later, however, he felt doubt. The
price was rising, but what rises can surely fall, and so he cashed out,
doubling his initial investment.
Soon rumors began to circulate that the company was about to
initiate trade in South America, where all kinds of riches lay buried in
the mountains. This only added fuel to the fire, and people from all
classes began to converge on London to buy up shares in the South Sea
Company. Blunt, it was reported, was a financial alchemist who had
found the secret of transforming debt into wealth. In the countryside
farmers pulled up from under their beds their life savings in coins and
sent their sons and nephews to buy as many shares as possible. The
fever spread to women of all classes, who normally did not dabble in
such things. Now actresses were rubbing elbows with duchesses in
Exchange Alley. All the while, the price kept rising, over £300 and
soon £400.
Like France before it, the country was now experiencing a
spectacular boom. On May 28 the king celebrated his sixtieth birthday,
and for someone who had been known for his frugality, it was the most
lavish party anyone had ever seen, with enormous tubs full of claret
and champagne. One woman at the party flaunted her new wealth by
encrusting her dress with jewels worth over £5,000. Everywhere in
London the wealthy were tearing down mansions and replacing them
with houses that were even larger and grander. Porters and footmen
were now quitting their jobs and buying expensive coaches and hiring
porters and footmen of their own. One young actress made such a
fortune, she decided to retire; she rented out an entire theater to say
good-bye to her adoring fans. An aristocratic lady was astonished one
evening at the opera to see that her former maid now occupied a more
expensive box in the theater than her own. Jonathan Swift wrote in a
letter to a friend, “I have enquired of some that have come from
London, what is the religion there? They tell me it is South Sea stock.
What is the policy of England? The answer is the same. What is the
trade? South Sea still. And what is the business? Nothing but South
Sea.”
In this midst of this feverish buying and selling spree, there stood
John Blunt at the pump, doing whatever he possibly could to stimulate
the interest in South Sea shares and keep the price rising. He sold the
stock in various subscriptions, offering generous terms of payment,
sometimes requiring only a 20 percent advance to get in. For every
£400 invested, Blunt would lend £300. He wanted to keep up the
demand and make people feel that they might be missing out on their
one chance for wealth. Soon the price had passed £500 and kept on
rising. By June 15, he had set the subscription price at an astronomical
£1,000, with only 10 percent down to get in and 10 percent
installments spread out over four years. Few could resist such terms.
That very month King George had Blunt knighted. Now a baronet, Sir
John Blunt stood at the pinnacle of English society. Yes, he was rather
unattractive to look at and he could be quite pompous. But he had
made so many people so wealthy that he was now England’s most
cherished celebrity.
As the rich and powerful prepared to leave London for the summer
months, the mood was downright giddy. Blunt affected a confident
and carefree air, but underneath it he was beginning to feel worried,
even panicky. There were so many things he had failed to foresee. He
had inadvertently inspired a rash of new speculative ventures, some
involving legitimate ideas and some patently absurd, such as the
development of a wheel of perpetual motion. People were now feeling
the fever and were pouring some of their money into these new joint-
stock companies. Every £1 of cash that went into these was one £1 less
that people had to spend on the South Sea Company, and that was a
growing problem, since there was only so much cash in England, and
there were limits to how far he could go by offering credit. Similarly,
people were beginning to pour their money into land as a safe
investment for the future, often cashing out their South Sea stock for
such purposes. Blunt himself had been doing that very thing,
unbeknownst to the public.
More troubling still, the French had lost faith in the Mississippi
venture and were pulling out their money; cash had become scarce
and the French economy had now fallen into a sudden depression.
This would certainly affect the mood in London. Before people
returned from their summer holidays, Blunt had to take action.
Working with Parliament, he got passed the Bubble Act of 1720,
which banned all joint stocks not authorized by royal charter. This
would put an end to rampant speculation. But this solution created
consequences he did not foresee. Thousands of people had poured
their savings into these new businesses, and as these were now
outlawed, they had no way of getting their money back. Their only
recourse was to sell South Sea shares. Many of those who had used
credit to buy South Sea shares saw themselves facing installments they
could no longer afford. They tried to cash out as well. The price of
South Sea shares began to fall. That August crowds were forming
outside the South Sea house as people felt desperate to sell.
Near the end of August Blunt became desperate himself. He
decided to launch his fourth money subscription, once again at
£1,000. Now the terms were even more generous than ever, and on
top of it he was promising an astonishingly large Christmas dividend
of 30 percent, to be followed by an annual dividend of 50 percent.
Some were pulled back into the scheme by such alluring terms,
including Sir Isaac Newton himself. But others, as if waking up from a
dream, began to wonder about the whole thing: how could a company
that had not traded for anything yet in South America, whose only
tangible asset was the interest the government paid it on its debt,
afford to dish out such large dividends? Now what had seemed like
alchemy or magic appeared to be a downright hoax on the public. By
early September the selling off had turned into a panic, as almost
everyone rushed to convert paper shares into something real, into coin
or metal of any kind.
As the panic for cash accelerated, the Bank of England was nearly
brought down—it came close to running out of currency. It was now
clear in England that the party was over. Many had lost their fortunes
and life savings in the sudden downfall. Isaac Newton himself had lost
some £20,000, and from then on the mere mention of finance or
banks would make him ill. People were trying to sell whatever they
could. Soon there was a wave of suicides, including that of Charles
Blunt, Sir John’s nephew, who slashed his throat after learning the
exact nature of his losses.
Blunt himself was hounded in the streets and nearly killed by an
assassin. He had to quickly escape London. He spent the rest of his life
in the town of Bath, scraping by on the very modest means still left to
him after Parliament seized almost all of the money he had earned
through the South Sea scheme. Perhaps in his isolation he could
contemplate the irony of it all—he had indeed changed the course of
history and assured his fame for all time, as the man who had conjured
up one of the most absurd and destructive schemes ever devised in the
history of business.
•   •   •
Interpretation: John Blunt was a pragmatic, hard-nosed
businessman with a single goal—to make a lasting fortune for himself
and his family. In the summer of 1719, however, this highly realistic
man caught a fever of sorts. When he began to read about what was
going on in Paris, he was struck by the drama of it all. He read vivid
stories about average Frenchmen suddenly making fortunes. He had
never thought prior to this that investments in joint-stock companies
could yield such quick results, but the evidence from France was
irrefutable. He wanted to bring similar good fortune to England, and
in crafting his plan he naturally imitated many of the features of Law’s
scheme, only increasing the scale of it.
What is striking here, however, is that one rather obvious question
never seemed to cross his mind. The scheme would depend on the
share price rising. If those who converted their government IOUs into
shares had to pay £200 per share instead of £100, they would receive
fewer shares, which would leave more shares for South Sea to sell to
the public and make a nice profit. If the shares were purchased at
£200 they were now worth more if the price continued to rise and
were sold at some point. Seeing the price rise would lure more
creditors to convert their shares and more people to buy in. Everyone
would win only if the price kept rising. But how could the price keep
rising if it was not based on any real assets, such as trade? If the price
started to fall, as it inevitably would, panic would certainly set in, since
people would lose faith in the scheme, and this could only set off a
chain reaction of selling. How could Blunt not have foreseen this?
The answer is simple: Blunt’s mental time frame had shrunk to the
point where he lost the ability to look months down the road and
consider consequences. Mesmerized by events in France and
imagining all of the wealth and power he was on the verge of attaining,
he could focus only on the present, making sure the scheme launched
successfully. Its initial success only made him imagine it would trend
this way for a long time. As it progressed, he certainly understood that
he had to make the price rise even more quickly, and the only means of
doing so was to lure in more investors through generous terms of
credit. This would make the scheme even more precarious, one
solution incurring several new dangers. The Bubble Act and the
generous dividends carried even greater immediate risks, but by now
his time frame had shrunk to a matter of days. If only he could keep
the ship afloat another week, he would find some new solution.
Finally, he ran out of time.
When people lose the connection between their actions and their
consequences, they lose their hold on reality, and the further this goes
the more it looks like madness. The madness that overcame Blunt
soon infected the king, the Parliament, and eventually an entire nation
of citizens renowned for their common sense. Once the English saw
their compatriots making large sums of money, it became a fact—the
scheme had to be a success. They too lost the ability to think a few
months ahead. Look at what happened to Sir Isaac Newton, paragon of
rationality. In the beginning he too caught the fever, but after a week
his logical mind could see the holes in the scheme, and so he sold his
shares. Then he watched others making much larger sums of money
than his paltry £14,000 and it bothered him. By August he had to get
back in, even though it was the absolute worst time to reinvest. Sir
Isaac Newton himself had lost the ability to think past the day. As one
Dutch banker observed of the scene in Exchange Alley, “[It resembled]
nothing so much as if all the Lunatics had escaped out of the
Madhouse at once.”
Understand: We humans tend to live in the moment. It is the
animal part of our nature. We respond first and foremost to what we
see and hear, to what is most dramatic in an event. But we are not
merely animals tied to the present. Human reality encompasses the
past—every event is connected to something that happened before in
an endless chain of historical causation. Any present problem has deep
roots in the past. It also encompasses the future. Whatever we do has
consequences that stretch far into the years to come.
When we limit our thinking to what our senses provide, to what is
immediate, we descend to the pure animal level in which our
reasoning powers are neutralized. We are no longer aware of why or
how things come about. We imagine that some successful scheme that
has lasted a few months can only get better. We no longer give thought
to the possible consequences of anything we set in motion. We react to
what is given in the moment, based on only a small piece of the puzzle.
Naturally our actions then lead to unintended consequences, or even
to disasters like the South Sea crash or the more recent crash of 2008.
To complicate matters, we are surrounded by others who are
continually reacting, drawing us deeper into the present. Salesmen
and demagogues play on this weakness in human nature to con us
with the prospect of easy gains and instant gratification. Our only
antidote is to train ourselves to continually detach from the immediate
rush of events and elevate our perspective. Instead of merely reacting,
we step back and look at the wider context. We consider the various
possible ramifications of any action we take. We keep in mind our
long-term goals. Often, in raising our perspective, we will decide that it
is better to do nothing, to not react, and to let time go by and see what
it reveals. (If Blunt had only waited a few months, he would have seen
Law’s scheme falling apart, and England would have been spared the
ruin that came.) Such sanity and balance do not come naturally. They
are powers we acquire through great effort, and they represent the
height of human wisdom.
I can calculate the motion of heavenly bodies, but not the madness
of people.
—Sir Isaac Newton
Keys to Human Nature
Almost all of us have experienced something similar to the following
scenarios: Someone we need or depend on is not paying us proper
attention, not returning our calls. Feeling frustrated, we express our
feelings to him or double our efforts to get a response. Or we
encounter a problem, a project that is not going well, and so we decide
upon a strategy and take appropriate action. Or a new person appears
in our life, and captivated by her fresh energy and charm, we become
friends.
Then weeks go by and we are forced to reassess what had happened
and how we had reacted. New information comes to light. That person
who was not responding to us was himself overwhelmed with work. If
only we had just waited and not been so impatient, we could have
avoided pushing away a valuable ally. That problem we tried to solve
was not really so urgent, and we made it worse by rushing an outcome.
We needed to know more before acting. And that new friend ends up
not being so charming; in fact, time reveals her to be a destructive
sociopath whose friendship takes us years to heal from. A little more
distance could have let us see the red flags before it was too late.
Looking back on our life, we see that we have a tendency to be
impatient and to overreact; we notice patterns of behavior over long
periods of time that elude us in the moment but become clearer to us
later on.
What this means is that in the present moment we lack perspective.
With the passage of time, we gain more information and see more of
the truth; what was invisible to us in the present now becomes visible
in retrospect. Time is the greatest teacher of them all, the revealer of
reality.
We can compare this to the following visual phenomenon: At the
base of a mountain, in a thick forest, we have no ability to get our
bearings or to map out our surroundings. We see only what is before
our eyes. If we begin to move up the side of the mountain, we can see
more of our surroundings and how they relate to other parts of the
landscape. The higher we go, the more we realize that what we thought
further below was not quite accurate, was based on a slightly distorted
perspective. At the top of the mountain we have a clear panoramic
view of the scene and perfect clarity as to the lay of the land.
For us humans, locked in the present moment, it as if we are living
at the base of the mountain. What is most apparent to our eyes—the
other people around us, the surrounding forest—gives us a limited,
skewed vision of reality. The passage of time is like a slow ascent up
the mountain. The emotions we felt in the present are no longer so
strong; we can detach ourselves and see things more clearly. The
further we ascend with the passage of time, the more information we
add to the picture. What we saw three months after the fact is not
quite as accurate as what we come to know a year later.
It would seem, then, that wisdom tends to come to us when it is too
late, mostly in hindsight. But there is in fact a way for us humans to
manufacture the effect of time, to give ourselves an expanded view in
the present moment. We can call this the farsighted perspective, and
it requires the following process.
First, facing a problem, conflict, or some exciting opportunity, we
train ourselves to detach from the heat of the moment. We work to
calm down our excitement or our fear. We get some distance.
Next, we start to deepen and widen our perspective. In considering
the nature of the problem we are confronting, we don’t just grab for an
immediate explanation, but instead we dig deeper and consider other
possibilities, other possible motivations for the people involved. We
force ourselves to look at the overall context of the event, not just what
immediately grabs our attention. We imagine as best we can the
negative consequences of the various strategies we are contemplating.
We consider how the problem or the apparent opportunity might play
itself out over time, how other problems or issues not apparent in the
moment might suddenly loom larger than what we are immediately
dealing with. We focus on our long-term goals and realign our
priorities in the present according to them.
In other words, this process involves distance from the present, a
deeper look at the source of problems, a wider perspective on the
overall context of the situation, and a look further into the future—
including the consequences of our actions and our own long-term
priorities.
As we go through this process, certain options and explanations will
begin to seem more logical and realistic than others that grabbed us in
the moment. We add to this the lessons we have learned over the years
about our own patterns of behavior. In this way, though we cannot re-
create the full effect that time has on our thinking, we can approximate
it. Most often the passing months give us even more information and
reveal better options for us to have taken. We are manufacturing this
effect in the present by widening what we consider and opening our
minds. We are moving up the mountain. Such an elevated perspective
can calm us down and make it easier for us to maintain our presence
of mind as events unfold.
Although this stands as an ideal, we must admit that such a
perspective is rare among us humans. It seems to require an effort that
is almost beyond us. The reason for this is simple: short-term thinking
is hardwired into our system; we are built to respond to what is
immediate and to seek out instant gratification. For our early human
ancestors, it paid to notice what was potentially dangerous in the
environment or what offered an opportunity for food. The human
brain as it evolved was designed not to examine the full picture and
context of an event but to home in on the most dramatic features. This
worked well in a relatively simple environment and amid the simple
social organization of the tribe. But it is not suited to the complex
world we now live in. It makes us take notice mostly of what stimulates
our senses and emotions, and miss much of the larger picture.
This has a decided impact on how we view the potential pleasure or
pain involved in a situation. Our brains are designed to make us notice
what could immediately harm us in our surroundings but not to pay
great attention to other dangers looming in the future that are more
abstract. This is why we tend to give much more attention to
something like terrorism (immediate pain), which certainly deserves
our scrutiny, than to global warming (distant pain), which in fact
represents the greater danger since it puts the very survival of the
planet at risk. But such a danger seems abstract in the present. By the
time it becomes not abstract at all, it might be too late. We tend also to
grab for things that offer immediate pleasure, even if we know about
the negative long-term consequences. That is why people continue to
smoke, drink, do drugs, or engage in any self-destructive behavior in
which the destruction is not immediate and dramatic.
In a world that is complex, with myriad dangers that loom in the
future, our short-term tendencies pose a continual threat to our well-
being. And as our attention spans decrease because of technology, the
threat is even greater. In many ways we are defined by our relationship
to time. When we simply react to what we see and hear, when we
swing from excitement and exuberance to fear and panic at each new
piece of dramatic news, when we gear our actions toward gaining as
much pleasure as possible in the moment without a thought for future
consequences, we can say that we are giving in to our animal nature, to
what is most primitive and potentially destructive in our neurological
makeup.
When we strive to go against this grain, to consider more deeply the
consequences of what we do and the nature of our long-term
priorities, we are straining to realize our true human potential as the
thinking animal. And just as short-term thinking can be contagious,
one individual who embodies the wisdom of the farsighted perspective
can have an immensely positive effect on the people around him or
her. Such individuals make us aware of the larger picture and reveal a
mind-set that we recognize as superior. We want to imitate them.
Throughout history there have been various icons of this wisdom to
inspire and guide us: Joseph in the Old Testament, who could see into
the hearts of men and foresee the future; Socrates of ancient Greece,
who taught us how to be less foolish and more consequential in our
thinking; the brilliant strategist Zhuge Liang of ancient China, who
could predict every movement of the enemy; leaders such as Queen
Elizabeth I and Abraham Lincoln, renowned for the success of their
long-term strategizing; the very patient and prescient scientist Charles
Darwin, who finally exposed the effects of deep time on the evolution
of all living things; and Warren Buffett, the most successful investor in
history, whose power is based on his farsighted perspective.
If possible, avoid deep contact with those whose time frame is
narrow, who are in continual react mode, and strive to associate with
those with an expanded awareness of time.
Four Signs of Shortsightedness and Strategies to
Overcome Them
Most of us imagine that we engage in some form of long-term
thinking; after all, we have goals and plans. But really we are fooling
ourselves. We can see this most clearly when we talk to other people
about their plans and strategies for the near and more distant future:
we are often struck by their vagueness and the lack of deep thinking
people generally give to such plans. They are more like hopes and
wishes, and in the rush of immediate events, feeling pressure and the
need to respond, such weak goals and plans are easily overwhelmed.
Most of the time we are improvising and reacting to events with
insufficient information. Basically we are in denial about this because
it is hard to have perspective about our own decision-making process.
The best way to overcome this is to recognize the clear signs of
shortsighted thinking in our own lives. As with most elements of
human nature, awareness is the key. Only by seeing these signs can we
combat them. The following are the four most common manifestations
of short-term thinking:
1. Unintended consequences. History is littered with endless
examples of this phenomenon. In ancient Rome, a group of men loyal
to the Republic feared that Julius Caesar was going to make his
dictatorship permanent and establish a monarchy. In 44 BC they
decided to assassinate him, thereby restoring the Republic. In the
ensuing chaos and power vacuum Caesar’s great-nephew Octavius
quickly rose to the top, assumed power, and permanently ended the
Republic by establishing a de facto monarchy. After Caesar’s death it
came out that he had never intended to create a monarchical system.
The conspirators brought about precisely what they had tried to stop.
In nineteenth-century India, under British colonial rule, authorities
decided there were too many venomous cobras in the streets of Delhi,
making life uncomfortable for the British residents and their families.
To solve this they offered a reward for every dead cobra residents
would bring in. Soon enterprising locals began to breed cobras in
order to make a living from the bounty. The government caught on to
this and canceled the program. The breeders, resentful of the rulers
and angered by their actions, decided to release their cobras back on
the streets, thereby tripling the population from before the
government program.
Other notorious examples would include the Eighteenth
Amendment, establishing Prohibition in the United States in 1920,
which was designed to stop the spread of alcoholism but only ended up
increasing alcohol consumption by a substantial amount; and the
surprise attack on Pearl Harbor by the Japanese in 1941, designed to
decimate the U.S. naval force in one blow and bring America to its
knees. Instead it shook the American public out of its deep
isolationism, ensuring the total mobilization of the country’s superior
manpower and resources to not only defeat the Japanese but also to
obliterate its military for good. The very success of the attack
guaranteed the opposite of the intended result.
We can find less dramatic examples of this in our daily lives. We try
to control a rebellious teenager by putting some restrictions on his
behavior, only to make him even more rebellious and uncontrollable.
We try to cheer up a depressed person by making her realize that her
life is not that bad and that the sun is shining, only to find out we have
made her even more depressed. She now feels guilty about her
feelings, worthless, and more alone in her unhappiness. A wife tries to
get her partner to open up more to her. With the hope of establishing
more intimacy, she asks him what he is thinking, what happened
during the course of the day, and so on. He interprets this as
intrusiveness and closes up further, which makes the wife more
suspicious and more prying, which closes him up even further.
The source of this age-old syndrome is relatively simple: alarmed
by something in the present, we grab for a solution without thinking
deeply about the context, the roots of the problem, the possible
unintended consequences that might ensue. Because we mostly react
instead of think, our actions are based on insufficient information—
Caesar was not planning to start a monarchy; the poor people of Delhi
despised their colonial rulers and would not take kindly to suddenly
losing money; Americans would be willing to go to war if attacked.
When we operate with such a skewed perspective, it results in all kinds
of perverse effects. In all of these cases a simple move partway up the
mountain would have made clear the possible negative consequences
so obvious to us in hindsight: for example, offering a reward for dead
cobras would naturally cause impoverished residents to breed them.
Invariably in these cases people’s thinking is remarkably simple
and lazy: kill Caesar and the Republic returns, action A leads to result
B. A variation on this, one that is quite common in the modern world,
is to believe that if people have good intentions, good things should be
the result. If a politician is honest and means well, he or she will bring
about the desired results. In fact, good intentions often lead to what
are known as cobra effects, because people with the noblest intentions
are often blinded by feelings of self-righteousness and do not consider
the complex and often malevolent motivations of others.
Nonconsequential thinking is a veritable plague in the world today
that is only growing worse with the speed and ease of access to
information, which gives people the illusion that they are informed
and have thought deeply about things. Look at self-destructive wars
such as the 2003 invasion of Iraq, the attempts to shut down the
American government for short-term political gain, the increasing
number of financial bubbles from tech stocks to real estate. Related to
this is a gradual disconnect from history itself, as people tend to view
present events as if they were isolated in time.
Understand: Any phenomenon in the world is by nature complex.
The people you deal with are equally complex. Any action sets off a
limitless chain of reactions. It is never so simple as A leads to B. B will
lead to C, to D, and beyond. Other actors will be pulled into the drama
and it is hard to predict their motivations and responses. You cannot
possibly map out these chains or get a complete handle on
consequences. But by making your thinking more consequential you
can at least become aware of the more obvious negative consequences
that could ensue, and this often spells the difference between success
and disaster. You want depth of thinking, to go to several degrees in
imagining the permutations, as far as your mind can go.
Often, going through this process will convince you of the wisdom
of doing nothing, of waiting. Who knows what would have resulted in
history if the conspirators had thought this out and chosen to wait
until Caesar died naturally or in battle?
While this mode of thinking is important for individuals, it can be
even more crucial for large organizations, where there is a lot at stake
for many people. In any group or team, put at least one person in
charge of gaming out all of the possible consequences of a strategy or
line of action, preferably someone with a skeptical and prudent frame
of mind. You can never go too far in this process, and the time and
money spent will be well rewarded as you avoid potential catastrophes
and develop more solid plans.
2. Tactical hell. You find yourself embroiled in several struggles or
battles. You seem to get nowhere but you feel like you have invested so
much time and energy already that it would be a tremendous waste to
give up. You have actually lost sight of your long-term goals, what
you’re really fighting for. Instead it has become a question of asserting
your ego and proving you are right. Often we see this dynamic in
marital spats: it is no longer about repairing the relationship but about
imposing one’s point of view. At times, caught in these battles, you feel
defensive and petty, your spirit drawn downward. This is almost a sure
sign that you have descended into tactical hell. Our minds are
designed for strategic thinking—calculating several moves in advance
toward our goals. In tactical hell you can never raise your perspective
high enough to think in that manner. You are constantly reacting to
the moves of this or that person, embroiled in their dramas and
emotions, going around in circles.
The only solution is to back out temporarily or permanently from
these battles, particularly if they are occurring on several fronts. You
need some detachment and perspective. Get your ego to calm down.
Remind yourself that winning an argument or proving your point
really gets you nowhere in the long run. Win through your actions, not
your words. Start to think again about your long-term goals. Create a
ladder of values and priorities in your life, reminding yourself of what
really matters to you. If you determine that a particular battle is in fact
important, with a greater sense of detachment you can now plot a
more strategic response.
More often than not you will realize that certain battles are not
worth it in the end. They are a waste of valuable energy and time,
which should be high on your scale of values. It is always better to
walk away from a circular battle, no matter how deeply you feel
personally invested in it. Your energy and your spirit are important
considerations. Feeling petty and frustrated can have reverberating
consequences for your ability to think strategically and reach your
goals. Going through the process delineated above in the Keys will
naturally elevate your perspective and put your mind on the strategic
plane. And in life as in warfare, strategists will always prevail over
tacticians.
3. Ticker tape fever. During the run-up to the 1929 crash on Wall
Street, many people had become addicted to playing the stock market,
and this addiction had a physical component—the sound of the ticker
tape that electronically registered each change in a stock’s price.
Hearing that clicking noise indicated something was happening,
somebody was trading and making a fortune. Many felt drawn to the
sound itself, which felt like the heartbeat of Wall Street. We no longer
have the ticker tape. Instead many of us have become addicted to the
minute-by-minute news cycle, to “what’s trending,” to the Twitter
feed, which is often accompanied by a ping that has its own narcotic
effects. We feel like we are connected to the very flow of life itself, to
events as they change in real time, and to other people who are
following the same instant reports.
This need to know instantly has a built-in momentum. Once we
expect to have some bit of news quickly, we can never go back to the
slower pace of just a year ago. In fact, we feel the need for more
information more quickly. Such impatience tends to spill over into
other aspects of life—driving, reading a book, following a film. Our
attention span decreases, as well as our tolerance for any obstacles in
our path.
We can all recognize signs of this nervous impatience in our own
lives, but what we don’t recognize is the distorting effect it has on our
thinking. The trends of the moment—in business or politics—are
embedded in larger trends that play out over the course of weeks and
months. Such larger spans of time tend to reveal the relative
weaknesses and strengths of an investment, a strategic idea, a sports
team, or a political candidate, which are often the opposite of what we
see in the microtrends of the moment. In isolation, a poll or stock
price do not tell us much about these strengths and weaknesses. They
give us the deceptive impression that what is revealed in the present
will only become more pronounced with time. It is normal to want to
keep up with the latest news, but to base any kind of decision on these
snapshots of the moment is to run the risk of misreading the larger
picture.
Furthermore, people tend to react and overreact to any negative or
positive change in the present, and it becomes doubly hard to resist
getting caught up in their panic or exuberance.
Look at what Abraham Lincoln had to face in a much less
technological age. At the outbreak of the Civil War, he looked at the
larger picture—as he estimated it, the North should prevail because it
had more men and more resources to draw on. The only danger was
time. Lincoln would need time for the Union Army to develop itself as
a fighting force; he also needed time to find the right generals who
would prosecute the war as he desired. But if too much time passed
and there were no big victories, public opinion might turn against the
effort, and once the North became divided within itself, Lincoln’s job
would become impossible. He needed patience but also victories on
the battlefield.
In the first year of the war the North suffered a great defeat at Bull
Run, and suddenly almost everyone questioned the president’s
competency. Now even levelheaded Northerners such as the famous
editor Horace Greeley urged the president to negotiate peace. Others
urged him to throw everything the North had into an immediate blow
to crush the South, even though the army was not ready for this.
On and on this went, the pressure continually mounting as the
North failed to deliver a single solid victory until finally General
Ulysses S. Grant finished off the siege at Vicksburg in 1863, followed
soon by the victory at Gettysburg under General George Meade. Now
suddenly Lincoln was hailed as a genius. But some six months later, as
Grant got bogged down in his pursuit of the Confederate Army under
General Robert E. Lee and the casualties mounted, the sense of panic
returned. Once again Greeley urged negotiation with the South.
Lincoln’s reelection that year seemed doomed. He had become
immensely unpopular. The war was taking too long. Feeling the weight
of all this, in late August of 1864 Lincoln finally drafted a letter
spelling out the terms of peace he would offer the South, but that very
night he felt ashamed for losing his resolve and hid the letter in a
drawer. The tide had to turn, he felt, and the South would be crushed.
Only a week later, General William Tecumseh Sherman marched into
Atlanta and all the doubts about Lincoln suddenly vanished for good.
Through long-term thinking Lincoln had correctly gauged the
relative strengths and weaknesses of the two sides and how the war
would eventually trend. Everyone else got caught up in the day-by-day
reports of the progress of the war. Some wanted to negotiate, others to
suddenly speed up the effort, but all of this was based on momentary
swings of fortune. A weaker man would have given in to such
pressures and the war would have ended very differently. The writer
Harriet Beecher Stowe, who visited Lincoln in 1864, later wrote of
him: “Surrounded by all sorts of conflicting claims, by traitors, by half-
hearted, timid men, by Border States men and Free States men, by
radical Abolitionists and Conservatives, he has listened to all, weighed
the words of all, waited, observed, yielded now here and now there,
but in the main kept one inflexible, honest purpose, and drawn the
national ship through.”
Lincoln provides the model for us all and the antidote to the fever.
First and foremost we must develop patience, which is like a muscle
that requires training and repetition to make it strong. Lincoln was a
supremely patient man. When we face any kind of problem or
obstacle, we must follow his example and make an effort to slow things
down and step back, wait a day or two before taking action. Second,
when faced with issues that are important, we must have a clear sense
of our long-term goals and how to attain them. Part of this involves
assessing the relative strengths and weaknesses of the parties
involved. Such clarity will allow us to withstand the constant
emotional overreactions of those around us. Finally, it is important to
have faith that time will eventually prove us right and to maintain our
resolve.
4. Lost in trivia. You feel overwhelmed by the complexity of your
work. You feel the need to be on top of all the details and global trends
so you can control things better, but you are drowning in information.
It is hard to see the proverbial forest for the trees. This is a sure sign
that you have lost a sense of your priorities—which facts are more
important, what problems or details require more attention.
The icon for this syndrome would have to be King Philip II of Spain
(1527–1598). He had a prodigious appetite for paperwork and for
keeping on top of all facets of the Spanish government. This gave him
a feeling of being in control, but in fact in the end it made him lose
control. He fussed over the placement of toilets in his new palace at
Escorial and their precise distance from the kitchen; he spent days
deliberating on how exactly particular members of the clergy should
be addressed and remunerated. But sometimes he would fail to pay
proper attention to important reports on spies and national security
issues. Poring over endless reports on the state of the Turkish army, he
believed it showed signs of great weakness and decided to launch a
war against the Turks. Somehow he had misjudged. The war would
last eighteen years, have no definitive resolution, and bleed Spain of
money.
A similar process occurred in relation to England. The king had to
read every single report on the state of the English navy, the support of
the people for Queen Elizabeth, every minute detail about the
country’s finances and shoreline defenses. Based on years of such
study, in 1588 he decided to launch his armada against England,
feeling certain that, having made the armada large enough, Spain
would prevail. But he failed to pay enough attention to weather
reports, the most critical factor of all—for storms at sea would spell the
destruction of the armada. He also failed to realize that by the time he
had compiled and assimilated enough information on the Turks or on
England, the situation had actually changed. So while he seemed
extremely detail oriented, he was never quite on top of anything. Over
the years Philip strained his mind with so much reading that he had
frequent headaches and dizzy spells. His thinking was definitely
impaired, and he made decisions that ended up leading directly to the
irreversible decline of the Spanish empire.
In some ways you are probably more like King Philip II than you
would like to imagine. In your life you are more than likely paying
attention to some details that seem immediately important to you,
while ignoring the weather reports that will doom your project. Like
Philip, you tend to take in information without considering your
priorities, what really matters in the end. But the brain has its limits.
Assimilating too much information leads to mental fatigue, confusion,
and feelings of helplessness. Everything begins to seem equally
important—the placement of toilets and a possible war with the Turks.
What you need is a mental filtering system based on a scale of
priorities and your long-term goals. Knowing what you want to
accomplish in the end will help you weed out the essential from the
nonessential. You do not have to know all the details. Sometimes you
need to delegate—let your subordinates handle the information
gathering. Remember that greater control over events will come from
realistic assessments of the situation, precisely what is made most
difficult by a brain submerged in trivia.
The Farsighted Human
Most of us live within a relatively narrow time frame. We generally
associate the passage of time with something negative—aging and
moving closer to death. Instinctively we recoil from thinking too
deeply about the future and the past, for this reminds us of the passage
of time. In relation to the future we may try to think about our plans a
year or two from now, but our thinking is more like a daydream, a
wish, than deep analysis. In relation to the past we may have a few
fond or painful memories from childhood and later years, but in
general the past baffles us. We change so much with each passing year
that who we were five, ten, twenty years ago might seem like a stranger
to us. We don’t really have a cohesive sense of who we are, a feeling of
connection between the five-year-old and thirty-five-year-old versions
of ourselves.
Not wanting to go too far in either direction, we mostly live within
the present. We react to what we see and hear and to what others are
reacting to. We live for immediate pleasures to distract us from the
passage of time and make us feel more alive. But we pay a price for all
this. Repressing the thought of death and aging creates a continual
underlying anxiety. We are not coming to terms with reality.
Continually reacting to events in the present puts us on a roller coaster
ride—up and down we go with each change in fortune. This can only
add to our anxiety, as life seems to pass so quickly in the immediate
rush of events.
Your task as a student of human nature, and someone aspiring to
reach the greater potential of the human animal, is to widen your
relationship to time as much as possible, and slow it down. This means
you do not see the passage of time as an enemy but rather as a great
ally. Each stage in life has its advantages—those of youth are most
obvious, but with age comes greater perspective. Aging does not
frighten you. Death is equally your friend (see chapter 18). It motivates
you to make the most of each moment; it gives you a sense of urgency.
Time is your great teacher and master. This affects you deeply in the
present. Awareness that a year from now this current problem you are
experiencing will hardly seem so important will help you lower your
anxiety and adjust your priorities. Knowing that time will reveal the
weaknesses of your plans, you become more careful and deliberative
with them.
In relation to the future, you think deeply about your long-term
goals. They are not vague dreams but concrete objectives, and you
have mapped out a path to reach them. In relation to the past, you feel
a deep sense of connection to your childhood. Yes, you are constantly
changing, but these changes are on the surface and create the illusion
of real change. In fact, your character was set in your earliest years
(see chapter 4), along with your inclinations toward certain activities,
your likes and dislikes. As you get older, this character only becomes
more apparent. Feeling organically connected to who you were in the
past gives you a strong sense of identity. You know what you like and
dislike, you know who you are. This will help you maintain your self-
love, which is so critical in resisting the descent into deep narcissism
and in helping you to develop empathy (see chapter 2). Also, you will
pay greater attention to the mistakes and lessons of the past, which
those who are locked in the present tend to repress.
Like everyone, you enjoy the present and its passing pleasures. You
are not a monk. You connect to the trends of the moment and to the
current flow of life. But you derive even greater pleasure from reaching
your long-term goals and overcoming adversity. This expanded
relationship to time will have a definite effect on you. It will make you
calmer, more realistic, more in tune with the things that matter. It will
also make you a superior strategist in life, able to resist people’s
inevitable overreactions to what is happening in the present and to see
further into the future, a potential power that we humans have only
begun to tap into.
The years teach much which the days never know.
—Ralph Waldo Emerson
L
7
Soften People’s Resistance by
Confirming Their Self-opinion
The Law of Defensiveness
ife is harsh and people competitive. We naturally must look after
our own interests. We also want to feel that we are independent,
doing our own bidding. That is why when others try to persuade or
change us, we become defensive and resistant. To give in challenges
our need to feel autonomous. That is why to get people to move from
their defensive positions you must always make it seem like what
they are doing is of their own free will. Creating a feeling of mutual
warmth helps soften people’s resistance and makes them want to
help. Never attack people for their beliefs or make them feel insecure
about their intelligence or goodness—that will only strengthen their
defensiveness and make your task impossible. Make them feel that by
doing what you want they are being noble and altruistic—the
ultimate lure. Learn to tame your own stubborn nature and free your
mind from its defensive and closed positions, unleashing your
creative powers.
The Influence Game
In December 1948, Senator Tom Connally of Texas received a visit
from the newly elected second senator of the state, Lyndon Baines
Johnson (1908–1973). Johnson had previously served as a Democratic
congressman in the House of Representatives for twelve years, and
had earned a reputation as a politician with high ambitions who was
quite impatient to realize them. He could be brash, opinionated, and
even a bit pushy.
Connally knew all of this, but he was willing to judge Johnson for
himself. He studied the young man closely (Connally was thirty-one
years older). He had met him before and thought him rather astute.
But after exchanging a few pleasantries, Johnson revealed his true
motives: he was hoping to get a seat on one of the three most
prestigious committees in the Senate—Appropriations, Finance, or
Foreign Relations. Connally served on two of them as a senior
member. Johnson seemed to suggest that as a fellow Texan Connally
could help him get what he wanted. Connally felt that Johnson clearly
did not understand how the senatorial system worked, and he decided
to put him in his place right then and there.
Acting as if he were doing Johnson a great favor, he offered to help
him get a seat on the Agriculture Committee, knowing full well
Johnson would find this insulting—it was among the least coveted of
all committees. Thrusting the knife in deeper, Connally said that he
had followed Johnson’s senatorial campaign and had heard him
exclaim numerous times that he was a friend of the farmer. Here was
his chance to prove it. The Agriculture Committee would be a perfect
fit. Johnson could not hide his displeasure and squirmed
uncomfortably in his chair. “And then, Lyndon,” Connally concluded,
“after you’ve been in the Senate for a while, then you get on the
Foreign Relations or Finance Committee, and render a real public
service.” And by “for a while” Connally meant a good twelve to twenty
years, the usual time it took for any senator to amass enough
influence. It was called seniority and that was how the game was
played. It had taken Connally himself nearly twenty years to get his
plum committee positions.
Over the next few weeks, word quickly spread among senators that
Johnson was someone to keep an eye on, a potential hothead. And so
it was a pleasant surprise when many of them saw and met him for the
first time, after he was officially inaugurated. He was not at all what
they had expected. He was the picture of politeness, and very
deferential. He would often come to visit them in their offices. He
would announce himself to the secretary in the outer office, then
patiently wait there until called in, sometimes for an hour. He didn’t
seem bothered by this—he busied himself by reading or taking notes.
Once inside, he’d ask the senator about his wife and family or his
favorite sports team—he had clearly done his homework on the
senator in question. He could be quite self-deprecating. He’d often
first introduce himself as “Landslide Lyndon,” everyone knowing he
had won his Senate seat by the slimmest of margins.
Mostly, however, he came to talk business and get advice. He’d ask
a question or two about some bill or bit of senatorial procedure and
would listen with a focus that was striking and charming, almost like a
child. His large brown eyes would stay fixed on the senator in
question, and with his chin resting on his hand, he would occasionally
nod and every now and then ask another question. The senators could
tell he was paying deep attention because invariably he would act on
their advice or repeat their very words to someone else, always
crediting the senator who had spoken them. He would leave with a
gracious thank-you for their time and for the invaluable education
they had provided. This was not the spirited hothead they had heard
so much about, and the contrast redounded to his credit.
The senators saw him most often on the Senate floor, and unlike
any other member of the institution, he attended every session and sat
almost the whole time at his desk. He took copious notes. He wanted
to learn everything about senatorial procedure—a dull affair, but one
that seemed to captivate him. He was far, however, from being a
dullard. When senators encountered him in the hallway or in the
cloakroom, he always had a good joke to tell or some amusing
anecdote. He had spent his early years in rural poverty, and although
he was well educated, his language had some of the color and biting
humor of the Texan farmer and migrant worker. The senators found
him amusing. Even Tom Connally had to admit that he had somehow
misread him.
Older senators, referred to at the time as Old Bulls, particularly
came to appreciate Lyndon Johnson. Although they held positions of
great authority based on their seniority, they often felt insecure about
their age (some were in their eighties) and their physical and mental
capacities. But here was Johnson visiting their offices frequently,
intent on absorbing their wisdom.
One older Democratic senator in particular took to Johnson—
Richard Russell of Georgia. He was only eleven years older than
Johnson, but he had been serving in the Senate since 1933 and had
become one of its most powerful members. They had gotten to know
each other because Johnson had requested and received a seat on the
Armed Services Committee, on which Russell was second in seniority.
Russell crossed paths with Johnson in the cloakroom, in the corridors,
on the Senate floor; he seemed to be everywhere. And although
Johnson visited Russell in his office almost every day, Russell came to
enjoy his presence. Like Russell, Johnson was mostly all business, and
full of questions on arcane Senate procedures. He began to call Russell
“the Old Master,” and he would often say, “Well, that’s a lesson from
the Old Master. I’ll remember that.”
Russell was one of the few senators who had remained a bachelor.
He never admitted he was lonely, but he spent almost all of his time at
his Senate office, even on Sundays. As Johnson would often be in
Russell’s office discussing some matter until the evening, he would
sometimes invite Russell over for dinner at his house, telling him that
his wife, Lady Bird, was an excellent cook, particularly good with
southern dishes. The first few times Russell politely refused, but finally
he relented and he soon became a weekly regular at the Johnson
house. Lady Bird was charming and he quickly took to her.
Slowly the relationship between Russell and Johnson deepened.
Russell was a baseball fanatic, and to his delight, Johnson confessed a
weakness for the sport as well. Now they would go together to night
games of the Washington Senators. A day would not pass in which
they did not see each other, as the two of them would often be the only
senators in their offices working on the weekends. They seemed to
have so many interests in common, including the Civil War, and they
thought alike on so many issues dear to southern Democrats, such as
their opposition to a civil rights bill.
Soon Russell could be heard touting the junior senator as “a can-do
young man” with a capacity equal to his own for hard work. Johnson
was the only junior senator over his long career whom he referred to
as a “disciple.” But the friendship went deeper than that. After
attending a hunting party that Johnson had organized in Texas,
Russell wrote to him, “Ever since I reached home I have been
wondering if I would wake up and find that I had just been dreaming
that I had made a trip to Texas. Everything was so perfect that it is
difficult to realize that it could happen in real life.”
In 1950 the Korean War broke out and there was pressure on the
Armed Services Committee to form a subcommittee to investigate the
military’s preparedness for the war. Such a subcommittee had been
formed during World War II and chaired by Harry Truman, and it was
through that chairmanship that Truman had become famous and risen
to power. The current chairman of the Armed Services Committee was
Senator Millard Tydings of Maryland. Tydings would naturally assume
the chairmanship of the subcommittee, since it would be a great
platform for publicity.
Johnson approached Tydings with a proposal: Tydings was facing a
reelection campaign that year, and Johnson offered to chair the
subcommittee only up to the time of the election, allowing Tydings to
focus on winning it. Then he would step aside and let Tydings have the
position. Tydings, protective of the powers he had accrued, declined
Johnson’s offer. But then Dick Russell met with him and said
something to cause Tydings to change his mind. Johnson was named
the chairman, a stunning coup for a senator who had been on the job
for only a year and a half, and he would hold on to the job for quite a
while, as Tydings lost his reelection bid.
As chairman Johnson was suddenly receiving national public
exposure, and journalists covering the Senate discovered that he was a
master at handling the press. He carefully guarded the findings of the
subcommittee, allowing no leaks to journalists. He surrounded its
work with tremendous mystery and drama, giving the impression that
the committee was uncovering some real dirt on the military. He doled
out information and reports to a select group of powerful journalists
who had written articles that he had approved of. The other journalists
had to fight for any news crumbs he deigned to offer.
The junior senator began to fascinate the press corps—he was tough
yet sympathetic to the journalists’ job. And most important, he knew
how to give them a good story. Soon some of them were writing about
him as a zealous patriot, a future political force to be reckoned with.
Now Russell could properly defend his elevation of Johnson—the
senator from Texas had done a great job and had finally gotten the
Senate some positive publicity.
In May and June of 1951, Johnson and Russell worked closely
together on the recall of General MacArthur from Korea. Now Russell
had a firsthand view of Johnson’s staff, and he was astounded at how
efficient it was, larger and better organized than his own. It made
Russell feel out of step with the times. But Johnson, as if sensing his
thoughts, began to help Russell build his own modern staff. He gave
him complete access to the legal and public relations teams he had
developed, showing Russell how helpful they could be. As Johnson
worked with him on this, the bond between them grew even tighter.
One day Russell told a reporter, “That Lyndon Johnson could be
president, and would make a good one.” The reporter was
flabbergasted. It was so unlike Russell to ever pay such a compliment.
One spring day in 1951, Senator Hubert Humphrey of Minnesota
was waiting to catch the subway to the Capitol when Lyndon Johnson
suddenly approached him and suggested they ride together and talk.
Such words were like music to Humphrey; he almost couldn’t believe
Johnson was sincere in the offer. Humphrey had joined the Senate at
the same time as Johnson, and he had been considered the bigger star,
a charismatic liberal who could be president one day. Humphrey,
however, had a problem that had completely impeded his rise to the
top: he believed so stridently in liberal causes that he had alienated
almost everyone else. In his first speech to the Senate, Humphrey
criticized the institution for its slow pace of change and its cozy
atmosphere. Soon he was paid back in kind—relegated to the worst
committees. The bills he introduced went nowhere. When he would
walk into the Senate cloakroom, he would be shunned by almost
everyone. As this ostracism got worse, Humphrey felt increasingly
depressed and despondent. Sometimes driving home from work, he
would pull over and cry. His career had taken a very wrong turn.
In the subway car together, Johnson praised him effusively.
“Hubert,” he told him, “you have no idea what a wonderful experience
it is for me ride to the Senate chamber with you. There are so many
ways I envy you. You are articulate, you have such a broad range of
knowledge.” Feeling relieved to hear this, Humphrey was then
surprised by the vehemence of Johnson’s criticisms that followed. “But
goddammit, Hubert, you’re spending so much time making speeches
that there is no time left to get anything done.” Humphrey needed to
be more pragmatic, fit in better. When they finally parted, Johnson
invited Humphrey to stop by his office one day for drinks. Humphrey
soon became a regular visitor, and this southern senator, quite loathed
by northern liberals as the darling of the conservative Russell,
enthralled him.
First, Johnson was immensely entertaining. Everything he said was
accompanied by some folksy anecdote, often of a bawdy nature but
always teaching some wicked lesson. Sitting in his office, the drinks
being lavishly poured, he would instigate bouts of laughter that would
reverberate through the corridors. It was hard to resist a man who
could put you in a good mood. He had incredible presence. As
Humphrey later wrote, “He’d come on just like a tidal wave sweeping
all over the place. He went through walls. He’d come through a door
and he’d take the whole room over.”
Second, he had such invaluable information to share. He taught
Humphrey all of the intricacies of Senate procedure and the
knowledge he had accrued about the psychological weaknesses of
various senators through close observation. He had become the
greatest vote counter in the history of the Senate, able to predict the
results of almost any Senate vote with astounding accuracy. He shared
with Humphrey his vote-counting method.
Finally, he taught Humphrey the power he could have by
compromising, by being more pragmatic and less idealistic. He would
share with him stories about FDR, Humphrey’s hero. When Johnson
was in the House of Representatives, he had become close friends with
the president. FDR, according to Johnson, was a consummate
politician who knew how to get things done by retreating tactically and
even compromising. The subtext here was that Johnson was really a
closet liberal who also idolized FDR and who wanted just as much as
Humphrey to pass a civil rights bill. They were both on the same side,
fighting for the same noble causes.
Working with Johnson, there was no limit to how high Humphrey
could rise within the Senate and beyond. As Johnson had correctly
guessed, Humphrey had presidential ambitions. Johnson himself
could never become president, or so he said to Humphrey, because the
nation was not ready for a president from the South. But he could help
Humphrey get there. Together they would make an unbeatable team.
What sealed the deal for Humphrey, however, was how Johnson
proceeded to make his life easier within the Senate. Johnson talked to
his fellow southern Democrats about Humphrey’s intelligence and
humor, how they had misread him as a man. Having softened them up
in this way, Johnson then reintroduced Humphrey to these senators,
who found him charming. Most important of all, he got Russell to
change his mind—and Russell could move mountains. Now that he
was sharing drinks with the more powerful senators, Humphrey’s
loneliness faded away. He felt compelled to return the favor and to get
many northern liberals to change their minds about Johnson, whose
influence was now beginning to spread like an invisible gas.
In 1952 the Republicans swept into power with the election of
Dwight D. Eisenhower as president, taking in the process control of
the Senate and the House. One of the casualties in the election was
Ernest McFarland of Arizona, the former Democratic leader in the
Senate. Now that the leadership position was vacant, the scrambling
for his replacement began.
Johnson suggested that Russell himself take the position, but
Russell declined. He could have more power operating behind the
scenes. Instead he told Johnson he should be the next leader, and
Russell could make it happen. Johnson, acting surprised, said he
would consider it, but only if Russell would remain the Old Master and
advise Johnson every step of the way. He did not have to say another
word. Within weeks, Russell had essentially helped secure him the
position, and it was a remarkable coup. At the age of forty-four,
Johnson was by far the youngest leader in the history of either party.
Several weeks into his new position, Johnson came to Russell with
a most unusual request. Positions on key committees had been based
for decades on seniority. But what this meant was that committee
chairmen were often not up to the job. Men in their seventies and
eighties had ideas that were rooted in the past. They did not have the
stomach for a big fight. Now, with the Republicans in full control, they
were planning on rolling back some of FDR’s greatest achievements
with the New Deal and in foreign policy. It was going to be a rough two
years until midterm elections.
Johnson wanted the power as the leader of the Senate Democrats to
alter the committee landscape. He was not advocating anything
radical. He would shift here and there a few committees and
chairmanships, bringing in some fresh blood, such as the newly
elected Senator John Kennedy, and Hubert Humphrey, whom he
wanted to get on the Foreign Relations Committee. These younger
men would give a fresh public face to the party and bring some energy
in combating the Republicans. Russell could see the wisdom in this,
and he gave Johnson his tacit approval, but he also warned him:
“You’re dealing with the most sensitive thing in the Senate. . . .
[You’re] playing with dynamite.”
Johnson approached other older senators. Some were easy to
convince, such as Senator Robert Byrd, who had a great fondness for
the new leader. Liberals came on board with these changes, thanks to
the work of Humphrey, who now had tremendous power as the liaison
between Johnson and the northerners. Others were much more
recalcitrant. Johnson, however, would not give up the fight. With
those who continued to resist, he went into a higher gear. He became
relentless. He would spend hours in his office behind a closed door,
talking to himself, rehearsing his arguments and the
counterarguments of these stubborn senators until he was sure he had
found the perfect approach. To some he argued pure pragmatism—the
need to defeat the Republicans at all costs. With others he reached
back to the glory years of FDR. To southern senators he made it clear
that making the party more powerful and unified would make
Johnson’s job easier, and that as a fellow southerner he would be their
ultimate ally in further fights.
He served them endless drinks in his office, pulled out the full
arsenal of his wit and charm. He would telephone them at all hours. If
the senator continued resisting, he would call again later in the
evening. He never argued with vehemence or tried to force the issue.
He saw their side. He offered numerous quid pro quos. Eventually, as
one senator after another relented, he got the last holdouts to cave in.
Somehow Johnson was now someone to fear; if they did not give in
and remained one of the few holdouts, clearly he could make their
lives miserable over the next few years.
When it finally became public, the Republicans and the press were
astounded at what Lyndon Johnson had accomplished. In a matter of
weeks, since assuming the leadership position, he had gained
unprecedented powers. He, not the seniority system, controlled
committee appointments. He was now the undisputed “Master of the
Senate,” and the byword among his colleagues was “Let Lyndon do it.”
Drawn into his sphere of influence was the most unlikely cast of
characters—from Dick Russell to Hubert Humphrey. But the most
astonished person of all must have been Senator Tom Connally
himself. In four short years, Johnson had not only risen to the top but
had gained control of the Senate Democrats through a slow and steady
campaign of accumulating influence, far surpassing the power
Connally had accrued in over twenty years of service.
•   •   •
Interpretation: From the beginning of his political career, Johnson
had a single ambition—to one day become president of the United
States. To get there he needed a relatively swift rise to prominence.
The younger he reached leadership positions, the more time he would
have to spread his name and gain leverage within the Democratic
Party. Elected to the House of Representatives at the age of twenty-
eight, he seemed on track to get what he wanted, but in the House his
career got bogged down. The place was so big and complex, and he was
not good at dealing with large groups. He was not an exciting public
speaker. He was much more charming in one-on-one situations. He
became frustrated and restless. Finally reaching the Senate at the age
of forty, he brought with him his impatience, as evidenced by his
meeting with Connally. But shortly before his inauguration, he toured
the floor of the Senate and had an epiphany: the place was much
smaller; it was more like a cozy club for gentlemen. Here he could
work one on one and slowly gain power by accumulating influence.
To accomplish this, however, he had to transform himself. He was
naturally aggressive; he would have to rein this in, slow down, and
step back. He would have to stop talking so much and getting into
heated arguments. Let other people do the talking; let them feel like
the star of the show. Stop thinking of himself; instead, focus
completely on his fellow senators as they talked and talked. Assume
the inoffensive front of the junior senator learning the ropes, the
serious and somewhat dull student of procedure and legislation.
Behind this front he could observe people without seeming ambitious
or aggressive. In this way he could slowly gain knowledge of the inner
workings of the Senate—vote counting, how bills were actually passed
—and insights into the various senators, their deepest insecurities and
weaknesses. At some point, his deep understanding of the institution
would translate into a commodity he could exchange for influence and
favors.
After several months of this campaign, he was able to alter the
reputation he had had in the House. He no longer seemed a threat,
and with the senators’ defenses down, Johnson could escalate his
campaign.
He turned his attention to winning over key allies. As he had always
believed, having one key ally at or near the top of the hierarchy could
move mountains. Early on he spotted Senator Russell as the perfect
target—lonely, a believer in a cause without any real disciples, and very
powerful. Johnson genuinely liked Russell, and he was always in
search of father figures, but his attention and approach were highly
strategic. He made sure he got appointed to the Armed Services
Committee, where he would have the most access to Russell. Their
constant encounters in the hallway or the cloakroom were rarely
accidental. Without making it obvious, he slowly increased the hours
they spent together. Johnson had never liked baseball and could care
less about the Civil War, but he quickly learned to cultivate an interest
in both. He mirrored back to Russell his own conservative values and
work ethic and made the lonely senator feel like he had not only a
friend but a worshipping son and disciple.
Johnson was careful to never ask for favors. Instead he quietly did
favors himself for Russell, helping him to modernize his staff. When
Johnson finally wanted something, such as the chairmanship of the
subcommittee, he would insinuate his desire rather than directly
express it. Russell would come to see him as an extension of his own
political ambitions, and at that point he would do almost anything for
his acolyte.
Within a few years, word got around that Johnson was a masterful
vote counter and had inside knowledge on various senators, the kind
of information that could be extremely useful when trying to get a bill
passed. Now senators would come to him for this information, and he
would share it with the understanding that at some point he would
expect favors in return. Slowly his influence was spreading, but he
realized that his desire to have the dominant position within his party
and the Senate had one major obstacle—the northern liberals.
Once again, Johnson chose the perfect target—Senator Humphrey.
He read him as a man who was lonely, in need of validation, but who
was also tremendously ambitious. The way to Humphrey’s heart was
threefold: make him feel liked, confirm his belief that he was
presidential material, and give him the practical tools to realize his
ambitions. As he had done with Russell, Johnson gave Humphrey the
impression that he was secretly on his side, mirroring Humphrey’s
deepest values by sharing his adoration of FDR. After several months
of this campaign, Humphrey would do almost anything for Johnson.
Now with a bridgehead established to the northern liberals, Johnson
had expanded his influence to all corners of the Senate.
By the time the leadership position opened up, Johnson had
established tremendous credibility as someone who returned favors,
who could get things done, and who had very powerful allies. His
desire to get control over committee assignments represented a radical
change in the system, but he carefully couched it as a way to enhance
the Democratic Party and help individual senators in their various
battles with Republicans. It was in their interest to hand over power to
Lyndon Johnson. Step by step he had acquired such influence without
ever appearing aggressive or even threatening. By the time those in the
party realized what had happened, it was too late—he was in complete
control of the chessboard, the Master of the Senate.
Understand: Influence over people and the power that it brings
are gained in the opposite way from what you might imagine.
Normally we try to charm people with our own ideas, showing
ourselves off in the best light. We hype our past accomplishments. We
promise great things about ourselves. We ask for favors, believing that
being honest is the best policy. What we do not realize is that we are
putting all of the attention on ourselves. In a world where people are
increasingly self-absorbed, this only has the effect of making others
turn more inward in return and think more of their own interests
rather than ours.
As the story of Johnson demonstrates, the royal road to influence
and power is to go the opposite direction: Put the focus on others. Let
them do the talking. Let them be the stars of the show. Their opinions
and values are worth emulating. The causes they support are the
noblest. Such attention is so rare in this world, and people are so
hungry for it, that giving them such validation will lower their defenses
and open their minds to whatever ideas you want to insinuate.
Your first move then is always to step back and assume an inferior
position in relation to the other. Make it subtle. Ask for their advice.
People are dying to impart their wisdom and experience. Once you feel
that they are addicted to this attention, you can initiate a cycle of
favors by doing something small for them, something that saves them
time or effort. They will instantly want to reciprocate and will return
the favor without feeling manipulated or pushed. And once people do
favors for you, they will continue to work on your behalf. In doing
something for you, they have judged you worthy of this, and to stop
helping you would mean to call into question their original judgment
and their own intelligence, which people are very reluctant to do.
Working slowly this way in a group, you will expand your influence
without its seeming aggressive or even purposeful, the ultimate
disguise for your ambitions.
The true spirit of conversation consists more in bringing out the
cleverness of others than in showing a great deal of it yourself; he
who goes away pleased with himself and his own wit is also greatly
pleased with you. Most men . . . seek less to be instructed, and
even to be amused, than to be praised and applauded.
—Jean de La Bruyère
Keys to Human Nature
From early on in life we humans develop a defensive and self-
protective side to our personality. It begins in early childhood as we
cultivate a sense of personal physical space that others should not
violate. It later expands into a feeling of personal dignity—people
should not coerce or manipulate us into doing things we don’t want to.
We should be free to choose what we desire. These are necessary
developments in our growth as socialized humans.
As we get older, however, these defensive qualities often solidify
into something much more rigid, and for good reason. People are
continually judging and appraising us—are we competent enough,
good enough, a team player? We never feel quite free of this scrutiny.
One noticeable failure in our lives, and people’s scrutiny will turn into
negative judgments that can cripple us for a long time. Furthermore,
we have the feeling that people are always trying to take from us—they
want our time, our money, our ideas, our labor. In the face of all of
this, we naturally become more self-absorbed and defensive—we have
to look after our own interests, since nobody else will. We set up walls
around ourselves to keep out intruders and those who want something
from us.
By the time we reach our twenties, we have all developed systems of
defense, but in certain circumstances our inner walls can come
tumbling down. For instance, during a night of revelry with friends,
perhaps after some drinking, we feel bonded with others and not
judged by them. Our minds loosen up, and suddenly new and very
interesting ideas come to us, and we’re open to doing things we would
normally never do. In another instance, perhaps we attend some
public rally and hear an inspiring speaker advocating for a cause.
Feeling on the same page as hundreds of others, caught up in the
group spirit, we suddenly feel called to action and to work for the
cause—something we might normally resist.
The most telling example, however, occurs when we fall in love and
the feeling is reciprocated. The other person appreciates and reflects
back to us our most positive qualities. We feel worthy of being loved.
Under such a spell, we let go of our ego and our habitual
stubbornness; we give the other person unusual sway over our
willpower.
What these moments have in common is that we feel inwardly
secure—not judged but accepted by friends, the group, or the loved
one. We see a reflection of ourselves in others. We can relax. At our
core we feel validated. Not needing to turn inward and defensive, we
can direct our minds outward, beyond our ego—to a cause, a new idea,
or the happiness of the other.
Understand: Creating this feeling of validation is the golden key
that will unlock people’s defenses. And we cannot survive and thrive in
this highly competitive world without possessing such a power.
We continually find ourselves in situations in which we need to
move people from their resistant positions. We need their assistance,
or we need the ability to alter their ugly behavior. If we flail about,
improvising in the moment, trying to plead, cajole, and even make
people feel guilty, we are more than likely only making them more
defensive. If we somehow succeed in getting what we want through
these methods, their support is thin, with an undercurrent of
resentment. We have taken from them—time, money, ideas—and they
will close themselves off to further influence. And if we go through
long stretches of time continually butting up against people’s
resistance and getting nowhere, we can face a very dangerous dynamic
in life—mounting frustration at the apparent indifference of people.
This subtly infects our attitude. When we find ourselves in situations
needing to influence people, they sense our neediness and insecurity.
We try too hard to please. We seem ever so slightly desperate, defeated
before starting. This can turn into a negative self-fulfilling dynamic
that will keep us marginalized without ever being aware of the source
of the problem.
Before it is too late we must turn this dynamic around, as Johnson
did at the age of forty. We must discover the power that we can possess
by giving people the validation they crave and lowering their defenses.
And the key to making this happen in a realistic and strategic manner
is to fully understand a fundamental law of human nature.
This law is as follows: People have a perception about themselves
that we shall call their self-opinion. This self-opinion can be accurate
or not—it doesn’t matter. What matters is how people perceive their
own character and worthiness. And there are three qualities to
people’s self-opinion that are nearly universal: “I am autonomous,
acting of my own free will”; “I am intelligent in my own way”; and “I
am basically good and decent.”
When it comes to the first universal (I am acting of my own free
will), if we join a group, or believe something, or buy a product, it is
because we choose to do so. The truth might be that we were
manipulated or succumbed to peer pressure, but we will tell ourselves
something else. If we ever feel consciously coerced—as in having to
obey a boss—we either tell ourselves we have chosen to obey or we
deeply resent being forced and manipulated. In the latter case, we
might smile and obey, but we will find a way to secretly rebel. In other
words, we feel the need to continually express and assert our free will.
With the second universal (I am intelligent), we may realize we are
not on the level of an Einstein, but in our field, in our own way, we are
intelligent. A plumber revels in his superior knowledge of the inner
workings of a house and in his manual skills, which are a form of
intelligence. He also thinks his political opinions come from solid
common sense, another sign of intelligence, as he sees it. People are
generally never comfortable with the thought that they could be
gullible and less than intelligent. If they have to admit they are not
smart in the conventional way, they will at least think they are cleverer
than others.
With the third universal (I am a good person), we like to see
ourselves as supporting the right causes. We treat people well. We are
a team player. If we happen to be the boss and we like to instill
discipline in the troops, we call it “tough love.” We are acting for the
good of others.
In addition to these universals, we find that people have more
personalized self-opinions that serve to regulate their particular
insecurities. For instance, “I’m a free spirit, one of a kind” or “I’m very
self-reliant and don’t need anybody’s help” or “I am good-looking and
I can depend on that” or “I am a rebel and disdain all authority.”
Implied in these various self-opinions is a feeling of superiority in this
one area: “I am a rebel and you are less so.” Many of these types of
self-opinions are related to developmental issues in early childhood.
For instance, the rebel type had a father figure who disappointed him;
or perhaps he suffered from bullying and cannot bear any feeling of
inferiority. He must despise all authority. The self-reliant type may
have experienced a very distant mother, be haunted by feelings of
abandonment, and have crafted a self-image of rugged independence.
Our self-opinion is primary: it determines so much of our thinking
and our values. We will not entertain ideas that clash with our self-
opinion. Let us say we see ourselves as particularly tough and self-
reliant. We will then gravitate toward ideas and philosophies that are
realistic, hard-core, and unforgiving of others’ weaknesses. If in this
scenario we also happen to be Christian, we will then reinterpret
Christian religious doctrines to match our tough self-image, finding
elements within Christianity that emphasize self-reliance, tough love,
and the need to destroy our enemies. In general, we will choose to
belong to groups that validate our feeling of being noble and smart.
We might think we have particular ideas or values that stand on their
own, but in fact they are dependent on our self-opinion.
When you try to convince people of something, one of three things
will happen. First, you might inadvertently challenge a particular
aspect of their self-opinion. In a discussion that might turn into an
argument, you make them feel stupid or brainwashed or less than
good. Even if you are subtle in your arguments, the implication is that
you know better. If this happens, you make people even more
defensive and resistant. Walls go up that will never come down.
Second, you can leave their self-opinion in a neutral position—
neither challenged nor confirmed. This often happens if you try to be
reasonable and calm in your approach, avoiding any emotional
extremes. In this scenario people remain resistant and dubious, but
you have at least not tightened them up, and you have some room to
maneuver them with your rational arguments.
Third, you can actively confirm their self-opinion. In this case you
are fulfilling one of people’s greatest emotional needs. We can imagine
that we are independent, intelligent, decent, and self-reliant, but only
other people can truly confirm this for us. And in a harsh and
competitive world in which we are all prone to continual self-doubt,
we almost never get this validation that we crave. When you give it to
people, you will have the magical effect that occurred when you
yourself were drunk, or at a rally, or in love. You will make people
relax. No longer consumed by insecurities, they can direct their
attention outward. Their minds open, making them susceptible to
suggestion and insinuation. If they decide to help you, they feel like
they are doing this of their own free will.
Your task is simple: instill in people a feeling of inner security.
Mirror their values; show that you like and respect them. Make them
feel you appreciate their wisdom and experience. Generate an
atmosphere of mutual warmth. Get them to laugh along with you,
instilling a feeling of rapport. All of this works best if the feelings are
not completely faked. By exercising your empathy, by getting inside
their perspective (see chapter 2 for more on this), you are more likely
to genuinely feel at least a part of such emotions. Practice this often
enough and confirming people’s self-opinion will become your default
position—you will have a loosening-up effect on almost everyone you
encounter.
One caveat: most people have a relatively high self-opinion, but
some people have a low opinion of themselves. They tell themselves, “I
am not worthy of good things” or “I am not such a nice person” or “I
have too many problems and issues.” Because they generally expect
bad things to happen to them, they often feel relieved and justified
when bad things do happen. In this way their low self-opinion serves
to calm their insecurities about ever getting success in life. If your
targets have a low self-opinion, the same rule applies. If you insist that
they can easily better their lives by following your advice, this will
clash with their belief that the world is against them and that they
really do not deserve such good things. They will discount your ideas
and resist you. Instead you must work from within their self-opinion,
empathizing with the injustices in their life and the difficulties they
have faced. Now, with them feeling validated and mirrored, you have
some latitude to make gentle corrections and even apply some reverse
psychology (see the section below).
Finally, the greatest obstacle you will face in developing these
powers comes from a cultural prejudice against the very idea of
influence: “Why can’t we all just be honest and transparent with one
another, and simply ask for what we want? Why can’t we just let
people be who they are and not try to change them? Being strategic is
ugly and manipulative.” First, when people tell you such things, you
should be on guard. We humans cannot stand feelings of
powerlessness. We need to have influence or we become miserable.
The honestymongers are no different, but because they need to believe
in their angelic qualities, they cannot square this self-opinion with the
need to have influence. And so they often become passive-aggressive,
pouting and making others feel guilty as a means of getting what they
want. Never take people who say such things at face value.
Second, we humans cannot avoid trying to influence others.
Everything we say or do is examined and interpreted by others for
clues as to our intentions. We are silent? Perhaps it is because we are
upset and want to make this clear. Or we are genuinely listening as a
way of trying to impress with our politeness. No matter what we do,
people will read into it attempts at influence, and they are not wrong
in doing so. As social animals we cannot avoid constantly playing the
game, whether we are conscious of this or not.
Most people do not want to expend the effort that goes into
thinking about others and figuring out a strategic entry past their
defenses. They are lazy. They want to simply be themselves, speak
honestly, or do nothing, and justify this to themselves as stemming
from some great moral choice.
Since the game is unavoidable, better to be skillful at it than in
denial or merely improvising in the moment. In the end, being good at
influence is actually more socially beneficial than the moral stance. By
having this power, we can influence people who have dangerous or
antisocial ideas. Becoming proficient at persuasion requires that we
immerse ourselves in the perspective of others, exercising our
empathy. We might have to abide by the cultural prejudice and nod
our heads in agreement about the need for complete honesty, but
inwardly we must realize that this is nonsense and practice what is
necessary for our own well-being.
Five Strategies for Becoming a Master Persuader
The following five strategies—distilled from the examples of the
greatest influencers in history—are designed to help you focus more
deeply on your targets and create the kinds of emotional effects that
will help lower people’s resistance. It would be wise to put all five into
practice.
1. Transform yourself into a deep listener. In the normal
flow of a conversation, our attention is divided. We hear parts of what
other people are saying, in order to follow and keep the conversation
going. At the same time, we’re planning what we’ll say next, some
exciting story of our own. Or we are even daydreaming about
something irrelevant. The reason for this is simple: we are more
interested in our own thoughts, feelings, and experiences than in those
of the other person. If this were not the case, we would find it
relatively easy to listen with full attention. The usual prescription is to
talk less and listen more, but this is meaningless advice as long as we
prefer our own internal monologue. The only solution is to somehow
be motivated to reverse this dynamic.
Think of it this way: You know your own thoughts only too well.
You are rarely surprised. Your mind tends to circle obsessively around
the same subjects. But each person you encounter represents an
undiscovered country full of surprises. Imagine for a moment that you
could step inside people’s minds and what an amazing journey that
could be. People who seem quiet and dull often have the strangest
inner lives for you to explore. Even with boors and fools, you can
educate yourself as to the origins and nature of their flaws.
Transforming yourself into a deep listener will not only prove more
amusing as you open your mind to their mind but will also provide the
most invaluable lessons about human psychology.
Once you are motivated to listen, the rest is relatively simple. You
cannot make the strategic purpose behind your listening too obvious.
The other person has to feel it is a lively exchange, even though in the
end they may do 80 percent of the talking. For this purpose, you must
not barrage them with questions that make it feel like a job interview.
Instead, pay attention to their nonverbal cues. You will see their eyes
light up when certain topics are mentioned—you must guide the
conversation in that direction. People will become chatty without
realizing it. Almost everyone likes to talk about their childhood, their
family, the ins and outs of their work, or some cause that is dear to
them. An occasional question or comment plays off something they
have said.
You are deeply absorbed in what they say, but you must feel and
appear relaxed in being so. You convey that you are listening by
maintaining relatively consistent eye contact and nodding as they talk.
The best way to signal how deeply you are listening is to occasionally
say something that mirrors what they have said, but in your own
words and filtered through your own experience. In the end, the more
they talk, the more they will reveal about their insecurities and unmet
desires.
Your goal is to make them come away from the encounter feeling
better about themselves. You have let them be the star of the show.
You have drawn out of them the wittier, more fun-loving side of their
personality. They will love you for this and will look forward to the
next encounter. As they become increasingly relaxed in your presence,
you will have great latitude for planting ideas and influencing their
behavior.
2. Infect people with the proper mood. As social animals, we
are extremely susceptible to the moods of other people. This gives us
the power to subtly infuse into people the appropriate mood for
influencing them. If you are relaxed and anticipating a pleasurable
experience, this will communicate itself and have a mirror-like effect
on the other person. One of the best attitudes to adapt for this purpose
is one of complete indulgence. You do not judge other people; you
accept them as they are.
In the novel The Ambassadors, the writer Henry James paints the
portrait of this ideal in the form of Marie de Vionnet, an older French
woman of impeccable manners who surreptitiously uses an American
named Lambert Strether to help her in a love affair. From the very
moment he meets her, Strether is captivated. She seems a “mix of
lucidity and mystery.” She listens deeply to what he says and, without
responding, gives him the feeling she completely understands him.
She envelops him in her empathy. She acts from the beginning as if
they have become good friends, but it is in her manner, nothing she
says. He calls her indulgent spirit “a beautiful conscious mildness,”
and it has a hypnotic power over him. Well before she even asks for his
help, he is completely under her spell and will do anything for her.
Such an attitude replicates the ideal mother figure—unconditional in
her love. It is not expressed so much in words as in looks and body
language. It works equally well on men and women and has an
hypnotic effect on almost anyone.
A variation of this is to infect people with a warm feeling of rapport
through laughter and shared pleasures. Lyndon Johnson was the
master of this. Of course, he used alcohol, which flowed freely in his
office, his targets never knowing that his own drinks were greatly
watered down so he could retain control of himself. His bawdy jokes
and colorful anecdotes created a comfortable club-like atmosphere for
men. It was hard to resist the mood he set. Johnson could also be quite
physical, often wrapping his arms around a man’s shoulder, frequently
touching him on the arm. Many studies on nonverbal cues have
demonstrated the incredible power that a simple touch of people’s
hands or arms can have in any interaction, making them think positive
things about you without their ever being aware of the source of their
good opinion. Such gentle taps establish a feeling of visceral rapport,
as long as you do not maintain eye contact, which will give it too much
of a sexual connotation.
Keep in mind that your expectations about people are
communicated to them nonverbally. It has been demonstrated, for
instance, that teachers who expect greater things from their pupils
can, without ever saying anything, have a positive effect on their work
and grades. By feeling particularly excited when you’re meeting
someone, you will communicate this to him or her in a powerful way.
If there is a person of whom you will eventually ask a favor, try
imagining him or her in the best light—generous and caring—if that is
possible. Some have claimed to get great results by simply thinking the
other person is handsome or good-looking.
3. Confirm their self-opinion. Recall the universal qualities of
the self-opinions of people with a high self-opinion. Here’s how to
approach each one of them.
Autonomy. No attempt at influence can ever work if people feel in
any way that they are being coerced or manipulated. They must choose
to do whatever it is you want them to do, or they must at least
experience it as their choice. The more deeply you can create this
impression, the greater your chances of success.
In the novel Tom Sawyer, the twelve-year-old protagonist of the
same name is portrayed as an extremely savvy boy, raised by his aunt,
with an uncanny sensitivity to human nature. Despite his cleverness,
Tom is always getting into trouble. The second chapter of the book
begins with Tom being punished for getting in a fight. Instead of
spending a hot summer Saturday afternoon messing around with his
friends and swimming in the river, Tom has to whitewash the very
large fence in the front of the house. As he starts the job, his friend
Ben Rogers walks by, eating a delicious-looking apple. Ben is as
mischievous as Tom, and seeing him at this tedious chore, he decides
to torment him by asking him if he’s planning on going for a swim that
afternoon, knowing full well he can’t.
Tom pretends to feign deep interest in his work. Now Ben is
curious. He asks Tom if he’s seriously more interested in painting the
fence than in having some fun. Tom finally addresses him, while still
keeping an eye on his work. His aunt would not give such a job to just
anyone, he says. It is what people see first of their house when they
pass by. This is a very important job that won’t come up again for
many years. In the past he and his friends painted something on
fences and got into trouble; now he can do so freely. It is a challenge, a
test of skill. And yes, he enjoys it. Swimming can be done any old
weekend, but not this.
Ben asks if he can try his hand, to see what Tom means. After
several pleas, Tom finally relents, only after Ben offers him his apple.
Soon other boys approach and Tom does the same sell job on them,
accumulating more pieces of fruit and toys. An hour later, we see Tom
lying in the shade while a whole team of friends finishes the job for
him. Tom used basic psychology to get what he wanted. First, he got
Ben to reinterpret this job, not by saying anything but through his
absorbed attention in the task and his body language: the task must be
something interesting. Second, he framed the job as a test of skill and
intelligence, a rare opportunity, something that would appeal to any
competitive boy. And finally, as he knew, once the neighborhood boys
saw others at the task, they would want to join in, making it a group
activity. Nobody wanted to be left out. Tom could have pleaded with
dozens of friends to help him and gotten nowhere. Instead he framed
it in such a way that they wanted to do the work. They came to him,
begging for the job.
Your attempts at influence must always follow a similar logic: how
can you get others to perceive the favor you want to ask for as
something they already desire? Framing it as something pleasurable,
as a rare opportunity, and as something other people want to do will
generally have the proper effect.
Another variation on this is to appeal directly to people’s
competitive instincts. In 1948 the director Billy Wilder was casting for
his new film A Foreign Affair, which was to be set in Berlin just after
the war. One of the main characters was a woman named Erika von
Shluetow, a German cabaret singer with suspicious ties to various
Nazis during the war. Wilder knew that Marlene Dietrich would be the
perfect actress to play the part, but Dietrich had publicly expressed her
intense dislike of anything having to do with the Nazis and had worked
hard for various Allied causes. When first approached about the role,
she found it too distasteful, and that was the end of the discussion.
Wilder did not protest or plead with her, which would have been
futile, given Dietrich’s famed stubbornness. Instead he told her he had
found two perfect American actresses to play the part, but he wanted
her opinion on which would be better. Would she view their tests?
Feeling bad that she had turned down her old friend Wilder, Dietrich
naturally agreed to this. But Wilder had cleverly tested two well-
known actresses whom he knew would be quite terrible for the role,
making a mockery of the part of a sexy German cabaret singer. The
ploy worked like a charm. The very competitive Dietrich was aghast at
their performances and immediately volunteered to do the part
herself.
Finally, when giving people gifts or rewards as a possible means of
winning them over to your side, it is always best to give smaller gifts or
rewards than larger ones. Large gifts make it too apparent that you are
trying to buy their loyalty, which will offend people’s sense of
independence. Some might accept large gifts out of need, but later they
will feel resentful or suspicious. Smaller gifts have a better effect—
people can tell themselves they deserve such things and are not being
bought or bribed. In fact, such smaller rewards, spread out over time,
will bind people to you in a much greater way than anything lavish.
Intelligence. When you disagree with another person and impose
your contrary opinion, you are implying that you know better, that you
have thought things through more rationally. People challenged in this
way will then naturally become even more attached to their opinions.
You can prevent this by being more neutral, as if this opposing idea is
simply something you are entertaining and it could be wrong. But
better still, you can go much further: you see their point of view and
agree with it. (Winning arguments is rarely worth the effort.) With
their intelligence flattered, you now have some room to gently alter
their opinion or have lowered their defenses for a request for help.
The nineteenth-century British prime minister and novelist
Benjamin Disraeli conceived of an even cleverer ploy when he wrote,
“If you wish to win a man’s heart, allow him to confute you.” You do
this by beginning to disagree with a target about a subject, even with
some vehemence, and then slowly come to seeing their point of view,
thereby confirming not only their intelligence but also their own
powers of influence. They feel ever so slightly superior to you, which is
precisely what you want. They will now be doubly vulnerable to a
countermove of your own. You can create a similar effect by asking
people for advice. The implication is that you respect their wisdom and
experience.
In 1782 the French playwright Pierre-Augustin Caron de
Beaumarchais put the finishing touches on his great masterpiece The
Marriage of Figaro. The approval of King Louis XVI was required,
and when he read the manuscript, he was furious. Such a play would
lead to a revolution, he said: “This man mocks everything that must be
respected in a government.” After much pressure he agreed to have it
privately performed in a theater at Versailles. The aristocratic
audience loved it. The king allowed more performances, but he
directed his censors to get their hands on the script and alter its worst
passages before it was presented to the public.
To bypass this, Beaumarchais commissioned a tribunal of
academics, intellectuals, courtiers, and government ministers to go
over the play with him. A man who attended the meeting wrote, “M. de
Beaumarchais announced that he would submit unreservedly to every
cut and change that the gentlemen and even the ladies present might
deem appropriate. . . . Everyone wanted to add something of his
own. . . . M. de Breteuil suggested a witticism, Beaumarchais accepted
it and thanked him. . . . ‘It will save the fourth act.’ Mme de Matignon
contributed the color of the little page’s ribbon. The color was adopted
and became fashionable.”
Beaumarchais was indeed a very clever courtier. By allowing others
to make even the smallest changes to his masterpiece, he greatly
flattered their egos and their intelligence. Of course, on the larger
changes later requested by Louis’s censors, Beaumarchais did not
relent. By then he had so won over the members of his own tribunal
that they stridently defended him, and Louis had to back down.
Lowering people’s defenses in this way on matters that are not so
important will give you great latitude to move them in the direction
you desire and get them to concede to your desires on more important
matters.
Goodness. In our daily thoughts, we constantly comfort ourselves
as to the moral nature of our actions. If we are employees of a
company, we see ourselves as good team members. If we are bosses,
we treat people well, or at least we pay and support them well. We help
the right causes. In general, we do not like to see ourselves as selfish
and narrowly focused on our own agenda. Just as important, we want
others to see us in this light. Look at social media and how people will
make a display of supporting the best causes. Few people give to
charities anonymously—they want their names loudly advertised.
You must never inadvertently cast doubts on this saintly self-
opinion. To make positive use of this trait in people, frame what you
are asking them to do as part of a larger cause that they can participate
in. They are not merely buying clothes but helping the environment or
keeping jobs local. In taking these actions, people can feel better about
themselves. Keep it subtle. If you are trying to get recruits for a job, let
others spread the message about the cause. Make it appear prosocial
and popular. Make people want to join the group, instead of having to
plead with them. Pay great attention to the words and labels you use.
It is better, for instance, to call someone a team member than an
employee.
To put yourself in the inferior, one-down position, you can commit
some relatively harmless faux pas, even offend people in a more
pronounced way, and then ask for their forgiveness. By asking for this,
you imply their moral superiority, a position people love to occupy.
Now they are vulnerable to suggestion.
Finally, if you need a favor from people, do not remind them of
what you have done for them in the past, trying to stimulate feelings of
gratitude. Gratitude is rare because it tends to remind us of our
helplessness, our dependence on others. We like to feel independent.
Instead, remind them of the good things they have done for you in the
past. This will help confirm their self-opinion: “Yes, I am generous.”
And once reminded, they will want to continue to live up to this image
and do yet another good deed. A similar effect can come from
suddenly forgiving your enemies and forging a rapprochement. In the
emotional turmoil this creates, they will feel obligated to live up to the
high opinion you have now shown toward them and will be extra
motivated to prove themselves worthy.
4. Allay their insecurities. Everyone has particular insecurities
—about their looks, their creative powers, their masculinity, their
power status, their uniqueness, their popularity, et cetera. Your task is
to get a bead on these insecurities through the various conversations
you draw them into.
Once you’ve identified them, you must first be extra careful not to
trigger them. People have grown sensitive antennae for any words or
body language that might cast doubt on their physical appearance or
their popularity, or whatever their insecurity may be. Be aware of this
and be on guard. Second, the best strategy is to praise and flatter those
qualities that people are most insecure about. We all crave this, even if
we somehow see through the person who is praising us. That is
because we live in a tough world in which we are continually judged,
and yesterday’s triumph is easily followed by tomorrow’s failure. We
never really feel secure. If the flattery is done right, we feel that the
flatterer likes us, and we tend to like people who like us.
The key to successful flattery is to make it strategic. If I know that I
am particularly awful at basketball, praising me for my basketball
skills in any way will ring false. But if I am uncertain about my skills, if
I imagine I am perhaps not really so bad, then any flattery on that
score can work wonders. Look for those qualities people are uncertain
about and offer reassurance. Lord Chesterfield advised his son in his
letters (later published in 1774), “Cardinal Richelieu who was
undoubtedly the ablest statesman of his time . . . had the idle vanity of
being thought the best poet too: he envied the great Corneille his
reputation. Those, therefore, who flattered skillfully, said little to him
of abilities in state affairs, or at least but en passant, and as it might
naturally occur. But the incense which they gave him, the smoke of
which they knew would turn his head in their favour, was as a . . .
poet.”
If your targets are powerful and quite Machiavellian, they might
feel somewhat insecure about their moral qualities. Flattering them
about their clever manipulations might backfire, but obvious praise of
their goodness would be too transparent, because they know
themselves too well. Instead, some strategic flattery about how you
have benefited from their advice and how their criticisms helped
improve your performance will appeal to their self-opinion of being
tough yet fair, with a good heart underneath the gruff exterior.
It is always better to praise people for their effort, not their talent.
When you extol people for their talent, there is a slight deprecation
implied, as if they were simply lucky for being born with natural skill.
Instead, everyone likes to feel that they earned their good fortune
through hard work, and that is where you must aim your praise.
With people who are your equals, you have more room to flatter.
With those who are your superiors, it is best to simply agree with their
opinions and validate their wisdom. Flattering your boss is too
transparent.
Never follow up your praise with a request for help, or whatever it
is you are after. Your flattery is a setup and requires the passage of
some time. Do not appear too ingratiating in the first encounter or
two. Better to show even a little coldness, which will give you room to
warm up. After a few days you have grown to like this person, and then
a few flattering words aimed at their insecurities will begin to melt
their resistance. If possible, get third parties to pass along your
compliments, as if they had simply overheard them. Never be too
lavish in your praise or use absolutes.
A clever way to cover your tracks is to mix in some small criticisms
of the person or their work, nothing that will trigger insecurities but
enough to give your praise a more realistic hue: “I loved your
screenplay, although I feel act two might need a little work.” Do not
say, “Your latest book is so much better than the last one.” Be very
careful when people ask you for their opinion about their work or
something related to their character or their looks. They do not want
the truth; they want support and confirmation given as realistically as
possible. Be happy to supply this for them.
You must seem as sincere as possible. It would be best to choose
qualities to praise that you actually admire, if at all possible. In any
event, what gives people away is the nonverbal cues—praise along with
stiff body language or a fake smile or eyes glancing elsewhere. Try to
feel some of the good emotions you are expressing so any exaggeration
will seem less obvious. Keep in mind that your target must have a
relatively high self-opinion. If it is low, the flattery will not jibe with
how they feel about themselves and will ring hollow, whereas for those
of high self-opinion it will seem only natural.
5. Use people’s resistance and stubbornness. Some people
are particularly resistant to any form of influence. They are most often
people with deeper levels of insecurity and low self-opinion. This can
manifest itself in a rebellious attitude. Such types feel as if it is them
against the world. They must assert their will at all costs and resist any
kind of change. They will do the opposite of what people suggest. They
will seek advice for a particular problem or symptom, only to find
dozens of reasons of why the advice given won’t work for them. The
best thing to do is to play a game of mental judo with them. In judo
you do not counter people’s moves with a thrust of your own but
rather encourage their aggressive energy (resistance) in order to make
them fall on their own. Here are some ways to put this into practice in
everyday life.
Use their emotions: In the book Change, the therapist authors
(Paul Watzlawick, John H. Weakland, and Richard Fisch) discuss the
case of a rebellious teenager, suspended from school by the principal
because he was caught dealing drugs. He was still to do his homework
at home but was forbidden to be on campus. This would put a big dent
in his drug-dealing business. The boy burned with the desire to get
vengeance.
The mother consulted a therapist, who told her to do the following:
explain to the son that the principal believed only students who
attended class in person could do well. In the principal’s mind, by
keeping the boy away from school he was ensuring he would fail. If he
did better by working at home than in class, this would embarrass the
principal. Better to not try too hard this semester and get on the good
side of the principal by proving him right. Of course, such advice was
designed to play into his emotions. Now he desired nothing more than
to embarrass the principal and so threw himself into his homework
with great energy, the goal of the therapist all along. In essence, the
idea is not to counter people’s strong emotions but to move with them
and find a way to channel them in a productive direction.
Use their language: The therapist Milton Erickson (see chapter 3)
described the following case that he had treated: A husband came to
him for advice, although he seemed quite set on doing what he wanted
anyway. He and his wife came from very religious families and had
married mostly to please their parents. The husband and wife were
very religious as well. Their honeymoon, however, had been a disaster.
They found sex very awkward and did not feel like they were in love.
The husband decided it was not anyone’s fault but that they should get
“a friendly divorce.” Erickson readily agreed with him and suggested
exactly how to bring about this “friendly divorce.” He instructed him
to reserve a room at a hotel. They were to have one final “friendly”
night together before the divorce. They were also to have one last
“friendly” glass of champagne, one last “friendly” kiss between them,
and so on. These instructions virtually ensured the wife’s seduction by
her husband. As Erickson had hoped, the husband followed his
instructions, the couple had an exciting evening together, and they
happily decided to remain married.
Erickson intuited that the husband did not really want a divorce
and that the two of them felt awkward because of their religious
backgrounds. They were both deeply insecure about their physical
desires, yet resistant to any kind of change. Erickson used the
husband’s language and his desire for divorce but found a way to
gently redirect the energy toward something much different. When
you use people’s words back at them, it has a hypnotic effect. How can
they not follow what you suggest when it is exactly the words they have
used?
Use their rigidity: A pawnbroker’s son once came to the great
eighteenth-century Zen master Hakuin with the following problem: he
wanted to get his father to practice Buddhism, but the man pretended
to be too busy with his bookkeeping to have time for even a single
chant or prayer. Hakuin knew the pawnbroker—he was an inveterate
miser who was only using this as an excuse to avoid religion, which he
considered a waste of time. Hakuin advised the boy to tell his father
that the Zen master himself would buy from him each prayer and
chant that he did on a daily basis. It was strictly a business deal.
Of course the pawnbroker was very happy with the deal—he could
shut his son up and make money in the process. Each day he
presented Hakuin with his bill for the prayers, and Hakuin duly paid
him. But on the seventh day he failed to show up. It seemed that he
had gotten so caught up in the chanting that he had forgotten to count
how many prayers he had done. A few days later he admitted to
Hakuin he had become completely taken up with the chants, felt so
much better, and did not need to be paid anymore. He soon became a
very generous donor to Hakuin’s temple.
When people are rigid in their opposition to something, it stems
from deep fear of change and the uncertainty it could bring. They must
have everything on their terms and feel in control. You play into their
hands if you try with all your advice to encourage change—it gives
them something to react against and justifies their rigidity. They
become more stubborn. Stop fighting with such people and use the
actual nature of their rigid behavior to effect a gentle change that
could lead to something greater. On their own, they discover
something new (like the power of Buddhist prayer), and on their own
they might take this further, all set up by your judo maneuver.
Keep in mind the following: people often won’t do what others ask
them to do, because they simply want to assert their will. If you
heartily agree with their rebellion and tell them to keep on doing what
they’re doing, it now means that if they do so they are following your
advice, which is distasteful to them. They may very well rebel again
and assert their will in the opposite direction, which is what you
wanted all along—the essence of reverse psychology.
The Flexible Mind—Self-strategies
You find it frustrating when people resist your good ideas out of sheer
stubbornness, but you are largely unaware of how the same problem—
your own stubbornness—afflicts you and limits your creative powers.
As children our minds were remarkably flexible. We could learn at
a rate that far surpasses our adult capacities. We can attribute much of
the source of this power to our feelings of weakness and vulnerability.
Sensing our inferiority in relation to those older than us, we felt highly
motivated to learn. We were also genuinely curious and hungry for
new information. We were open to the influence of parents, peers, and
teachers.
In adolescence many of us had the experience of falling under the
sway of a great book or writer. We became entranced by the novel
ideas in the book, and because we were so open to influence, these
early encounters with exciting ideas sank deeply into our minds and
became part of our own thought processes, affecting us decades after
we absorbed them. Such influences enriched our mental landscape,
and in fact our intelligence depends on the ability to absorb the lessons
and ideas of those who are older and wiser.
Just as the body tightens with age, however, so does the mind. And
just as our sense of weakness and vulnerability motivated the desire to
learn, so does our creeping sense of superiority slowly close us off to
new ideas and influences. Some may advocate that we all become
more skeptical in the modern world, but in fact a far greater danger
comes from the increasing closing of the mind that afflicts us as
individuals as we get older, and seems to be afflicting our culture in
general.
Let us define the ideal state of the mind as one that retains the
flexibility of youth along with the reasoning powers of the adult. Such
a mind is open to the influence of others. And just as you use strategies
to melt people’s resistance, you must do the same on yourself, working
to soften up your rigid mental patterns.
To reach such an ideal, we must first adopt the key tenet of the
Socratic philosophy. One of Socrates’s earliest admirers was a young
man named Chaerephon. Frustrated that more Athenians did not
revere Socrates as he himself did, Chaerephon visited the Oracle of
Delphi and posed a question: “Is there a wiser man than Socrates in all
of Athens?” The oracle answered no.
Chaerephon felt vindicated in his admiration of Socrates and
rushed to tell his mentor the good news. Socrates, however, being a
humble man, was not at all pleased to hear this and was determined to
prove the oracle wrong. He visited many people, each eminent in their
own field—politics, the arts, business—and asked them many
questions. When they kept to knowledge of their field, they seemed
quite intelligent. But then they would expatiate on all kinds of subjects
about which they clearly knew nothing. On such subjects they merely
spouted the conventional wisdom. They did not think through any of
these ideas.
Finally Socrates had to admit that the oracle was indeed accurate—
he was wiser than all the others because he was aware of his own
ignorance. Over and over again he examined and reexamined his own
ideas, seeing inadequacies and infantile emotions lodged within them.
His motto in life had become “The unexamined life is not worth
living.” The charm of Socrates, what made him so devilishly
fascinating to the youth of Athens, was the supreme openness of his
mind. In essence, Socrates assumed the weaker, vulnerable position of
the ignorant child, always asking questions.
Think of it this way: We like to scoff at the superstitious and
irrational ideas that most people held in the seventeenth century.
Imagine how those of the twenty-fifth century will scoff at ours. Our
knowledge of the world is limited, despite the advances of science. Our
ideas are conditioned by the prejudices instilled in us by our parents,
by our culture, and by the historical period we live in. They are further
limited by the increasing rigidity of the mind. A bit more humility
about what we know would make us all more curious and interested in
a wider range of ideas.
When it comes to the ideas and opinions you hold, see them as toys
or building blocks that you are playing with. Some you will keep,
others you will knock down, but your spirit remains flexible and
playful.
To take this further, you can adopt a strategy promulgated by
Friedrich Nietzsche: “He who really wants to get to know something
new (be it a person, an event, a book) does well to entertain it with all
possible love and to avert his eyes quickly from everything in it he
finds inimical, repellent, false, indeed to banish it from mind: so that,
for example, he allows the author of a book the longest start and then,
like one watching a race, desires with beating heart that he may reach
his goal. For with this procedure one penetrates to the heart of the new
thing, to the point that actually moves it: and precisely this is what is
meant by getting to know it. If one has gone this far, reason can
afterwards make its reservations; that over-estimation, that temporary
suspension of the critical pendulum, was only an artifice for luring
forth the soul of the thing.”
Even in writing that is inimical to your own ideas there is often
something that rings true, which represents the “soul of the thing.”
Opening yourself up to its influence in this way should become part of
your mental habits, allowing you to better understand things, even to
criticize them properly. Sometimes, however, that “soul” will move you
as well and gain some influence, enriching your mind in the process.
Upon occasion it is good to let go of your deepest set of rules and
restrictions. The great fourteenth-century Zen master Bassui posted at
the door of his temple a list of thirty-three rules his monks were to
abide by or be thrown out. Many of the rules dealt with alcohol, which
was strictly forbidden. One night, to totally disconcert his literal-
minded monks, he showed up to a talk completely drunk. He never
apologized or repeated it, but the lesson was simple: such rules are
merely guidelines, and to demonstrate our freedom we must violate
them from time to time.
Finally, when it comes to your own self-opinion, try to have some
ironic distance from it. Make yourself aware of its existence and how it
operates within you. Come to terms with the fact that you are not as
free and autonomous as you like to believe. You do conform to the
opinions of the groups you belong to; you do buy products because of
subliminal influence; you can be manipulated. Realize as well that you
are not as good as the idealized image of your self-opinion. Like
everyone else, you can be quite self-absorbed and obsessed with your
own agenda. With this awareness, you will not feel the need to be
validated by others. Instead you will work at making yourself truly
independent and concerned with the welfare of others, as opposed to
staying attached to the illusion of your self-opinion.
There was something terribly enthralling in the exercise of
influence. No other activity was like it. To project one’s soul into
some gracious form, and let it tarry there for a moment; to hear
one’s own intellectual views echoed back to one with all the added
music of passion and youth; to convey one’s temperament into
another as though it were a subtle fluid or a strange perfume:
there was a real joy in that—perhaps the most satisfying joy left to
us in an age so limited and vulgar as our own, an age grossly
carnal in its pleasures, and grossly common in its aims.
—Oscar Wilde, The Picture of Dorian Gray
E
8
Change Your Circumstances by
Changing Your Attitude
The Law of Self-sabotage
ach of us has a particular way of looking at the world, of
interpreting events and the actions of people around us. This is
our attitude, and it determines much of what happens to us in life. If
our attitude is essentially fearful, we see the negative in every
circumstance. We stop ourselves from taking chances. We blame
others for mistakes and fail to learn from them. If we feel hostile or
suspicious, we make others feel such emotions in our presence. We
sabotage our career and relationships by unconsciously creating the
circumstances we fear the most. The human attitude, however, is
malleable. By making our attitude more positive, open, and tolerant
of other people, we can spark a different dynamic—we can learn
from adversity, create opportunities out of nothing, and draw people
to us. We must explore the limits of our willpower and how far it can
take us.
The Ultimate Freedom
As a child, Anton Chekhov (1860–1904)—the future celebrated writer
—faced each morning with a feeling of dread: would he be beaten that
day by his father or somehow spared? Without warning, and
sometimes without any apparent cause, his father, Pavel Yegorovich,
would strike him hard several times with a cane or a whip or the back
of his hand. What made it doubly confusing was that his father did not
beat him out of any apparent malice or anger. He told Anton he was
doing it out of love. It was God’s will that children be beaten, to instill
humility. That was how he had been raised, and look at what a fine
man he had turned into. At the end of the beating, young Anton had to
kiss his father’s hand and ask to be forgiven. At least he was not alone
in this ordeal—his four brothers and one sister all received the same
treatment.
The beating was not the only thing he came to dread. In the
afternoon he would hear his father’s approaching footsteps outside
their ramshackle wooden house, and he would tremble with fear. More
often than not he was coming to the house at that hour to ask the child
Anton to replace him in the grocery shop that he owned, in the
backwater town of Taganrog, Russia, where the family lived. For most
of the year, the shop was unbearably cold. While minding the counter,
Anton would try to do his homework, but his fingers would quickly
become numb and the ink in the pot for his pen would freeze up. In
that mess of a store, which smelled of rancid meat, he would have to
listen to the dirty jokes of the Ukrainian peasants who worked there,
and witness the lewd behavior of the assortment of town drunks who
wandered in for their shots of vodka. In the midst of all this, he had to
make sure that every kopeck was accounted for, or he would get an
added thrashing from his father. He would often be left there for hours
while his father was getting drunk somewhere else.
His mother would try to intervene. She was a gentle soul who was
no match for her husband. The boy was too young to work, she would
say. He needed time for his studies. Sitting in the freezing shop was
ruining his health. The father would thunder back that Anton was lazy
by nature, and only through hard work could he become a respectable
citizen.
There was no respite from the father’s presence. On Sunday, the
one day the shop was closed, he would wake the children up at four or
five in the morning to rehearse their singing for the church choir, of
which he was the director. Once home from the service, they would
have to repeat it, ritual by ritual, on their own, then return for the
noon mass. By the time it was over, they were all too exhausted to
play.
In the moments he had to himself, Anton would wander around
town. Taganrog was a grim place to grow up. The fronts of almost all
of the houses were decaying and crumbling, as if they were already
ancient ruins. The roads were not paved, and when the snow melted
there was mud everywhere, with giant potholes that could swallow a
child up to the neck. There were no streetlights. Prisoners would be
tasked with finding the stray dogs on the streets and beating them to
death. The only quiet and safe place was the surrounding graveyards,
and Anton would visit them often.
On these walks, he would wonder about himself and the world. Was
he really so worthless that he deserved the almost daily beatings from
his father? Perhaps. And yet his father was a walking contradiction—
he was lazy, a drunk, and quite dishonest with customers, despite his
religious zeal. And the citizens of Taganrog were equally ridiculous
and hypocritical. He would observe them at the cemetery, trying to act
pious during the funeral service but then excitedly whispering to one
another about the delicious cakes they would eat later at the home of
the widow, as if that was why they had shown up.
His only recourse in the face of the pain and boredom he constantly
felt was to laugh at it all. He became the family clown, imitating the
characters of Taganrog and inventing stories about their private lives.
Sometimes his humor turned aggressive. He played cruel practical
jokes on other children in the neighborhood. Sent to the market by his
mother, he often tormented the live duck or chicken that he carried
home in a sack. He was becoming impish and quite lazy.
Then in 1875, everything changed for the Chekhov family. Anton’s
two older brothers, Alexander and Nikolai, had had enough of their
father. They decided to move together to Moscow, Alexander to pursue
a university degree and Nikolai to become an artist. This snubbing of
his authority infuriated the father, but he could not stop them. At
around the same time, Pavel Yegorovich had to finally confront his
complete mismanagement of the grocery store—he had piled up debts
over the years and now the bills came due. Facing bankruptcy and
almost certainly time in the debtor’s prison, he quietly slipped out of
town one night, without telling his wife, and escaped to Moscow,
intending to live with his sons.
The mother was forced to sell the family possessions to pay the
debts. A boarder who lived with them offered to help the mother with
their case against the creditors, but much to her surprise, he used his
court connections to swindle the Chekhovs out of their house. Without
a penny to her name, the mother was forced to leave for Moscow with
the other children. Only Anton would stay to finish his studies and get
his diploma. He was charged with selling all of the remaining family
belongings and sending the money to Moscow as soon as possible. The
former boarder, now owner of the house, gave Anton a corner of one
room to live in, and so at the age of sixteen, with no money of his own
and no family to look after him, Anton was suddenly left to fend for
himself in Taganrog.
Anton had never really been alone before. His family had been his
whole life, for better or worse. Now it was as if the bottom had
dropped out. He had no one to turn to for help in any way. He blamed
his father for this miserable fate, for being trapped in Taganrog. One
day he felt angry and bitter, the next day depressed. But soon it
became clear that he had no time for such sentiments. He had no
money or resources, and yet somehow he had to survive. So he hired
himself out as a tutor to as many families as possible. When they went
on vacation he would often go hungry for days. His one jacket was
threadbare; he had no galoshes for the heavy rains. He felt ashamed
when he entered people’s houses, shivering and his feet all wet. But at
least he was now able to support himself.
He had decided to become a doctor. He had a scientific frame of
mind, and doctors made a good living. To get into medical school he
would have to study much harder. Frequenting the town library, the
only place he could work in peace and quiet, he began to also browse
the literature and philosophy sections, and soon he felt his mind
soaring far beyond Taganrog. With books, he no longer felt so trapped.
At night, he returned to his corner of a room to write stories and sleep.
He had no privacy, but he could keep his corner neat and tidy, free of
the usual disorder of the Chekhov household.
He had finally begun to settle down, and new thoughts and
emotions came to him. Work was no longer something he dreaded; he
loved absorbing his mind in his studies, and tutoring had made him
feel proud and dignified—he could take care of himself. Letters came
from his family—Alexander ranting and complaining about their
father making everyone miserable again; Mikhail, the youngest son,
feeling worthless and depressed. Anton wrote back to Alexander: stop
obsessing over our father and start taking care of yourself. He wrote to
Mikhail: “Why do you refer to yourself as my ‘worthless, insignificant
little brother’? Do you know where you should be aware of your
worthlessness? Before God, perhaps . . . but not before people. Among
people you should be aware of your worth.” Even Anton was surprised
by the new tone he was taking in these letters.
Then one day, several months after being abandoned, he wandered
through the streets of Taganrog and suddenly felt welling up from
within a tremendous and overwhelming sense of empathy and love for
his parents. Where did this come from? He had never felt this before.
In the days leading up to this moment he had been thinking long and
hard about his father. Was he really to blame for all their problems?
Pavel’s father, Yegor Mikhailovich, had been born a serf, serfdom
being a form of indentured slavery. The Chekhovs had been serfs for
several generations. Yegor had finally been able to buy the family’s
freedom, and he set his three sons up in different fields, Pavel
designated as the family merchant. But Pavel could not cope. He had
an artistic temperament, could have been a talented painter or
musician. He felt bitter at his fate—a grocery store and six children.
His father had beaten him, and so he beat his children. Although no
longer a serf, Pavel still bowed and kissed the hand of every local
official and landowner. He remained a serf at heart.
Anton could see that he and his siblings were falling into the same
pattern—bitter, secretly feeling worthless, and wanting to take their
anger out on others. Now that he was alone and taking care of himself,
Anton yearned to be free in the truest sense of the word. He wanted to
be free of the past, free of his father. And here, as he walked the streets
of Taganrog, the answer came to him from these new and sudden
emotions. Understanding his father, he could accept and even love
him. He was not some imposing tyrant but a rather helpless old man.
With a bit of distance, he could feel compassion and forgive the
beatings. He would not become enmeshed in all of the negative
feelings his father inspired. And he could finally value as well his kind
mother, and not blame her for being so weak. With his mind emptied
of rancor and obsessive thoughts of his lost childhood, it was as if a
great weight had been suddenly lifted off him.
He made a vow to himself: no more bowing and apologizing to
people; no more complaining and blaming; no more disorderly living
and wasting time. The answer to everything was work and love, work
and love. He had to spread this message to his family and save them.
He had to share it with mankind through his stories and plays.
Finally in 1879 Anton moved to Moscow to be with his family and
to attend medical school, and what he saw there made him
despondent. The Chekhovs and a few boarders were all crammed in a
single room in the basement of a tenement, in the middle of the red-
light district. The room had little ventilation and almost no light.
Worst of all was the morale of the group. His mother was beaten down
by the constant anxieties about money and the subterranean existence.
His father drank even more and held some odd jobs that were quite a
step down from owning a business. He continued to beat his children.
Anton’s younger siblings were no longer in school (the family could
not afford it) and felt completely useless. Mikhail in particular was
even more depressed than ever. Alexander had gotten work as a writer
for magazines, but he felt he deserved much better and started to
drink heavily. He blamed his problems on his father for following him
to Moscow and haunting his every move. Nikolai, the artist, slept till
late, worked sporadically, and spent most of his time at the local
tavern. The entire family was spiraling downward at an alarming rate,
and the neighborhood they lived in only made it worse.
The father and Alexander had recently moved out. Anton decided
he needed to do the opposite—move into the cramped room and
become the catalyst for change. He would not preach or criticize but
rather set the proper example. What mattered was keeping the family
together and elevating their spirits. To his overwhelmed mother and
sister he announced that he would take charge of the housework.
Seeing Anton cleaning and ironing, his brothers now agreed to share
in these duties. He scrimped and saved from his own medical school
scholarship and got more money from his father and Alexander. With
this money he put Mikhail, Ivan, and Maria back into school. He
managed to find his father a better job. Using his father’s money and
his own savings, he was able to move the entire family to a much larger
apartment with a view.
He worked to improve all aspects of their lives. He got his brothers
and sister to read books he had chosen, and well into the night they
would discuss and argue the latest findings in science and
philosophical questions. Slowly they all bonded on a much deeper
level, and they began to refer to him as Papa Antosha, the leader of the
family. The complaining and self-pitying attitude he had first
encountered had mostly disappeared. His two younger brothers now
talked excitedly about their future careers.
Anton’s greatest project was to reform Alexander, whom he
considered the most gifted yet troubled member of the family. Once
Alexander came home completely drunk, began to insult the mother
and sister, and threatened to smash Anton’s face in. The family had
become resigned to these tirades, but Anton would not tolerate this.
He told Alexander the next day that if he ever yelled at another family
member, he would lock him out and disavow him as a brother. He was
to treat his mother and sister with respect and not blame the father for
his turning to drink and womanizing. He must have some dignity—
dress well and take care of himself. That was the new family code.
Alexander apologized and his behavior improved, but it was a
continual battle that demanded all of Anton’s patience and love, for
the self-destructive streak in the Chekhovs was deeply ingrained. It
had led Nikolai to an early death from alcoholism, and without
constant attention Alexander could easily follow the same path. Slowly
Anton weaned him from drinking and helped him with his journalistic
career, and eventually Alexander settled into a quiet and satisfying life.
Sometime in 1884, Anton had begun to spit blood, and it was
apparent to him that he had the preliminary signs of tuberculosis. He
refused to submit to the examination of a fellow doctor. He preferred
not to know and to go on writing and practicing medicine without
worrying about the future. But as he became increasingly famous for
his plays and short stories, he began to experience a new kind of
discomfort—the envy and petty criticisms of his fellow writers. They
formed various political cliques and endlessly attacked one another,
including Anton himself, who had refused to ally himself with any
revolutionary cause. All of this made Anton feel increasingly
disenchanted with the literary world. The elevated mood he had so
carefully crafted in Taganrog was dissipating. He became depressed
and considered giving up writing entirely.
Then, toward the end of 1889, he thought of a way to free himself
from his growing depression. Since his days in Taganrog, the poorest
and most abject members of society had fascinated him. He liked to
write about thieves and con artists, and get inside their minds. The
lowliest members of Russian society were its prisoners, who lived in
ghastly conditions. And the most notorious prison in Russia was on
Sakhalin Island, just north of Japan. It housed five penal colonies with
hundreds of thousands of prisoners and their families. It was like a
shadow state—nobody in Russia had any idea what really went on on
the island. This could be the answer to his present misery. He would
make the arduous trek across Siberia to the island. He would interview
the most hardened criminals. He would write a detailed book on the
conditions there. Far from the pretentious literary world, he would
connect to something very real and reignite the generous mood he had
crafted in Taganrog.
His friends and family tried to dissuade him. His health had gotten
worse; the travel could kill him. But the more they tried to dissuade
him, the more he felt certain it was the only way to save himself.
After a three-month journey he finally arrived at the island in July
of 1890, and he immediately immersed himself in this new world. His
task was to interview every possible prisoner, including the most
vicious murderers. He investigated every aspect of their lives. He
witnessed the most gruesome torture sessions of prisoners and
followed convicts as they worked in the local mines, chained to
wheelbarrows. Prisoners who completed their sentences would often
have to stay on the island in labor camps, and so Sakhalin was full of
wives waiting to join them in these camps. These women and their
daughters would resort to prostitution to stay alive. Everything was
designed to degrade people’s spirits and drain them of every ounce of
dignity. It reminded him of his family dynamic, on a much larger scale.
This was certainly the lowest rung of hell he could have visited, and
it affected him deeply. He now longed to return to Moscow and write
about what he had seen. His sense of proportion had been restored.
He had finally freed himself of the petty thoughts and concerns that
had weighed him down. Now he could get outside of himself and feel
generous again. The book he wrote, Sakhalin Island, caught the
attention of the public and led to substantial reforms of conditions on
the island.
By 1897 his health had deteriorated, and he began to cough blood
rather regularly. He could no longer disguise his tuberculosis from the
world at large. The doctor who treated him advised that he retire from
all work and leave Moscow for good. He needed rest. Perhaps by living
in a sanatorium he could extend his life a few years. Anton would have
none of this. He would live as if nothing had changed.
A cult had begun to form around Chekhov, comprising younger
artists and adoring fans of his plays, all of which had made him one of
Russia’s most famous writers. They came to visit him in large
numbers, and although he was clearly ailing, he radiated a calmness
that astonished almost everyone. Where did it come from? Was he
born this way? He seemed to absorb himself completely in their stories
and problems. No one ever heard him talk about his illness.
In the winter of 1904, as his condition worsened, he suddenly had
the desire to take an open-sleigh ride into the country. Hearing the
bells of the sleigh and breathing the cold air had always been one of his
greatest pleasures, and he needed to feel this one more time. It put
him in such high spirits that he did not care anymore about the
consequences, which were dire. He died a few months later.
•   •   •
Interpretation: The moment his mother left him to be alone in
Taganrog, young Anton Chekhov felt trapped, as if he had been thrown
into prison. He would be forced to work as much as he could outside
his studies. He was now stuck in this hopelessly dull backwater with
no support system, living in the corner of a small room. Bitter
thoughts about his fate and about the childhood he had never had
gnawed at him in his few free moments. But as the weeks went by, he
noticed something very strange—he actually liked the work he did as a
tutor, even though the pay was meager and he was continually running
around town. His father had kept telling him he was lazy, and he had
believed it, but now he was not so sure. Each day represented a
challenge to find more work and put food on the table. He was
succeeding in this. He was not some miserable worm who needed a
beating. Besides, the work was a way to get outside himself and
immerse his mind in the problems of his students.
The books he read took him far away from Taganrog and filled him
with interesting thoughts that lingered in his mind for entire days.
Taganrog itself was not so bad. Each shop, each house contained the
oddest characters, supplying him endless material for stories. And that
corner of the room—that was his kingdom. Far from feeling trapped,
he now felt liberated. What had actually changed? Certainly not his
circumstances, or Taganrog, or the corner of the room. What had
changed was his attitude, which opened him up to new experiences
and possibilities. Once he felt this, he wanted to take it further. The
greatest remaining impediment to this sense of freedom was his
father. No matter what he tried, he couldn’t seem to get rid of deep
feelings of bitterness. It was as if he could still feel the beatings and
hear the endless pointed criticisms.
As a last resort, he tried to analyze his father as if he were a
character in a story. This led him to think about his father’s father and
all the generations of Chekhovs. As he considered his father’s erratic
nature and his wild imagination, he could understand how he must
have felt trapped by his circumstances, and why he turned to drinking
and tyrannizing the family. He was helpless, more a victim than an
oppressor. This understanding of his father laid the groundwork for
the sudden rush of unconditional love he felt one day for his parents.
As he glowed with this new emotion, he finally felt completely
liberated from resentments and anger. The negative emotions from
the past had finally fallen away from him. His mind could now be
completely open. The sensation was so exhilarating that he had to
share it with his siblings and free them as well.
What had brought Chekhov to this point was the crisis he had faced
when left alone at such a young age. He experienced another such
crisis some thirteen years later, when he became depressed about the
pettiness of his fellow writers. His solution was to reproduce what had
happened in Taganrog, but in reverse—he would be the one to
abandon others and force himself to be alone and vulnerable. In this
way he could reexperience the freedom and empathy he had felt in
Taganrog. The early death sentence from tuberculosis was the last
crisis. He would let go of his fear of death, and the bitter feelings that
came with having his life cut short, by continuing to live at full tilt.
This final and ultimate freedom gave him a radiance that almost
everyone who met him in this period could feel.
Understand: The story of Anton Chekhov is really a paradigm for
what we all face in life. We carry with us traumas and hurts from early
childhood. In our social life, as we get older, we accumulate
disappointments and slights. We too are often haunted by a sense of
worthlessness, of not really deserving the good things in life. We all
have moments of great doubt about ourselves. These emotions can
lead to obsessive thoughts that dominate our minds. They make us
curtail what we experience as a way to manage our anxiety and
disappointments. They make us turn to alcohol or any kind of habit to
numb the pain. Without realizing it, we assume a negative and fearful
attitude toward life. This becomes our self-imposed prison. But this is
not how it has to be. The freedom that Chekhov experienced came
from a choice, a different way of looking at the world, a change in
attitude. We can all follow such a path.
This freedom essentially comes from adopting a generous spirit—
toward others and toward ourselves. By accepting people, by
understanding and if possible even loving them for their human
nature, we can liberate our minds from obsessive and petty emotions.
We can stop reacting to everything people do and say. We can have
some distance and stop ourselves from taking everything personally.
Mental space is freed up for higher pursuits. When we feel generous
toward others, they feel drawn to us and want to match our spirit.
When we feel generous toward ourselves, we no longer feel the need to
bow and scrape and play the game of false humility while secretly
resenting our lack of success. Through our work and through getting
what we need on our own, without depending on others, we can stand
tall and realize our potential as humans. We can stop reproducing the
negative emotions around us. Once we feel the exhilarating power
from this new attitude, we will want to take it as far as possible.
Years later, in a letter to a friend, Chekhov tried to summarize his
experience in Taganrog, referring to himself in the third person:
“Write about how this young man squeezes the slave out of himself
drop by drop and how one fine morning he awakes to find that the
blood coursing through his veins is no longer the blood of a slave but
that of a real human being.”
The greatest discovery of my generation is the fact that human
beings can alter their lives by altering their attitudes of mind.
—William James
Keys to Human Nature
We humans like to imagine that we have an objective knowledge of the
world. We take it for granted that what we perceive on a daily basis is
reality—this reality being more or less the same for everybody. But this
is an illusion. No two people see or experience the world in the same
way. What we perceive is our personal version of reality, one that is of
our own creation. To realize this is a critical step in our understanding
of human nature.
Imagine the following scenario: A young American must spend a
year studying in Paris. He is somewhat timid and cautious, prone to
feelings of depression and low self-esteem, but he’s genuinely excited
by this opportunity. Once there, he finds it hard to speak the language,
and the mistakes he makes and the slightly derisory attitude of the
Parisians make it even harder for him to learn. He finds the people not
friendly at all. The weather is damp and gloomy. The food is too rich.
Even Notre Dame Cathedral seems disappointing, the area around it
so crowded with tourists. Although he has pleasurable moments, he
generally feels alienated and unhappy. He concludes that Paris is
overrated and a rather unpleasant place.
Now imagine the same scenario but with a young woman who is
more extroverted and has an adventurous spirit. She’s not bothered by
making mistakes in French, nor by the occasional snide remark from a
Parisian. She finds learning the language a pleasant challenge. Others
find her spirit engaging. She makes friends more easily, and with more
contacts her knowledge of French improves. She finds the weather
romantic and quite suitable to the place. To her, the city represents
endless adventures and she finds it enchanting.
In this case, two people see and judge the same city in opposite
ways. As a matter of objective reality, the weather of Paris has no
positive or negative qualities. Clouds simply pass by. The friendliness
or unfriendliness of the Parisians is a subjective judgment—it depends
on whom you meet and how they compare with the people where you
come from. Notre Dame Cathedral is merely an agglomeration of
carved pieces of stone. The world simply exists as it is—things or
events are not good or bad, right or wrong, ugly or beautiful. It is we
with our particular perspectives who add color to or subtract it from
things and people. We focus on either the beautiful Gothic architecture
or the annoying tourists. We, with our mind-set, can make people
respond to us in a friendly or unfriendly manner, depending on our
anxiety or openness. We shape much of the reality that we perceive,
dictated by our moods and emotions.
Understand: Each of us sees the world through a particular lens
that colors and shapes our perceptions. Let us call this lens our
attitude. The great Swiss psychologist Carl Jung defined this in the
following way: “Attitude is a readiness of the psyche to act or react in a
certain way. . . . To have an attitude means to be ready for something
definite, even though this something is unconscious; for having an
attitude is synonymous with an a priori orientation to a definite
thing.”
What this means is the following: In the course of a day, our minds
respond to thousands of stimuli in the environment. Depending on the
wiring of our brain and our psychological makeup, certain stimuli—
clouds in the sky, crowds of people—lead to stronger firings and
responses. The stronger the response, the more we pay attention.
Some of us are more sensitive to stimuli that others would mostly
ignore. If we are unconsciously prone to feelings of sadness, for
whatever reason, we are more likely to pick up signs that promote this
feeling. If we have a suspicious nature, we are more sensitive to facial
expressions that display any kind of possible negativity and to
exaggerate what we perceive. This is the “readiness of the psyche to . . .
react in a certain way.”
We are never conscious of this process. We merely experience the
aftereffects of these sensitivities and firings of the brain; they add up
to an overall mood or emotional background that we might call
depression, hostility, insecurity, enthusiasm, or adventurousness. We
experience many different moods, but in an overall sense we can say
that we have a particular way of seeing and interpreting the world,
dominated by one emotion or a blend of several, such as hostility and
resentment. This is our attitude. People with a largely depressive
attitude can feel moments of joy, but they are more disposed toward
experiencing sadness; they anticipate the feeling in their day-to-day
encounters.
Jung illustrates this idea in the following way: Imagine that on a
hike people come upon a brook that must be crossed to continue the
journey. One person, without much thought, will simply leap across,
touching a stone or two, not worried at all about possibly falling. He
loves the sheer physical pleasure of the jump and doesn’t care if he
fails. Another person is excited as well, but it has less to do with the
physical joy than with the mental challenge the brook represents. She
will quickly calculate the most effective means of crossing and will
gain satisfaction from figuring this out. Another person, of a cautious
nature, will take more time to think it through. He takes no pleasure in
the crossing; he is irritated by the obstruction, but he wants to
continue the hike and he will do his best to safely cross. A fourth will
simply turn back. She will see no need for crossing and will rationalize
her fears by saying the hike has been long enough.
No one simply sees or hears the rushing of water over rocks. Our
minds do not perceive just what is there. Each person sees and
responds to the same brook differently, according to their particular
attitude—adventurous, fearful, et cetera.
The attitude that we carry with us throughout life has several roots:
First, we come into this world with certain genetic inclinations—
toward hostility, greed, empathy, or kindness. We can notice these
differences, for instance, in the case of the Chekhov children, who all
had to respond to the same physical punishments of the father. At a
very early age Anton revealed a more ironic attitude, prone to laughing
at the world and seeing things with some detachment. This made it
easier for him to reassess his father once he was on his own. The other
children lacked this ability to distance themselves and were more
easily enmeshed in the father’s brutality. This would seem to indicate
something different in the way Anton’s brain was wired. Some
children are greedier than others—they display from early on a greater
need for attention. They tend to always see what is missing, what they
are not getting from others.
Second, our earliest experiences and attachment schemas (see
chapter 4) play a large role in shaping the attitude. We internalize the
voices of the mother and father figure. If they were very authoritarian
and judgmental, we will tend to be harsher on ourselves than others
and have a more critical bent toward everything we see. Equally
important are the experiences we have outside the family, as we get
older. When we love or admire someone, we tend to internalize a part
of their presence, and they shape how we see the world in a positive
way. This could be teachers, mentors, or peers. Negative and traumatic
experiences can have a constricting effect—they close our minds off to
anything that might possibly make us reexperience the original pain.
Our attitude is constantly being shaped by what happens to us, but
vestiges of our earliest attitude always live on. No matter how far he
progressed, Chekhov remained susceptible to feelings of depression
and self-loathing.
What we must understand about the attitude is not only how it
colors our perceptions but also how it actively determines what
happens to us in life—our health, our relations with people, and our
success. Our attitude has a self-fulfilling dynamic.
Look again at the scenario of the young man in Paris. Feeling
somewhat tense and insecure, he reacts defensively to mistakes that he
makes in learning the language. This makes it harder for him to learn,
which in turn makes meeting people more difficult, which makes him
feel more isolated. The more his energy lowers from depression, the
more this cycle perpetuates itself. His insecurities can also push people
away. The way we think about people tends to have a like effect upon
them. If we feel hostile and critical, we tend to inspire critical emotions
in other people. If we feel defensive, we make others feel defensive.
The attitude of the young man tends to lock him into this negative
dynamic.
The attitude of the young woman, on the other hand, triggers a
positive dynamic. She is able to learn the language and meet people,
all of which elevates her mood and energy levels, which makes her
more attractive and interesting to others, on and on.
Although attitudes come in many varieties and blends, we can
generally categorize them as negative and narrow or positive and
expansive. Those with a negative attitude tend to operate from a basic
position of fear toward life. They unconsciously want to limit what
they see and experience to give them more control. Those with a
positive attitude have a much less fearful approach. They are open to
new experiences, ideas, and emotions. If the attitude is like our lens on
the world, the negative attitude narrows the aperture of this lens, and
the positive variety expands it as far as possible. We might move
between these two poles, but generally we tend to see the world with a
more closed or open lens.
Your task as a student of human nature is twofold: First, you must
become aware of your own attitude and how it slants your perceptions.
It is hard to observe this in your day-to-day life because it is so close to
you, but there are ways to catch glimpses of it in action. You can see it
in how you judge people once they are out of your presence. Are you
quick to focus on their negative qualities and bad opinions, or are you
more generous and forgiving when it comes to their flaws? You will see
definite signs of your attitude in how you face adversity or resistance.
Are you quick to forget or gloss over any mistakes on your part? Do
you instinctively blame others for any bad things that happen to you?
Do you dread any kind of change? Do you tend to keep to routines and
to avoid anything unexpected or unusual? Do you get your back up
when someone challenges your ideas and assumptions?
You will also catch signs of it in how people respond to you,
particularly in a nonverbal way. Do you catch them being nervous or
defensive in your presence? Do you tend to attract people who play the
mother or father role in your life?
Once you have a good feel for the makeup of your own attitude, its
negative or positive bent, you have much greater power to alter it, to
move it more in the positive direction.
Second, you must not only be aware of the role of your attitude but
also believe in its supreme power to alter your circumstances. You are
not a pawn in a game controlled by others; you are an active player
who can move the pieces at will and even rewrite the rules. View your
health as largely dependent on your attitude. Feeling excited and open
to adventure, you can tap into energy reserves you did not know that
you had. The mind and the body are one, and your thoughts affect
your physical responses. People can recover much more quickly from
illness through sheer desire and willpower. You are not born with fixed
intelligence and inherent limits. See your brain as a miraculous organ
designed for continual learning and improvement, well into old age.
The rich neural connections in your brain, your creative powers, are
something you develop to the degree that you open yourself up to new
experiences and ideas. View problems and failures as means to learn
and toughen yourself up. You can get through anything with
persistence. View the way people treat you as largely flowing from your
own attitude, something you can control.
Do not be afraid to exaggerate the role of willpower. It is an
exaggeration with a purpose. It leads to a positive self-fulfilling
dynamic, and that is all you care about. See this shaping of your
attitude as your most important creation in life, and never leave it to
chance.
The Constricted (Negative) Attitude
Life is inherently chaotic and unpredictable. The human animal,
however, does not react well to uncertainty. People who feel
particularly weak and vulnerable tend to adopt an attitude toward life
that narrows what they experience so that they can reduce the
possibility of unexpected events. This negative, narrowing attitude
often has its origins in early childhood. Some children have little
comfort or support in facing a frightening world. They develop various
psychological strategies to constrict what they have to see and
experience. They build up elaborate defenses to keep out other
viewpoints. They become increasingly self-absorbed. In most
situations they come to expect bad things to happen, and their goals in
life revolve around anticipating and neutralizing bad experiences to
better control them. As they get older, this attitude becomes more
entrenched and narrower, making any kind of psychological growth
nearly impossible.
These attitudes have a self-sabotaging dynamic. Such people make
others feel the same negative emotion that dominates their attitude,
which helps confirm them in their beliefs about people. They do not
see the role that their own actions play, how they often are the
instigators of the negative response. They only see people persecuting
them, or bad luck overwhelming them. By pushing people away, they
make it doubly hard to have any success in life, and in their isolation
their attitude gets worse. They are caught in a vicious cycle.
The following are the five most common forms of the constricted
attitude. Negative emotions have a binding power—a person who is
angry is more prone to also feel suspicion, deep insecurities,
resentment, et cetera. And so we often find combinations of these
various negative attitudes, each one feeding and accentuating the
other. Your goal is to recognize the various signs of such attitudes that
exist in you in latent and weakened forms, and to root them out; to see
how they operate in a stronger version in other people, better
understanding their perspective on life; and to learn how to handle
people with such attitudes.
The Hostile Attitude. Some children exhibit a hostile attitude at
a very early age. They interpret weaning and the natural separation
from parents as hostile actions. Other children must deal with a parent
who likes to punish and inflict hurt. In both cases, the child looks out
on a world that seems fraught with hostility, and their answer is to
seek to control it by becoming the source of the hostility themselves.
At least then it is no longer so random and sudden. As they get older,
they become adept at stimulating anger and frustration in others,
which justifies their original attitude—“See, people are against me, I
am disliked, and for no apparent reason.”
In a relationship, a husband with a hostile attitude will accuse his
wife of not really loving him. If she protests and becomes defensive, he
will see this as a sign that she has to try hard to disguise the truth. If
she is intimidated into silence, he sees that as a sign that he was right
all along. In her confusion, she can easily begin to feel some hostility
on her part, confirming his opinion. People with this attitude have
many other subtle tricks up their sleeve for provoking the hostility
they secretly want to feel directed at them—withdrawing their
cooperation on a project at just the wrong moment, constantly being
late, doing a poor job, deliberately making an unfavorable first
impression. But they never see themselves as playing any kind of role
in instigating the reaction.
Their hostility permeates everything they do—the way they argue
and provoke (they are always right); the nasty undertone of their
jokes; the greediness with which they demand attention; the pleasure
they get out of criticizing others and seeing them fail. You can
recognize them by how they are easily moved to anger in these
situations. Their life, as they describe it, is full of battles, betrayals,
persecutions, but seemingly not originating from them. In essence,
they are projecting their own hostile feelings onto other people and are
primed to read them in almost any apparently innocent action. Their
goal in life is to feel persecuted and to desire some form of revenge.
Such types generally have career problems, as their anger and hostility
frequently flare up. This gives them something else to complain about
and a basis on which to blame the world for being against them.
If you notice signs of this attitude in yourself, such self-awareness is
a major step toward being able to get rid of it. You can also try a simple
experiment: Approach people you are meeting for the first time, or
only know peripherally, with various positive thoughts—“I like them,”
“They seem smart,” et cetera. None of this is verbalized, but you do
your best to feel such emotions. If they respond with something hostile
or defensive, then perhaps the world is truly against you. More than
likely you will not see anything that could be remotely construed as
negative. In fact, you will see the opposite. Clearly, then, the source of
any hostile response is you.
In dealing with the extremes of this type, struggle as best you can to
not respond with the antagonism they expect. Maintain your
neutrality. This will confound them and temporarily put a stop to the
game they are playing. They feed off your hostility, so do not give them
fuel.
The Anxious Attitude. These types anticipate all kinds of
obstacles and difficulties in any situation they face. With people, they
often expect some sort of criticism or even betrayal. All of this
stimulates unusual amounts of anxiety before the fact. What they
really fear is losing control of the situation. Their solution is to limit
what can possibly happen, to narrow the world they deal with. This
means limiting where they go and what they’ll attempt. In a
relationship, they will subtly dominate the domestic rituals and habits;
they will seem brittle and demand extra careful attention. This will
dissuade people from criticizing them. Everything must be on their
terms. At work they will be ferocious perfectionists and
micromanagers, eventually sabotaging themselves by trying to keep on
top of too many things. Once outside their comfort zone—the home or
the relationship they dominate—they become unusually fretful.
Sometimes they can disguise their need for control as a form of love
and concern. When Franklin Roosevelt came down with polio in 1921,
at the age of thirty-nine, his mother, Sara, did all she could to restrict
his life and keep him to one room in the house. He would have to give
up his political career and surrender to her care. Franklin’s wife,
Eleanor, knew him better. What he wanted and needed was to slowly
get back to something resembling his old life. It became a battle
between the mother and the daughter-in-law that Eleanor eventually
won. The mother was able to disguise her anxious attitude and need to
dominate her son through her apparent love, transforming him into a
helpless invalid.
Another disguise, similar to such love, is to seek to please and
cajole people in order to disarm any possible unpredictable and
unfriendly action. (See chapter 4, Toxic Types, The Pleaser.)
If you notice such tendencies in yourself, the best antidote is to
pour your energies into work. Focusing your attention outward into a
project of some sort will have a calming effect. As long as you rein in
your perfectionistic tendencies, you can channel your need to control
into something productive. With people, try to slowly open yourself to
their habits and pace of doing things, instead of the opposite. This can
show you that you have nothing to fear by loosening control.
Deliberately place yourself in the circumstances you most dread,
discovering that your fears are grossly exaggerated. You are slowly
introducing a bit of chaos into your overly ordered life.
In dealing with those with this attitude, try to not feel infected with
their anxiety, and instead try to provide the soothing influence they so
lacked in their earliest years. If you radiate calmness, your manner will
have greater effect than your words.
The Avoidant Attitude. People with this attitude see the world
through the lens of their insecurities, generally related to doubts about
their competence and intelligence. Perhaps as children they were
made to feel guilty and uncomfortable with any efforts to excel and
stand out from siblings; or they were made to feel bad about any kind
of mistake or possible misbehavior. What they came to dread most was
the judgment of their parents. As these people get older, their main
goal in life is to avoid any kind of responsibility or challenge in which
their self-esteem might be at stake and for which they can be judged. If
they do not try too hard in life, they cannot fail or be criticized.
To enact this strategy they will constantly seek escape routes,
consciously or unconsciously. They will find the perfect reason for
leaving a job early and changing careers, or breaking off a relationship.
In the middle of some high-stakes project they will suddenly develop
an illness that will cause them to leave. They are prone to all kinds of
psychosomatic maladies. Or they become alcoholics, addicts of some
sort, always falling off the wagon at the right time but blaming this on
the “disease” they have, and their bad upbringing that caused their
addiction. If it weren’t for alcohol, they could’ve been a great writer or
entrepreneur, so they say. Other strategies will include wasting time
and starting too late on something, always with some built-in excuse
for why that happened. They then cannot be blamed for the mediocre
results.
These types find it hard to commit to anything, for a good reason. If
they remained at a job or in a relationship, their flaws might become
too apparent to others. Better to slip away at the right moment and
maintain the illusion—to themselves and to others—of their possible
greatness, if only . . . Although they are generally motivated by the
great fear of failing and the judgments that ensue, they are also
secretly afraid of success—for with success come responsibilities and
the need to live up to them. Success might also trigger their early fears
about standing out and excelling.
You can easily recognize such people by their checkered careers and
their short-term personal relationships. They may try to disguise the
source of their problems by seeming saintly—they look down on
success and people who have to prove themselves. Often they will
present themselves as noble idealists, propagating ideas that will never
come to pass but that will add to the saintly aura they wish to project.
Having to enact ideals might expose them to criticism or failure, so
they choose those that are too lofty and unrealistic for the times they
live in. Do not be fooled by the holier-than-thou front they present.
Look at their actions, the lack of accomplishments, the great projects
they never start on, always with a good excuse.
If you notice traces of this attitude in yourself, a good strategy is to
take on a project of even the smallest scale, taking it all the way to
completion and embracing the prospect of failure. If you fail, you will
have already cushioned the blow because you anticipated it, and
inevitably it will not hurt as much as you had imagined. Your self-
esteem will rise because you finally tried something and finished it.
Once you diminish this fear, progress will be easy. You will want to try
again. And if you succeed, all the better. Either way, you win.
When you find others with this attitude, be very wary of forming
partnerships with them. They are masters at slipping away at the
wrong moment, at getting you to do all of the hard work and take the
blame if it fails. At all costs avoid the temptation to help or rescue
them from their negativity. They are too good at the avoidance game.
The Depressive Attitude. As children, these types did not feel
loved or respected by their parents. For helpless children, it is too
much to imagine that their parents could be wrong or flawed in their
parenting. Even if unloved, they still are dependent on them. And so
their defense is to often internalize the negative judgment and imagine
that they are indeed unworthy of being loved, that there is something
actually wrong with them. In this way they can maintain the illusion
that their parents are strong and competent. All of this occurs quite
unconsciously, but the feeling of being worthless will haunt such
people their entire lives. Deep down they will feel ashamed of who they
are and not really know why they feel this way.
As adults they will anticipate abandonment, loss, and sadness in
their experiences and see signs of potentially depressing things in the
world around them. They are secretly drawn to what is gloomy in the
world, to the seamy side of life. If they can manufacture some of the
depression they feel in this way, it at least is under their control. They
are consoled by the thought that the world is a dreary place. A strategy
they will employ throughout their lives is to temporarily withdraw
from life and from people. This will feed their depression and also
make it something they can manage to some extent, as opposed to
traumatic experiences imposed upon them.
An excellent example of this type was the talented German
composer and conductor Hans von Bülow (1830–1894). In 1855 von
Bülow met and fell in love with Cosima Liszt (1837–1930), the
charismatic daughter of the composer Franz Liszt. Cosima was drawn
to von Bülow’s air of sadness. He lived with his domineering and
hostile mother, and Cosima had great sympathy for him. She wanted
to rescue von Bülow and transform him into a great composer. They
were soon married. As time went on, Cosima could see that he felt
quite inferior in relation to her intelligence and strong will. Soon he
began to question her love for him. He continually withdrew from her
during his bouts of depression. When she became pregnant, he
suddenly developed some mysterious ailment that prevented him from
being with her. Without warning he could become quite cold.
Feeling unloved and neglected, she began an affair with the famous
composer Richard Wagner, who was a friend and colleague of von
Bülow’s. Cosima had the feeling that von Bülow had unconsciously
encouraged their affair. When she eventually left von Bülow to live
with Wagner, von Bülow bombarded her with letters, blaming himself
for what had happened; he was unworthy of her love. He would then
go on about the bad turn in his career, his various illnesses, his
suicidal tendencies. Although he criticized himself, she could not help
but feel guilty and depressed for somehow being responsible.
Recounting all of his woes seemed like his subtle way of wounding her.
She compared each letter to “a sword twisted in my heart.” And they
kept coming, year after year, until he remarried and repeated the same
pattern with his new wife.
These types often have a secret need to wound others, encouraging
behavior such as betrayal or criticism that will feed their depression.
They will also sabotage themselves if they experience any kind of
success, feeling deep down that they don’t deserve it. They will develop
blocks in their work, or take criticism to mean they should not
continue with their career. Depressive types can often attract people to
them, because of their sensitive nature; they stimulate the desire to
want to help them. But like von Bülow, they will start to criticize and
wound the ones who wish to help, then withdraw again. This push and
pull causes confusion, but once under their spell it is hard to disengage
from them without feeling guilty. They have a gift for making other
people feel depressed in their presence. This gives them more fuel to
feed off.
Most of us have depressive tendencies and moments. The best way
to handle them is to be aware of their necessity—they are our body’s
and mind’s way of compelling us to slow down, to lower our energies
and withdraw. Depressive cycles can serve positive purposes. The
solution is to realize their usefulness and temporary quality. The
depression you feel today will not be with you in a week, and you can
ride it out. If possible, find ways to elevate your energy level, which
will physically help lift you out of the mood. The best way to handle
recurrent depression is to channel your energies into work, especially
the arts. You are used to withdrawing and being alone; use such time
to tap into your unconscious. Externalize your unusual sensitivity and
your dark feelings into the work itself.
Never try to lift up depressive people by preaching to them about
the wonderfulness of life. Instead, it is best to go along with their
gloomy opinion of the world while subtly drawing them into positive
experiences that can elevate their moods and energy without any
direct appeal.
The Resentful Attitude. As children, these types never felt they
got enough parental love and affection—they were always greedy for
more attention. They carry this sense of dissatisfaction and
disappointment with them throughout their lives. They are never quite
getting the recognition they deserve. They are experts at scanning
people’s faces for signs of possible disrespect or disdain. They see
everything in relation to themselves; if someone has more than they
do, it is a sign of injustice, a personal affront. When they feel this lack
of respect and recognition, they do not explode in anger. They are
generally cautious and like to control their emotions. Instead, the hurt
incubates inside them, the sense of injustice growing stronger as they
reflect on this. They do not easily forget. At some point they will take
their revenge in some shrewdly plotted act of sabotage or passive
aggression.
Because they have a continual feeling of being wronged, they tend
to project this on to the world, seeing oppressors everywhere. In this
way, they often become the leader of those who feel disaffected and
oppressed. If such types get power, they can become quite vicious and
vengeful, finally able to vent their resentments on various victims. In
general, they carry themselves with an air of arrogance; they are above
others even if no one recognizes this. They carry their head a little too
high; they frequently have a slight smirk or look of disdain. As they get
older, they are prone to pick petty battles, unable to completely
contain their resentments that have accumulated over time. Their
bitter attitude pushes a lot of people away, and so they often end up
congregating with others who have this attitude, as their form of
community.
The Roman emperor Tiberius (42 BC–AD 37) is perhaps the most
classic example of this type. As a child, his tutor noticed something
wrong with the boy. “He is a pitcher molded with blood and bile,” the
tutor once wrote to a friend. The writer Suetonius, who knew Tiberius,
described him as follows: “He carried himself with his head held
proudly high. . . . He was almost always silent, never saying a word
except now and again. . . . And even then he did so with extreme
reluctance, at the same time always making a disdainful gesture with
his fingers.” Emperor Augustus, his stepfather, had to continually
apologize to the Senate for “his displeasing manners, full of
haughtiness.” Tiberius hated his mother—she never loved him enough.
He never felt appreciated by Augustus, or his soldiers, or the Roman
people. When he became emperor, he slowly and methodically took
revenge on those who he felt had slighted him, and such revenge
would be cold and cruel.
As he got older, he became increasingly unpopular. His enemies
were legion. Feeling the hatred of his subjects, he retired to the island
of Capri, where he spent the last eleven years of his reign, almost
completely avoiding Rome. He was known to repeat to others in his
last years, “After me, let fire destroy the earth!” At his death Rome
exploded with celebration, the crowds voicing their feelings with the
famous phrase “Into the Tiber [River] with Tiberius!”
If you notice resentful tendencies within yourself, the best antidote
is to learn to let go of hurts and disappointments in life. It is better to
explode into anger in the moment, even it if it’s irrational, than to stew
on slights that you have probably hallucinated or exaggerated. People
are generally indifferent to your fate, not as antagonistic as you
imagine. Very few of their actions are really directed at you. Stop
seeing everything in personal terms. Respect is something that must
be earned through your achievements, not something given to you
simply for being human. You must break out of the resentful cycle by
becoming more generous toward people and human nature.
In dealing with such types, you must exercise supreme caution.
Although they might smile and seem pleasant, they are actually
scrutinizing you for any possible insult. You can recognize them by
their history of past battles and sudden breaks with people, as well as
how easily they judge others. You might try to slowly gain their trust
and lower their suspicions; but be aware that the longer you are
around them, the more fuel you will give them for something to resent,
and their response can be quite vicious. Better to avoid this type if
possible.
The Expansive (Positive) Attitude
Some fifty years ago, many medical experts began to think of health in
a new and revolutionary way. Instead of focusing on specific problems,
such as digestion or skin ailments or the condition of the heart, they
decided it was much better to look at the human body as a whole. If
people improved their diet and their exercise habits, this would have a
beneficial effect on all of the organs, because the body is an
interconnected whole.
This seems obvious to us now, but such an organic way of thinking
has great application to our psychological health as well. Now more
than ever people focus on their specific problems—their depression,
their lack of motivation, their social inadequacies, their boredom. But
what governs all of these seemingly separate problems is our attitude,
how we view the world on a daily basis. It is how we see and interpret
events. Improve the overall attitude and everything else will elevate as
well—creative powers, the ability to handle stress, confidence levels,
relationships with people. It was an idea first promulgated in the
1890s by the great American psychologist William James, but it
remains a revolution waiting to happen.
A negative, constricting attitude is designed to narrow down the
richness of life at the cost of our creative powers, our sense of
fulfillment, our social pleasures, and our vital energies. Without
wasting another day under such conditions, your goal is to break out,
to expand what you see and what you experience. You want to open
the aperture of the lens as wide as you can. Here is your road map.
How to view the world: See yourself as an explorer. With the
gift of consciousness, you stand before a vast and unknown universe
that we humans have just begun to investigate. Most people prefer to
cling to certain ideas and principles, many of them adopted early on in
life. They are secretly afraid of what is unfamiliar and uncertain. They
replace curiosity with conviction. By the time they are thirty, they act
as if they know everything they need to know.
As an explorer you leave all that certainty behind you. You are in
continual search of new ideas and new ways of thinking. You see no
limits to where your mind can roam, and you are not concerned with
suddenly appearing inconsistent or developing ideas that directly
contradict what you believed a few months before. Ideas are things to
play with. If you hold on to them for too long, they become something
dead. You are returning to your childlike spirit and curiosity, from
before you had an ego and being right was more important than
connecting to the world. You explore all forms of knowledge, from all
cultures and time periods. You want to be challenged.
By opening the mind in this way, you will unleash unrealized
creative powers, and you will give yourself great mental pleasure. As
part of this, be open to exploring the insights that come from your own
unconscious, as revealed in your dreams, in moments of tiredness, and
in the repressed desires that leak out in certain moments. You have
nothing to be afraid of or to repress there. The unconscious is merely
one more realm for you to freely explore.
How to view adversity: Our life inevitably involves obstacles,
frustrations, pain, and separations. How we come to handle such
moments in our early years plays a large role in the development of
our overall attitude toward life. For many people, such difficult
moments inspire them to restrict what they see and experience. They
go through life trying to avoid any kind of adversity, even if this means
never really challenging themselves or getting much success in their
careers. Instead of learning from negative experiences, they want to
repress them. Your goal is to move in the opposite direction, to
embrace all obstacles as learning experiences, as means to getting
stronger. In this way you embrace life itself.
By 1928 the actress Joan Crawford had a reasonably successful
career in Hollywood, but she was feeling increasingly frustrated by the
limited roles she was receiving. She saw other less talented actresses
vault ahead of her. Perhaps the problem was that she was not assertive
enough. She decided she needed to voice her opinion to one of the
most powerful production chiefs on the MGM lot, Irving Thalberg.
Little did she realize that Thalberg viewed this as impudence and that
he was vindictive by nature. He therefore cast her in a Western,
knowing that was the last thing she wanted and that such a fate was a
dead end for many an actress.
Joan had learned her lesson and decided to embrace her fate. She
made herself love the genre. She became an expert rider. She read up
on the Old West and became fascinated by its folklore. If that’s what it
took to get ahead, she decided to become the leading actress of
Westerns. At the very least this would expand her acting skills. This
became her lifelong attitude toward work and the supreme challenges
an actress faced in Hollywood, where careers were generally very
short. Every setback was a chance to grow and develop.
In 1946 twenty-year-old Malcolm Little (later known as Malcolm X)
began serving an eight-to-ten-year prison sentence for burglary.
Prison generally has the effect of hardening the criminal and
narrowing his already narrow view of the world. Instead, Malcolm
decided to reassess his life. He began to spend time in the prison
library and fell in love with books and learning. As he saw it now,
prison afforded him the best possible means of changing himself and
his attitude toward life. With so much time on his hands, he could
study and earn himself a degree. He could develop the discipline he
had always been missing. He could train himself to become an expert
speaker. He embraced the experience without any bitterness and
emerged stronger than ever. Once he left prison, he saw any difficulty,
large or small, as a means to test and toughen himself.
Although adversity and pain are generally beyond your control, you
have the power to determine your response and the fate that comes
from that.
How to view yourself: As we get older, we tend to place limits on
how far we can go in life. Over the years we internalize the criticisms
and doubts of others. By accepting what we think to be the limits of
our intelligence and creative powers, we create a self-fulfilling
dynamic. They become our limits. You do not need to be so humble
and self-effacing in this world. Such humility is not a virtue but is
rather a value that people promote to help keep you down. Whatever
you are doing now, you are in fact capable of much more, and by
thinking that, you will create a very different dynamic.
In ancient times, many great leaders, such as Alexander the Great
and Julius Caesar, felt that they were descended from gods and part
divine. Such self-belief would translate into high levels of confidence
that others would feed off and recognize. It became a self-fulfilling
prophecy. You do not need to indulge in such grandiose thoughts, but
feeling that you are destined for something great or important will give
you a degree of resilience when people oppose or resist you. You will
not internalize the doubts that come from such moments. You will
have an enterprising spirit. You will continually try new things, even
taking risks, confident in your ability to bounce back from failures and
feeling destined to succeed.
When Chekhov had the epiphany about the ultimate freedom he
could create for himself, he had what the American psychologist
Abraham Maslow called a “peak experience.” These are moments in
which you are lifted out of the daily grind and you sense that there is
something larger and more sublime in life that you have been missing.
In the case of Chekhov it was sparked by a crisis, by loneliness, and it
led to the sensation of complete acceptance of people and the world
around him. These moments can come from exerting yourself past
what you thought were your limits; they can come from overcoming
great obstacles, climbing a mountain, taking a trip to a very different
culture, or the deep bonding that comes from any form of love. You
want to deliberately go in search of such moments, stimulate them if
you can. They have the effect, as they did with Chekhov, of altering
your attitude for good. They expand what you think about your
possibilities and about life itself, and the memory is something you
will always return to for supreme inspiration.
In general, this way of looking at yourself runs counter to the cool,
ironic attitude that many people like to assume in the postmodern
world—never too ambitious, never too positive about things or life,
always affecting a nonchalant and very false humility. Such types see
the positive, expansive attitude as Pollyannaish and simpleminded.
But really their cool attitude is a clever mask for their great fears—of
embarrassing themselves, of failing, of showing too much emotion. As
with all such trends in culture, the cool attitude will eventually fade
away, a remnant of the early twenty-first century. Moving in the
opposite direction, you are much more progressive.
How to view your energy and health: Although we are all
mortal and subject to illnesses beyond our control, we must recognize
the role that willpower plays in our health. We have all felt this to
some degree or another. When we fall in love or feel excited by our
work, suddenly we have more energy and recover quickly from any
illnesses. When we are depressed or unusually stressed, we become
prey to all kinds of ailments. Our attitude plays an enormous role in
our health, one that science has begun to explore and will examine in
more depth in the coming decades. In general, you can safely push
yourself beyond what you think are your physical limits by feeling
excited and challenged by a project or endeavor. People get old and
prematurely age by accepting physical limits to what they can do,
making it a self-fulfilling cycle. Those who age well continue to engage
in physical activity, only moderately adjusted. You have wellsprings of
energy and health you have yet to tap into.
How to view other people: First you must try to get rid of the
natural tendency to take what people do and say as something
personally directed at you, particularly if what they say or do is
unpleasant. Even when they criticize you or act against your interests,
more often than not it stems from some deep earlier pain they are
reliving; you become the convenient target of frustrations and
resentments that have been accumulating over the years. They are
projecting their own negative feelings. If you can view people this way,
you will find it easier to not react and get upset or become embroiled
in some petty battle. If the person is truly malicious, by not becoming
emotional yourself you will be in a better place to plot the proper
countermove. You will save yourself from accumulating hurts and
bitter feelings.
See people as facts of nature. They come in all varieties, like flowers
or rocks. There are fools and saints and sociopaths and egomaniacs
and noble warriors; there are the sensitive and the insensitive. They all
play a role in our social ecology. This does not mean we cannot
struggle to change the harmful behavior of the people who are close to
us or in our sphere of influence; but we cannot reengineer human
nature, and even if we somehow succeeded, the result could be a lot
worse than what we have. You must accept diversity and the fact that
people are what they are. That they are different from you should not
be felt as a challenge to your ego or self-esteem but as something to
welcome and embrace.
From this more neutral stance, you can then try to understand the
people you deal with on a deeper level, as Chekhov did with his father.
The more you do this, the more tolerant you will tend to become
toward people and toward human nature in general. Your open,
generous spirit will make your social interactions much smoother, and
people will be drawn to you.
—
Finally, think of the modern concept of attitude in terms of the ancient
concept of the soul. The concept of the soul is found in almost all
indigenous cultures and in premodern civilizations. It originally
referred to external spiritual forces permeating the universe and
contained in the individual human in the form of the soul. The soul is
not the mind or the body but rather the overall spirit we embody, our
way of experiencing the world. It is what makes a person an
individual, and the concept of the soul was related to the earliest ideas
of personality. Under this concept, a person’s soul could have depths.
Some people possessed a greater degree of this spiritual force, had
more of a soul. Others had a personality lacking in this force and were
somewhat soulless.
This has great relevance to our idea of the attitude. In our modern
conception of the soul, we replace this external spiritual force with life
itself, or what can be described as the life force. Life is inherently
complex and unpredictable, its powers far beyond anything we can
ever completely comprehend or control. This life force is reflected in
nature and human society by the remarkable diversity we find in both
realms.
On the one side we find people whose goal in life is to inhibit and
control this life force. This leads them to self-destructive strategies.
They have to limit their thoughts and remain true to ideas that have
lost their relevance. They have to limit what they experience.
Everything is about them and their petty needs and personal
problems. They often become obsessed with a particular goal that
dominates all of their thoughts—such as making money or getting
attention. All of this renders them dead inside as they close themselves
off to the richness of life and the variety of human experience. In this
way they veer toward the soulless, an internal lack of depth and
flexibility.
Your goal must be to always move in the opposite direction. You
rediscover the curiosity you once had as a child. Everything and
everyone is a source of fascination to you. You keep learning,
continually expanding what you know and what you experience. With
people you feel generous and tolerant, even with your enemies and
with those trapped in the soulless condition. You do not enslave
yourself to bitterness or rancor. Instead of blaming others or
circumstances, you see the role that your own attitude and actions
played in any failure. You adapt to circumstances instead of
complaining about them. You accept and embrace uncertainty and the
unexpected as valuable qualities of life. In this way, your soul expands
to the contours of life itself and fills itself with this life force.
Learn to measure the people you deal with by the depth of their
soul, and if possible associate as much as you can with those of the
expansive variety.
This is why the same external events or circumstances affect no
two people alike; even with perfectly similar surroundings every
one lives in a world of his own. . . . The world in which a man lives
shapes itself chiefly by the way in which he looks at it, and so it
proves different to different men; to one it is barren, dull, and
superficial; to another rich, interesting, and full of meaning. On
hearing of the interesting events which have happened in the
course of a man’s experience, many people will wish that similar
things had happened in their lives too, completely forgetting that
they should be envious rather of the mental aptitude which lent
those events the significance they possess when he describes them.
—Arthur Schopenhauer
P
9
Confront Your Dark Side
The Law of Repression
eople are rarely who they seem to be. Lurking beneath their
polite, affable exterior is inevitably a dark, shadow side
consisting of the insecurities and the aggressive, selfish impulses they
repress and carefully conceal from public view. This dark side leaks
out in behavior that will baffle and harm you. Learn to recognize the
signs of the Shadow before they become toxic. See people’s overt
traits—toughness, saintliness, et cetera—as covering up the opposite
quality. You must become aware of your own dark side. In being
conscious of it you can control and channel the creative energies that
lurk in your unconscious. By integrating the dark side into your
personality, you will be a more complete human and will radiate an
authenticity that will draw people to you.
The Dark Side
On November 5, 1968, Republican Richard Nixon accomplished
perhaps the greatest comeback in American political history, narrowly
defeating his Democratic rival, Hubert Humphrey, to become the
thirty-seventh president of the United States. Only eight years earlier
he had lost his first attempt at the presidency to John F. Kennedy in a
devastating fashion. The election was extremely close, but clearly some
voting shenanigans in Illinois, orchestrated by the Democratic Party
machine in Chicago, played a role in his defeat. Two years later he lost
badly in the race to become the governor of California. Bitter at how
the press had hounded and provoked him throughout the race, he
addressed the media the day after this defeat and concluded by saying,
“Just think of how much you’re going to be missing. You won’t have
Nixon to kick around anymore, because, gentlemen, this is my last
press conference.”
The response to these words was overwhelmingly negative. He was
accused of wallowing in self-pity. ABC News ran a half-hour special
called “The Political Obituary of Richard Nixon.” A Time magazine
article on him concluded: “Barring a miracle, Richard Nixon can never
hope to be elected to any political office again.”
By all accounts his political career should have been over in 1962.
But Richard Nixon’s life had been an endless series of crises and
setbacks that had only made him more determined. As a young man
his dream was to attend an Ivy League school, the key to attaining
power in America. Young Richard was exceptionally ambitious. His
family, however, was relatively poor and could not afford to pay for
such an education. He overcame this seemingly insuperable barrier by
transforming himself into a superior student, earning the nickname
“Iron Butt” for his inhuman work habits, and managed to land a
scholarship to the law school at Duke University. To keep the
scholarship he had to remain at the top of his class, which he did
through the kind of hard work few others could endure.
After several years in the U.S. Senate, in 1952 Dwight D.
Eisenhower had chosen him to be his running mate as vice president
on the Republican ticket, but quickly regretted the choice. Nixon had
kept a secret fund from the Republican Party that he had supposedly
used for private purposes. In fact he was innocent of the charges, but
Eisenhower did not feel comfortable with him, and this was the excuse
to get rid of him. Cutting him loose in this way would almost certainly
ruin Nixon’s political career. Once again he rose to the challenge,
appearing on live television and delivering the speech of his life,
defending himself against the charges. It was so effective, the public
clamored for Eisenhower to keep him on the ticket. He went on to
serve eight years as vice president.
And so, the crushing defeats of 1960 and 1962 would again be the
means of toughening himself up and resurrecting his career. He was
like a cat with nine lives. Nothing could kill him. He laid low for a few
years, then came charging back for the 1968 election. He was now the
“new Nixon,” more relaxed and affable, a man who liked bowling and
corny jokes. And having learned all the lessons from his various
defeats, he ran one of the smoothest and savviest campaigns in
modern history and made all of his enemies and doubters eat crow
when he defeated Humphrey.
In becoming president, he had seemingly reached the apex of
power. But in his mind there was yet one more challenge to overcome,
perhaps the greatest of all. Nixon’s liberal enemies saw him as a
political animal, one who would resort to any kind of trickery to win an
election. To the East Coast elites who hated him, he was the hick from
Whittier, California, too obvious in his ambition. Nixon was
determined to prove them all wrong. He was not who they thought he
was. He was an idealist at heart, not a ruthless politician. His beloved
mother, Hannah, was a devout Quaker who had instilled in him the
importance of treating all people equally and promoting peace in the
world. He wanted to craft a legacy as one of the greatest presidents in
history. For the sake of his mother, who had died earlier that year, he
wanted to embody her Quaker ideals and show his detractors how
deeply they had misread him.
His political icons were men like French president Charles de
Gaulle, whom he had met and greatly admired. De Gaulle had crafted
a persona that radiated authority and love of country. Nixon would do
the same. In his notebooks he began to refer to himself as “RN”—the
world leader version of himself. RN would be strong, resolute,
compassionate yet completely masculine. The America he was to lead
was riven by antiwar protests, riots in the cities, a rising crime rate. He
would end the war and work toward world peace; at home he would
bring prosperity to all Americans, stand for law and order, and instill a
sense of decency the country had lost. Accomplishing this, he would
take his place among the presidents he revered—Abraham Lincoln and
Woodrow Wilson. And he would will this into existence, as he always
had done.
In his first months he moved quickly. He assembled a top-notch
cabinet, including the brilliant Henry Kissinger as his national security
adviser. For his personal staff he preferred clean-cut young men who
would be fiercely loyal to him and serve as tools to realize his great
ambitions for America. This would include Bob Haldeman, his chief of
staff; John Ehrlichman, in charge of domestic policy; John Dean, the
White House counsel; and Charles Colson, a White House aide.
He didn’t want intellectuals around him; he wanted go-getters. But
Nixon was not naive. He understood that in politics loyalty was
ephemeral. And so early on in his administration he installed a secret
voice-activated taping system throughout the White House that only a
select few would know about. In this way he could keep discreet tabs
on his staff and preemptively discover any possible turncoats or
leakers among them. It would provide evidence he could use later on if
anyone tried to misrepresent any conversations with him. And best of
all, once his presidency was over, the edited tapes could be used to
demonstrate his greatness as a leader, the clear and rational way he
came to his decisions. The tapes would secure his legacy.
As the first few years went by, Nixon worked to execute his plan. He
was an active president. He signed bills to protect the environment,
the health of workers, and the rights of consumers. On the foreign
front, he struggled to wind down the war in Vietnam, with limited
success. But soon he laid the groundwork for his first visit to the Soviet
Union and his celebrated trip to China and signed into law an
agreement with the Soviets to limit the proliferation of nuclear
weapons. This was just the start of what he would bring about.
And yet despite the relative smoothness of these first years,
something strange began to stir within Richard Nixon. He could not
shake these feelings of anxiety, something he had been prone to his
entire life. It started to come out in his closed-door meetings with his
personal staff, late at night over some drinks. Nixon would begin to
share with them stories from his colorful past, and in the process he
would go over some of his old political wounds, and bitterness would
rise up from deep within.
He was particularly obsessed with the Alger Hiss case. Alger Hiss
was an important staffer in the State Department who in 1948 had
been accused of being a communist spy. Hiss denied the charges.
Dapper and elegant, he was the darling of the liberals. Nixon, at the
time a junior congressman from California, smelled a phony. While
other congressmen decided to leave Hiss alone, Nixon, representing
the House Un-American Activities Committee, kept investigating. In
an interview with Hiss, as Nixon reminded him of the law against
perjury, Hiss replied, “I am familiar with the law. I attended Harvard
Law School. I believe yours was Whittier?” (a reference to the lowly
undergraduate college Nixon had attended).
Relentless in his pursuit of Hiss, Nixon was successful in getting
him indicted for perjury, and Hiss went to prison. This victory made
Nixon famous but, as he told his staff members, it earned him the
eternal wrath of East Coast elites, who saw him as the unctuous
upstart from Whittier. In the 1950s these elites, many of them Harvard
graduates, quietly kept Nixon and his wife, Pat, out of their social
circles, limiting Nixon’s political contacts. Their allies in the press
ridiculed him mercilessly for any misstatement or possible misdeed.
Yes, Nixon was no angel. He liked winning, but the hypocrisy of these
liberals galled him—Bobby Kennedy was the king of political dirty
tricks, and yet what reporter publicized this?
As he went deeper and deeper into these stories night after night
with his staff, he reminded them that this past was still very much
alive. The old enemies were still at work against him. There was CBS
correspondent Daniel Schorr, who seemed to hate Nixon with unusual
zeal. His reports from Vietnam always managed to highlight the worst
aspects of the war and make Nixon look bad. There was Katharine
Graham, the owner of the Washington Post, a newspaper that seemed
to have a personal vendetta against him going back many years. She
was the doyenne of the Georgetown social scene, which had snubbed
him and Pat for years. Worst of all, there was Larry O’Brien, now the
chairman of the Democratic Party, who as a key adviser in the
Kennedy administration had managed to get Nixon audited by the
IRS. As Nixon saw it, O’Brien was the evil genius of politics, a man
who would do anything to prevent Nixon’s reelection in 1972.
His enemies were everywhere and they were relentless—planting
negative stories in the press, procuring embarrassing leaks from
within the bureaucracy, spying on him, ready to pounce on the
slightest whiff of scandal. And what, he would ask his staff, are we
doing on our side? If his team did nothing to respond to this, they
would have only themselves to blame. His legacy, his ambitions were
at stake. As the stories began to pile up of antiwar demonstrations and
leaks about his administration’s Vietnam War effort, Nixon became
red-hot with anger and frustration, the talk with his staff heating up
on both sides. Once, as Colson talked about getting revenge on some
particularly nettlesome opponents, Nixon chimed in, “One day we will
get them—we’ll get them on the ground where we want them. And
then we’ll stick our heels in, step on them hard and twist—right,
Chuck, right?”
When informed that many of the staff at the Bureau of Labor
Statistics were Jews, he felt that was probably the reason for some bad
economic numbers coming from there. “The government is full of
Jews,” he told Haldeman. “Most Jews are disloyal.” They were the
mainstay of the East Coast establishment that worked so hard against
him. Another time he told Haldeman, “Please get me the names of the
Jews, you know, the big Jewish contributors to the Democrats. . . .
Could we please investigate some of the cocksuckers?” Auditing them
would be in order. He had other harsh ideas for how to hurt Katharine
Graham and embarrass Daniel Schorr.
Nixon also began to feel increasingly anxious about his public
image, so critical to his legacy. He badgered his staff, and even Henry
Kissinger, to promote to the press his strong leadership style. In
interviews, they should refer to him as Mr. Peace, and Kissinger
should not be getting so much credit. He wanted to know what the
elites at the parties in Georgetown were saying about him. Were they
finally changing their minds in any way about Richard Nixon?
Despite his nervousness, by 1972 it was clear that events were
lining up well for him. His Democratic opponent in his reelection bid
would be Senator George McGovern, a diehard liberal. Nixon was
ahead in the polls, but he wanted much more. He wanted a complete
landslide and mandate from the public. Certain that men like O’Brien
had some tricks up their sleeve, he began to rail at Haldeman to do
some spying and get some dirt on the Democrats. He wanted
Haldeman to assemble a team of “nutcutters” to do the necessary dirty
work with maximum efficiency. He would leave the details up to him.
Much to his chagrin, in June of that year Nixon read in the
Washington Post of a botched break-in at the Watergate Hotel, in
which a group of men had attempted to plant bugs in the offices of
Larry O’Brien. This led to the arrest of three men—James McCord, E.
Howard Hunt, and G. Gordon Liddy—with ties to the committee for
the reelection of President Nixon. The break-in was so badly done that
Nixon suspected it was all a setup by the Democrats. This was not the
efficient team of nutcutters he had advocated.
A few days later, on June 23, he discussed the break-in with
Haldeman. The FBI was investigating the case. Some of the men
arrested were former CIA operatives. Perhaps, Haldeman proposed,
they could get top brass in the CIA to put pressure on the FBI to drop
the investigation. Nixon approved. He told Haldeman, “I’m not going
to get that involved.” Haldeman responded, “No, sir. We don’t want
you to.” But Nixon then added, “Play it tough. That’s the way they play
and that’s the way we’re going to play it.” Nixon put his counsel, John
Dean, in charge of the internal investigation, with clear instructions
that he should stonewall the FBI and cover up any connections to the
White House. Anyway, Nixon had never directly ordered the break-in.
Watergate was a trifle, nothing to tarnish his reputation. It would fade
away, along with all the other dirty political deeds never discovered or
recorded in the history books.
And indeed he was correct, for the time being—the public paid little
attention to the break-in. Nixon went on to have one of the biggest
landslides in electoral history. He swept every state except
Massachusetts and the District of Columbia. He even won over a large
percentage of Democrats. He now had four more years to solidify his
legacy and nothing to stop him. His popularity numbers had never
been higher.
Watergate, however, kept coming back to life and would not leave
him alone. In January 1973, the Senate decided to launch an
investigation. In March, McCord finally spilled the beans, implicating
various members of the White House staff in the ordering of the
break-in. Hunt began demanding hush money to not reveal what he
knew. The way out of this mess was simple and clear—hire an outside
lawyer to do an internal investigation of the break-in, with the full
cooperation of Nixon and his team, and bring all the details to light.
Nixon’s reputation would suffer, some would go to prison, but it would
keep him politically alive, and he was the master of coming back from
the dead.
Nixon, however, could not take such a step. There would be too
much immediate damage. The thought of coming clean about what he
knew and had ordered frightened him to death. In meetings with Dean
he continued to discuss the cover-up, even suggesting where they
could come up with hush money. Dean cautioned him to not get so
involved, but Nixon seemed oddly fascinated by the growing mess he
had created, and unable to pull himself away.
Soon he was forced to fire Haldeman and Ehrlichman, both of
whom had been deeply implicated in the break-in. It was an ordeal to
get him to personally fire them, and when it came to delivering the
news to Ehrlichman, he broke down and sobbed. But it seemed that
nothing he did could stop the momentum of the Watergate
investigation, which got closer and closer to Nixon, making him feel
like a trapped rat.
On July 19, 1973, he received the worst news of all: the Senate
committee investigating Watergate had learned of the secret taping
system installed in the White House, and they demanded that the
tapes be handed over to them as evidence. All Nixon could think about
was the intense embarrassment that would ensue if the tapes went
public. They would make him the laughingstock of the world. Think of
the language that he had used and the many harsh things he had
advocated. His image, his legacy, all the ideals he had striven to
realize, it would all be ruined in one fell stroke. He thought of his
mother and his own family—they had never heard him speak as he had
done in the privacy of his own office. It was as if he were another
person on those tapes. Alexander Haig, who was now his chief of staff,
told Nixon he had to tear out the taping system and destroy the tapes
immediately, before receiving an official subpoena.
Nixon seemed paralyzed: Destroying the tapes would be an
admission of guilt; perhaps the tapes would exonerate him, as they
would prove he had never directly ordered the break-in. But the
thought of any of these tapes becoming public terrified him. He went
back and forth on this in his mind, but in the end he decided to not
destroy them. By invoking executive privilege he would resist handing
them over.
Finally, as pressure mounted, in April 1974 Nixon decided to
release edited transcripts of the tapes in the form of a 1,200-page book
and hope for the best. The public was horrified by what it read. Yes,
many had thought him slippery and devious, but the forceful language,
the swearing, the sometimes hysterical, paranoid tone of his
conversation, and the utter lack of compunction or hesitation in
ordering various illegal acts revealed a side of Nixon they had never
suspected. Even members of his family were shocked. When it came to
Watergate, he seemed very weak and indecisive, not at all the de
Gaulle image he wanted to project. He never once showed the slightest
desire to get at the truth and punish the wrongdoers. Where was the
man of law and order?
On July 24 came the final blow: the Supreme Court ordered him to
hand over the tapes themselves, and among them would be the
recorded conversation of June 23, 1972, in which he had approved of
using the CIA to quash the FBI investigation. This was the “smoking
gun” that revealed his involvement in the cover-up from early on.
Nixon was doomed, and although it was against everything he believed
in, by early August he decided to resign.
The morning after he delivered his resignation speech to the
country, Nixon addressed his staff one last time, and fighting to
control his emotions, he concluded, “Never get discouraged, never be
petty; always remember, others may hate you, but those who hate you
don’t win unless you hate them, and then you destroy yourself.” Along
with his family, he then got into the helicopter that was to take him
into political exile.
•   •   •
Interpretation: For those who worked closely with Richard Nixon,
the man was an enigma. According to his chief speechwriter, Ray
Price, there were two Nixons, one light, one dark. The light Nixon was
“exceptionally considerate, exceptionally caring, sentimental, generous
of spirit, kind.” The dark Nixon was “angry, vindictive, ill-tempered,
mean-spirited.” He saw both sides as being “at constant war with one
another.” But perhaps the most perceptive observer of Nixon, the one
closest to figuring out the enigma, was Henry Kissinger, who made a
point of studying him closely so that he could manage and even play
him for his own purposes. And according to Kissinger, the key to
Nixon and his split personality must somehow lie in his childhood.
“Can you imagine,” Kissinger once observed, “what this man would
have been like if somebody had loved him?”
As an infant, Nixon seemed to be unusually needy. He was a
notorious crybaby; it took great effort to soothe him, and he was
continually bursting into sobs. He wanted more attention, more
fussing after him, and he was quite manipulative if he did not get these
things. His parents did not like this aspect of their child. Growing up
in the pioneer days of southern California, they preferred to have a
stoic, self-reliant child. Nixon’s father could be physically abusive and
cold. His mother was more caring but frequently depressed and very
moody. She had to deal with the business failures of her husband and
two sickly brothers of Richard who died at young ages. She had to
frequently leave Richard alone for months to attend to his brothers,
which Richard must have experienced as some kind of abandonment.
In dealing with his difficult parents, the personality of Nixon was
formed. Seeking to overcome and disguise his vulnerabilities, he
created a persona that served him well, first with his family and later
with the public. For this persona he accentuated his own strengths and
developed new ones. He became supremely tough, resilient, fierce,
decisive, rational, and not someone to mess with, particularly in
debate. (According to Kissinger, “There was nothing he feared more
than to be thought weak.”) But the weak and vulnerable child within
does not miraculously disappear. If its needs have never been met or
dealt with, its presence sinks into the unconscious, into the shadows of
the personality, waiting to come out in strange ways. It becomes the
dark side.
With Nixon, whenever he experienced stress or unusual levels of
anxiety, this dark side would stir from deep within in the form of
potent insecurities (“nobody appreciates me”), suspicions (enemies
everywhere), sudden outbursts and tantrums, and powerful desires to
manipulate and harm those he believed had crossed him.
Nixon repressed and denied this side of himself with vehemence,
even up to the very end in his last words to his staff. He frequently told
people he never cried, or held grudges, or cared what others thought of
him—the opposite of the truth. For much of the time he played his role
well as RN. But when the shadow stirred, strange behavior emerged,
giving people who saw him on a regular basis the impression they were
indeed dealing with two Nixons. To Kissinger, it was like seeing the
unloved child come back to life.
Nixon’s dark side finally became something tangible in form of the
tapes. Nixon knew that everything he said was being recorded, and yet
he never held back or filtered what he was saying. He insulted close
friends behind their backs, indulged in wild bouts of paranoia and
revenge fantasies, waffled over the simplest decisions. He was a man
who greatly feared the slightest internal leak and suspected betrayal in
almost anyone around him, and yet he entrusted his fate to tapes that
he believed would never be made public in an unedited form. Even
when it seemed that they could become public and he was advised to
destroy them, he held on to them, mesmerized by this other Nixon that
had emerged. It was as if he secretly desired his own punishment, the
child and the dark side taking revenge for being so deeply denied.
Understand: The story of Nixon is closer to you and your reality
than you might like to imagine. Like Nixon, you have crafted a public
persona that accentuates your strengths and conceals your
weaknesses. Like him, you have repressed the less socially acceptable
traits you naturally possessed as a child. You have become terribly nice
and pleasant. And like him, you have a dark side, one that you are
loath to admit or examine. It contains your deepest insecurities, your
secret desires to hurt people, even those close to you, your fantasies of
revenge, your suspicions about others, your hunger for more attention
and power. This dark side haunts your dreams. It leaks out in
moments of inexplicable depression, unusual anxiety, touchy moods,
sudden neediness, and suspicious thoughts. It comes out in offhand
comments you later regret.
And sometimes, as with Nixon, it even leads to destructive
behavior. You will tend to blame circumstances or other people for
these moods and behavior, but they keep recurring because you are
unaware of their source. Depression and anxiety come from not being
your complete self, from always playing a role. It requires great energy
to keep this dark side at bay, but at times unpleasant behavior leaks
out as a way to release the inner tension.
Your task as a student of human nature is to recognize and examine
the dark side of your character. Once subjected to conscious scrutiny,
it loses its destructive power. If you can learn to detect the signs of it in
yourself (see the following sections for help on this), you can channel
this darker energy into productive activity. You can turn your
neediness and vulnerability into empathy. You can channel your
aggressive impulses into worthwhile causes and into your work. You
can admit your ambitions, your desires for power, and not act so
guiltily and stealthily. You can monitor your suspicious tendencies and
the projection of your own negative emotions onto others. You can see
that selfish and harmful impulses dwell within you as well, that you
are not as angelic or strong as you imagine. With this awareness will
come balance and greater tolerance for others.
It might seem that only those who project continual strength and
saintliness can become successful, but that is not at all the case. By
playing a role to such an extent, by straining to live up to ideals that
are not real, you will emit a phoniness that others pick up. Look at
great public figures such as Abraham Lincoln and Winston Churchill.
They possessed the ability to examine their flaws and mistakes and
laugh at themselves. They came across as authentically human, and
this was the source of their charm. The tragedy of Nixon was that he
had immense political talent and intelligence; if only he had also
possessed the ability to look within and measure the darker sides to
his character. It is the tragedy that confronts us all to the extent that
we remain in deep denial.
This longing to commit a madness stays with us throughout our
lives. Who has not, when standing with someone by an abyss or
high up on a tower, had a sudden impulse to push the other over?
And how is it that we hurt those we love although we know that
remorse will follow? Our whole being is nothing but a fight against
the dark forces within ourselves. To live is to war with trolls in
heart and soul. To write is to sit in judgment on oneself.
—Henrik Ibsen
Keys to Human Nature
If we think about the people we know and see on a regular basis, we
would have to agree that they are usually quite pleasant and agreeable.
For the most part, they seem pleased to be in our company, are
relatively up-front and confident, socially responsible, able to work
with a team, take good care of themselves, and treat others well. But
every now and then with these friends, acquaintances, and colleagues,
we glimpse behavior that seems to contradict what we normally see.
This can come in several forms: Out of nowhere they make a
critical, even cruel comment about us, or express a rather harsh
assessment of our work or personality. Is this what they really feel and
were struggling to conceal? For a moment they are not so nice. Or we
hear of their unpleasant treatment of family or employees behind
closed doors. Or out of the blue they have an affair with the most
unlikely man or woman, and it leads to bad things. Or they put their
money in some absurd and risky financial scheme. Or they do
something rash that puts their career in jeopardy. Or we catch them in
some lie or manipulative act. We can also notice such moments of
acting out, or behaving against reputation, in public figures and
celebrities, who then go through lengthy apologies for the strange
moods that came over them.
What we glimpse in these moments is the dark side of their
character, what the Swiss psychologist Carl Jung called the Shadow.
The Shadow consists of all the qualities people try to deny about
themselves and repress. This repression is so deep and effective that
people are generally unaware of their Shadow; it operates
unconsciously. According to Jung, this Shadow has a thickness to it,
depending on how deep the level of repression and the number of
traits that are being concealed. Nixon would be said to have a
particularly thick Shadow. When we experience those moments when
people reveal the dark side, we can see something come over their
face; their voice and body language is altered—almost as if another
person is confronting us, the features of the upset child suddenly
becoming visible. We feel their shadow as it stirs and emerges.
The Shadow lies buried deep within, but it becomes disturbed and
active in moments of stress, or when deep wounds and insecurities are
triggered. It also tends to emerge more as people get older. When we
are young, everything seems exciting to us, including the various social
roles we must play. But later in life we tire of the masks we have been
wearing, and the leakage is greater.
Because we rarely see the Shadow, the people we deal with are
somewhat strangers to us. It is as if we only see a two-dimensional,
flattened image of people—their pleasant social side. Knowing the
contours of their Shadow makes them come to life in three
dimensions. This ability to see the rounded person is a critical step in
our knowledge of human nature. Armed with this knowledge, we can
anticipate people’s behavior in moments of stress, understand their
hidden motives, and not get dragged under by any self-destructive
tendencies.
The Shadow is created in our earliest years and stems from two
conflicting forces that we felt. First, we came into this world bursting
with energy and intensity. We did not understand the difference
between acceptable and unacceptable behavior; we only experienced
natural impulses. Some of these impulses were aggressive. We wanted
to monopolize our parents’ attention and receive much more of it than
our siblings. We experienced moments of great affection but also
powerful dislikes and hatreds, even of our parents for not meeting our
needs. We wanted to feel superior in some way and appreciated for it—
in appearance, strength, or smartness. We could be remarkably selfish
if we were denied what we wanted, and turn devious and manipulative
to get it. We could even find some pleasure in hurting people, or
fantasize about getting revenge. We experienced and expressed the full
gamut of emotions. We were not the innocent angels people imagine
children to be.
At the same time, we were completely vulnerable and dependent on
our parents for survival. This dependence lasted for many years. We
watched our parents with eagle eyes, noting every signal of approval
and disapproval on their faces. They would chastise us for having too
much energy and wish we could sit still. They sometimes found us too
willful and selfish. They felt that other people were judging them by
the behavior of their children, so they wanted us to be nice, to put on a
show for others, to act like the sweet angel. They urged us to be
cooperative and play fairly, even though at times we wished to behave
differently. They encouraged us to tone down our needs, to be more of
what they needed in their stressful lives. They actively discouraged our
tantrums and any form of acting out.
As we got older, these pressures to present a particular front came
from other directions—peers and teachers. It was fine to show some
ambition, but not too much of it or we might seem antisocial. We
could exude confidence, but not too much or we would seem to be
asserting our superiority. The need to fit into the group became a
primary motivation, and so we learned to tamp down and restrain the
dark side of our personality. We internalized all of the ideals of our
culture—being nice, having prosocial values. Much of this is essential
for the smooth functioning of social life, but in the process a large part
of our nature moved underground, into the Shadow. (Of course, there
are some who never learned to control these darker impulses and end
up acting them out in real life—the criminals in our midst. But even
criminals struggle to appear nice a great deal of the time and justify
their behavior.)
Most of us succeed in becoming a positive social animal, but at a
price. We end up missing the intensity that we experienced in
childhood, the full gamut of emotions, and even the creativity that
came with this wilder energy. We secretly yearn to recapture it in some
way. We are drawn toward what is outwardly forbidden—sexually or
socially. We may resort to alcohol or drugs or any stimulant, because
we feel our senses dulled, our minds too restrained by convention. If
we accumulate a lot of hurts and resentments along the way, which we
strive to conceal from others, the Shadow grows thicker. If we
experience success in our lives, we become addicted to positive
attention, and in the inevitable down moments when the drug of such
attention wears off, the Shadow will be disturbed and activated.
Concealing this dark side requires energy; it can be draining to
always present such a nice, confident front. And so the Shadow wants
to release some of the inner tension and come back to life. As the poet
Horace once said, Naturam expellas furca, tamen usque recurret
(“You can throw out Nature with a pitchfork, but she’ll always come
back”). You must become adept at recognizing such moments of
release in others and interpreting them, seeing the outlines of the
Shadow that now come forward. The following are some of the most
notable signs of such release.
Contradictory behavior: This is the most eloquent sign of all. It
consists of actions that belie the carefully constructed front that people
present. For instance, a person who preaches morals is suddenly
caught out in a very compromising situation. Or someone with a tough
exterior reveals insecurities and hysteria at the wrong moment. Or a
person who preaches free love and open behavior suddenly becomes
quite domineering and authoritarian. The strange, contradictory
behavior is a direct expression of the Shadow. (For more on such signs
and how to interpret them, see the section on this page.)
Emotional outbursts: A person suddenly loses his or her
habitual self-control and sharply expresses deep resentments or says
something biting and hurtful. In the aftermath of such a release, they
may blame it on stress; they may say they did not mean any of it, when
in fact the opposite is the case—the Shadow has spoken. Take what
they said at face value. On a less intense level, people may suddenly
become unusually sensitive and touchy. Some of their deepest fears
and insecurities from childhood have somehow become activated, and
this makes them hyperalert to any possible slight and ripe for smaller
outbursts.
Vehement denial: According to Freud, the only way that
something unpleasant or uncomfortable in our unconscious can reach
the conscious mind is through active denial. We express the very
opposite of what is buried within. This could be a person fulminating
against homosexuality, when in fact he or she feels the opposite. Nixon
engaged in such denials frequently, as when he told others, in the
strongest terms, that he never cried, or held grudges, or gave in to
weakness, or cared what people thought of him. You must reinterpret
the denials as positive expressions of Shadow desires.
“Accidental” behavior: People might talk of quitting some
addiction, or not working so damned hard, or staying away from a self-
destructive relationship. They then fall into the behavior they spoke of
trying to avoid, blaming it on an uncontrollable illness or dependency.
This salves their conscience for indulging their dark side; they simply
can’t help it. Ignore the justifications and see the Shadow operating
and releasing. Also remember that when people are drunk and behave
differently, often it is not the alcohol that is speaking but the Shadow.
Overidealization: This can serve as one of the most potent covers
for the Shadow. Let us say we believe in some cause, such as the
importance of transparency in our actions, particularly in politics. Or
we admire and follow the leader of just such a cause. Or we decide that
some new type of financial investment—mortgage-backed securities,
for instance—represents the latest and most sophisticated path to
wealth. In these situations we go much further than simple
enthusiasm. We are charged with powerful conviction. We gloss over
any faults, inconsistencies, or possible downsides. We see everything
in black-and-white terms—our cause is moral, modern, and
progressive; the other side, including doubters, is evil and reactionary.
We now feel sanctioned to do everything for the cause—lie, cheat,
manipulate, spy, falsify scientific data, get revenge. Anything the
leader does is justified. In the case of the investment, we feel justified
in taking what normally would be seen as great risks, because this time
the financial tool is different and new, not subject to the usual rules.
We can be as greedy as we like without worrying about the
consequences.
We tend to be dazzled by the strength of people’s convictions and
interpret excessive behavior as simply overzealousness. But we should
look at it in another light. By overidealizing a cause, person, or object,
people can give free rein to the Shadow. That is their unconscious
motivation. The bullying, the manipulations, the greed that comes out
for the sake of the cause or product should be taken at face value, the
overly strong conviction providing simple cover for repressed
emotions to play themselves out.
Related to this, in arguments people will use their powerful
convictions as a perfect way to disguise their desires to bully and
intimidate. They trot out statistics and anecdotes (which can always be
found) to buttress their case, then proceed to insult or impugn our
integrity. It’s just an exchange of ideas, they say. Pay attention to the
bullying tone, and do not be fooled. Intellectuals might be subtler.
They will lord it over us with obscure language and ideas we cannot
decode, and we are made to feel inferior for our ignorance. In all cases,
see this as repressed aggression finding a way to leak out.
Projection: This is by far the most common way of dealing with
our Shadow, because it offers almost daily release. We cannot admit to
ourselves certain desires—for sex, for money, for power, for
superiority in some area—and so instead we project those desires onto
others. Sometimes we simply imagine and completely project these
qualities out of nothing, in order to judge and condemn people. Other
times we find people who express such taboo desires in some form,
and we exaggerate them in order to justify our dislike or hatred.
For instance, we accuse another person in some conflict of having
authoritarian desires. In fact, they are simply defending themselves.
We are the ones who secretly wish to dominate, but if we see it in the
other side first, we can vent our repressed desire in the form of a
judgment and justify our own authoritarian response. Let us say we
repressed early on assertive and spontaneous impulses so natural to
the child. Unconsciously we wish to have back such qualities, but we
cannot overcome our internal taboos. We look out for those who are
less inhibited, more assertive and open with their ambition. We
exaggerate these tendencies. Now we can despise them, and in
thinking about them, give vent to what we cannot admit to ourselves
or about ourselves.
The great nineteenth-century German composer Richard Wagner
frequently expressed anti-Semitic sentiments. He blamed Jews for
ruining Western music with their eclectic tastes, sentimentality, and
emphasis on technical brilliance. He yearned for a more pure German
music, which he would create. Most of what he blamed Jews for in
music was completely made up. Yet Wagner, strangely enough, had
many of the same qualities that he seemed to hate in Jews. His tastes
were quite eclectic. He had sentimental tendencies. Many of the
pianists and conductors he worked with were Jewish, because of their
technical proficiency.
Remember: behind any vehement hatred is often a secret and very
unpalatable envy of the hated person or people. It is only through such
hate that it can be released from the unconscious in some form.
Consider yourself a detective when it comes to piecing together
people’s Shadow. Through the various signs you pick up, you can fill in
the outlines of their repressed desires and impulses. This will allow
you to anticipate future leakage and odd Shadow-like behavior. Rest
assured such behavior never occurs just once, and it will tend to pop
up in different areas. If, for instance, you pick up bullying tendencies
in the way someone argues, you will also see it in other activities.
You might entertain the notion that this concept of the Shadow is
somewhat antiquated. After all, we live in a much more rational,
scientifically oriented culture today. People are more transparent and
self-aware than ever, we might say. We are much less repressed than
our ancestors, who had to deal with all sorts of pressures from
organized religion. The truth, however, might very well be the
opposite. In many ways we are more split than ever between our
conscious, social selves and our unconscious Shadow. We live in a
culture that enforces powerful codes of correctness that we must abide
by or face the shaming that is now so common on social media. We are
supposed to live up to ideals of selflessness, which are impossible for
us because we are not angels. All of this drives the dark side of our
personalities even further underground.
We can read signs of this in how deeply and secretly we are all
drawn to the dark side in our culture. We thrill at watching shows in
which various Machiavellian characters manipulate, deceive, and
dominate. We lap up stories in the news of those who have been
caught acting out in some way and enjoy the ensuing shaming. Serial
killers and diabolical cult leaders enthrall us. With these shows and
the news we can always become moralistic and talk of how much we
despise such villains, but the truth is that the culture constantly feeds
us these figures because we are hungry for expressions of the dark
side. All of this provides a degree of release from the tension we
experience in having to play the angel and seem so correct.
These are relatively harmless forms of release, but there are more
dangerous ones, particularly in the realm of politics. We find ourselves
increasingly drawn to leaders who give vent to this dark side, who
express the hostility and resentment we all secretly feel. They say
things we would dare not say. In the safety of the group and rallied to
some cause, we have license to project and vent our spleen on various
convenient scapegoats. By idealizing the leader and the cause, we are
now free to act in ways we would normally shy away from as
individuals. These demagogues are adept at exaggerating the threats
we face, painting everything in black-and-white terms. They stir up the
fears, insecurities, and desires for revenge that have gone
underground but are waiting at any moment to explode in the group
setting. We will find more and more such leaders as we experience
greater degrees of repression and inner tension.
The writer Robert Louis Stevenson expressed this dynamic in the
novel The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, published in
1886. The main character, Dr. Jekyll, is a well-respected and wealthy
doctor/scientist with impeccable manners, so much like the paragons
of goodness in our culture. He invents a concoction that transforms
him into Mr. Hyde, the embodiment of his Shadow, who proceeds to
murder and rape and indulge in the wildest of sensual pleasures.
Stevenson’s idea is that the more civilized and moral we outwardly
become, the more potentially dangerous is the Shadow, which we so
fiercely deny. As the character Dr. Jekyll describes it, “My devil had
long been caged, he came out roaring.”
The solution is not more repression and correctness. We can never
alter human nature through enforced niceness. The pitchfork doesn’t
work. Nor is the solution to seek release for our Shadow in the group,
which is volatile and dangerous. Instead the answer is to see our
Shadow in action and become more self-aware. It is hard to project
onto others our own secret impulses or to overidealize some cause,
once we are made aware of the mechanism operating within us.
Through such self-knowledge we can find a way to integrate the dark
side into our consciousness productively and creatively. (For more on
this, see the last section of this chapter.) In doing so we become more
authentic and complete, exploiting to the maximum the energies we
naturally possess.
Deciphering the Shadow: Contradictory Behavior
In the course of your life you will come upon people who have very
emphatic traits that set them apart and seem to be the source of their
strength—unusual confidence, exceptional niceness and affability,
great moral rectitude and a saintly aura, toughness and rugged
masculinity, an intimidating intellect. If you look closely at them, you
may notice a slight exaggeration to these traits, as if they were
performing or laying it on just a little too thick. As a student of human
nature, you must understand the reality: the emphatic trait generally
rests on top of the opposite trait, distracting and concealing it from
public view.
We can see two forms of this: Early on in life some people sense a
softness, vulnerability, or insecurity that might prove embarrassing or
uncomfortable. They unconsciously develop the opposite trait, a
resilience or toughness that lies on the outside like a protective shell.
The other scenario is that a person has a quality that they feel might be
antisocial—for instance, too much ambition or an inclination to be
selfish. They develop the opposite quality, something very prosocial.
In both cases, over the years they hone and perfect this public
image. The underlying weakness or antisocial trait is a key component
of their Shadow—something denied and repressed. But as the laws of
human nature dictate, the deeper the repression, the greater the
volatility of the Shadow. As they get older or experience stress, there
will be cracks in the façade. They are playing a role to the extreme, and
it is tiring. Their real self will rebel in the form of moods, obsessions,
secret vices, and behavior that is quite contrary to their image and is
often self-destructive.
Your task is simple: be extra wary around people who display such
emphatic traits. It is very easy to get caught up in the appearance and
first impression. Watch for the signs and emergence of the opposite
over time. It is much easier to deal with such types once you
understand them. The following are seven of the most common
emphatic traits that you must learn to recognize and manage
appropriately.
The Tough Guy: He projects a rough masculinity that is intended
to intimidate. He has a swagger and an air that signals he is not to be
messed with. He tends to boast about past exploits—the women he has
conquered, the brawls, the times he’s outnegotiated opponents.
Although he seems extremely convincing in telling such stories, they
feel exaggerated, almost hard to believe. Do not be fooled by
appearances. Such men have learned to conceal an underlying
softness, an emotional vulnerability from deep within that terrifies
them. On occasion you will see this sensitive side—they may cry, or
have a tantrum, or suddenly show compassion. Embarrassed by this,
they will quickly cover it up with a tough or even cruel act or comment.
For the baseball player Reggie Jackson, Yankees manager Billy
Martin was just such a brawling type. Jackson could recognize the
softness behind the bluster in Martin’s touchiness when it came to his
ego, his changing moods (not very masculine), and emotional
outbursts that revealed glaring insecurities. Such men will often make
terrible decisions under the impact of the emotions that they have
tried to conceal and repress but that inevitably surface. Although they
like to dominate women, they will often end up with a wife who clearly
dominates them, a secret wish of theirs.
You must not let yourself be intimidated by the front, but also be
careful to not stir up their deep insecurities by seeming to doubt their
tall tales or masculine nature. They are notoriously touchy and thin-
skinned, and you might detect a micropout on their face if you trigger
their insecurities, before they cover it up with a fierce scowl. If they
happen to be a rival, they are easy to bait into an overreaction that
reveals something less than tough.
The Saint: These people are paragons of goodness and purity.
They support the best and most progressive causes. They can be very
spiritual if that is the circle they travel in; or they are above the
corruption and compromises of politics; or they have endless
compassion for every type of victim. This saintly exterior developed
early on as a way to disguise their strong hunger for power and
attention or their strong sensual appetites. The irony is that often by
projecting this saintly aura to the nth degree they will gain great
power, leading a cult or political party. And once they are in power, the
Shadow will have space to operate. They will become intolerant,
railing at the impure, punishing them if necessary. Maximilien
Robespierre (nicknamed the Incorruptible), who rose to power in the
French Revolution, was just such a type. Under his reign, the guillotine
was never busier.
They are also secretly drawn to sex, to money, to the limelight, and
to what is expressly taboo for their particular saintliness. The strain
and the temptations are too much—they are the gurus who sleep with
their students. They will appear the saint in public, but their family or
spouse will see the demonic side in private. (See the story of the
Tolstoys in chapter 2.) There are genuine saints out there, but they do
not feel the need to publicize their deeds or grab power. To distinguish
between the real and the fake, ignore their words and the aura they
project, focusing on their deeds and the details of their life—how much
they seem to enjoy power and attention, the astonishing degree of
wealth they have accumulated, the number of mistresses, the level of
self-absorption. Once you recognize this type, do not become a naive
follower. Keep some distance. If they are enemies, simply shine a light
on the clear signs of hypocrisy.
As a variation on this, you will find people who propound a
philosophy of free love and anything goes; but in fact they are after
power. They prefer sex with those who are dependent on them. And of
course anything goes, as long as it’s on their terms.
The Passive-Aggressive Charmer: These types are amazingly
nice and accommodating when you first meet them, so much so that
you tend to let them into your life rather quickly. They smile a lot.
They are upbeat and always willing to help. At some point, you may
return the favor by hiring them for a job or helping them in their
careers. You will detect along the way some cracks in the veneer—
perhaps they make a somewhat critical comment out of the blue, or
you hear from friends that they have been talking about you behind
your back. Then something ugly occurs—a blowup, some act of
sabotage or betrayal—so unlike that nice, charming person you first
befriended.
The truth is that these types realize early on in life that they have
aggressive, envious tendencies that are hard to control. They want
power. They intuit that such inclinations will make life hard for them.
Over many years they cultivate the opposite façade—their niceness has
an almost aggressive edge. Through this stratagem they are able to
gain social power. But they secretly resent having to play such a role
and be so deferential. They can’t maintain it. Under stress or simply
worn out by the effort, they will lash out and hurt you. They can do
this well now that they know you and your weak spots. They will, of
course, blame you for what ensues.
Your best defense is to be wary of people who are too quick to
charm and befriend, too nice and accommodating at first. Such
extreme niceness is never natural. Keep your distance and look for
some early signs, such as passive-aggressive comments. If you notice
that—somewhat out of character—they indulge in malicious gossip
about someone, you can be sure the Shadow is speaking and that you
will be the target of such gossip one day.
The Fanatic: You are impressed by their fervor, in support of
whatever cause. They speak forcefully. They allow for no compromise.
They will clean things up, restore greatness. They radiate strength and
conviction, and because of this they gain followers. They have a flair
for drama and capturing attention. But at the key moment when they
could possibly deliver what they have promised, they unexpectedly slip
up. They become indecisive at the wrong moment, or burn themselves
out and fall ill, or take such ill-conceived actions that it all falls apart.
It’s as if they have suddenly lost belief, or secretly wanted to fail.
The truth is that such types have massive insecurities from early on
in life. They have doubts about their self-worth. They never felt loved
or admired enough. Riddled with fears and uncertainty, they cover this
up with the mask of great belief, in themselves and in their cause. You
will notice in their past some shifts in their belief system, sometimes
radical. That is because it is not the particular belief that matters but
the intense conviction, and so they will shift this around to fit the
times. Belief in something is like a drug for them. But the doubts
return. They secretly know they cannot deliver the goods. And so
under stress they become the opposite—indecisive and secretly
doubtful. They suddenly fire their assistants and managers to give the
impression of action, but unconsciously they are sabotaging
themselves with unnecessary change. They have to blow it all up,
somehow and yet blame others.
Never be taken in by the strength of people’s convictions and their
flair for drama. Always operate by the rule that the greater the
stridency in what they say, the deeper the underlying insecurities and
doubts. Do not become a follower. They will make a fool of you.
The Rigid Rationalist: All of us have irrational tendencies. It is
the lasting legacy of our primitive origins. We will never get rid of
them. We are prone to superstitions, to seeing connections between
events that have no connection. We are fascinated by coincidences. We
anthropomorphize and project our feelings onto other people and the
world around us. We secretly consult astrology charts. We must simply
accept this. In fact, we often resort to irrationality as a form of
relaxation—silly jokes, meaningless activities, occasional dabbling in
the occult. Always being rational can be tiresome. But for some people,
this makes them terribly uncomfortable. They experience this
primitive thinking as softness, as mysticism, as contrary to science and
technology. Everything must be clear and analytical in the extreme.
They become devout atheists, not realizing that the concept of God
cannot be proven or disproven. It is a belief either way.
The repressed, however, always return. Their faith in science and
technology has a religious air to it. When it comes to an argument,
they will impose their ideas with extra intellectual heft and even a
touch of anger, which reveals the stirring of the primitive within and
the hidden emotional need to bully. At the extreme, they will indulge
in a love affair that is most irrational and contrary to their image—the
professor running off with the young model. Or they will make some
bad career choice, or fall for some ridiculous financial scheme, or
indulge in some conspiracy theory. They are also prone to strange
shifts in mood and emotional outbursts as the Shadow stirs. Bait them
into just such overreactions to prick their bubble of intellectual
superiority. True rationality should be sober and skeptical about its
own powers and not publicize itself.
The Snob: These types have a tremendous need to be different
from others, to assert some form of superiority over the mass of
mankind. They have the most refined aesthetic tastes when it comes to
art, or film criticism, or fine wines, or gourmet food, or vintage punk
rock records. They have amassed impressive knowledge of these
things. They put a lot of emphasis on appearances—they are more
“alternative” than others, their tattoos are more unique. In many
cases, they seem to come from very interesting backgrounds, perhaps
with some exciting ancestry. Everything surrounding them is
extraordinary. Of course, it later comes out that they were
exaggerating or downright lying about their background. Beau
Brummell, the notorious snob and dandy of the early nineteenth
century, actually came from a staunch middle-class background, the
opposite of what he peddled. The family of Karl Lagerfeld, the current
Chanel creative director, did not inherit its money but made it in the
most bourgeois fashion, contrary to the stories he has told.
The truth is that banality is part of human existence. Much of our
lives is spent doing the most boring and tedious tasks. For most of us,
our parents had normal, unglamorous jobs. We all have mediocre
sides to our character and skills. Snobs are especially sensitive about
this, greatly insecure about their origins and possible mediocrity.
Their way of dealing with this is to distract and deceive with
appearances (as opposed to real originality in their work), surrounding
themselves with the extraordinary and with special knowledge.
Underneath it all is the real person waiting to come out—rather
ordinary and not so very different.
In any case, those who are truly original and different do not need
to make a great show of it. In fact, they are often embarrassed by being
so different and learn to appear more humble. (As an example of this,
see the story of Abraham Lincoln in the section below.) Be extra wary
of those who go out of their way to make a show of their difference.
The Extreme Entrepreneur: At first glance these types seem to
possess very positive qualities, especially for work. They maintain very
high standards and pay exceptional attention to detail. They are
willing to do much of the work themselves. If mixed with talent, this
often leads to success early on in life. But underneath the façade the
seeds of failure are taking root. This first appears in their inability to
listen to others. They cannot take advice. They need no one. In fact,
they mistrust others who do not have their same high standards. With
success they are forced to take on more and more responsibility.
If they were truly self-reliant, they would know the importance of
delegating on a lower level to maintain control on the higher level, but
something else is stirring within—the Shadow. Soon the situation
becomes chaotic. Others must come in and take over the business.
Their health and finances are ruined and they become completely
dependent on doctors or outside financiers. They go from complete
control to total dependence on others. (Think of the pop star Michael
Jackson near the end of his life.)
Often their outward show of self-reliance disguises a hidden desire
to have others take care of them, to regress to the dependency of
childhood. They can never admit this to themselves or show any signs
of such weakness, but unconsciously they are drawn to creating
enough chaos that they break down and are forced into some form of
dependency. There are signs beforehand: recurring health issues, the
sudden microneeds to be pampered by people in their daily lives. But
the big sign comes as they lose control and fail to take steps to halt
this. It is best to not get too entangled with such types later on in their
careers, as they have a tendency to bring about much collateral
damage.
The Integrated Human
In the course of our lives we inevitably meet people who appear to be
especially comfortable with themselves. They display certain traits that
help give this impression: they are able to laugh at themselves; they
can admit to certain shortcomings in their character, as well as to
mistakes they have made; they have a playful, sometimes impish edge
to them, as if they have retained more of the child within; they can
play their role in life with a little bit of distance (see the last section of
chapter 3). At times they can be charmingly spontaneous.
What such people signal to us is a greater authenticity. If most of us
have lost a lot of our natural traits in becoming socialized adults, the
authentic types have somehow managed to keep them alive and active.
We can contrast them easily with the opposite type: people who are
touchy, who are hypersensitive to any perceived slight, and who give
the impression of being somewhat uncomfortable with themselves and
having something to hide. We humans are masters at smelling the
difference. We can almost feel it with people in their nonverbal
behavior—the relaxed or tense body language, the flowing or halting
tone of voice; the way the eyes gaze and let you in; the genuine smile
or lack of it.
One thing is for certain: we are completely drawn to the authentic
types and unconsciously repulsed by their opposite. The reason for
this is simple: we all secretly mourn for the child part of our character
we have lost—the wildness, the spontaneity, the intensity of
experience, the open mind. Our overall energy is diminished by the
loss. Those who emit that air of authenticity signal to us another
possibility—that of being an adult who has managed to integrate the
child and the adult, the dark and the light, the unconscious and the
conscious mind. We yearn to be around them. Perhaps some of their
energy will rub off on us.
If Richard Nixon in many ways epitomizes the inauthentic type, we
find many examples of the opposite to inspire us—in politics, men like
Winston Churchill and Abraham Lincoln; in the arts, people like
Charlie Chaplin and Josephine Baker; in science, someone like Albert
Einstein; in social life in general, someone like Jacqueline Kennedy
Onassis. And these types indicate for us the path to follow, which
largely centers on self-awareness. Conscious of our Shadow, we can
control, channel, and integrate it. Aware of what we have lost, we can
reconnect to that part of ourselves that has sunk into the Shadow.
The following are four clear and practical steps for achieving this.
See the Shadow. This is the most difficult step in the process. The
Shadow is something we deny and repress. It is so much easier to dig
up and moralize about the dark qualities of others. It is almost
unnatural for us to look inward at this side of ourselves. But remember
that you are only half a human if you keep this buried. Be intrepid in
this process.
The best way to begin is to look for indirect signs, as indicated in
the sections above. For instance, take note of any particular one-sided,
emphatic traits in yourself. Assume that the opposite trait lies buried
deep within, and from there try to see more signs of this trait in your
behavior. Look at your own emotional outbursts and moments of
extreme touchiness. Somebody or something has struck a chord. Your
sensitivity to a remark or imputation indicates a Shadow quality that is
stirring, in the form of a deep insecurity. Bring it into the light.
Look deeply at your tendencies to project emotions and bad
qualities onto people you know, or even entire groups. For instance,
say you really loathe narcissistic types or pushy people. What is
happening is that you are probably brushing up against your own
narcissistic tendencies and secret desire to be more assertive, in the
form of a vehement denial or hatred. We are particularly sensitive to
traits and weaknesses in others that we are repressing in ourselves.
Look at moments in your youth (late teens, early twenties) in which
you acted in a rather insensitive or even cruel manner. When you were
younger, you had less control of the Shadow and it came out more
naturally, not with the repressed force of later years.
Later in his career, the writer Robert Bly (born 1926) began to feel
depressed. His writing had become sterile. He started to think more
and more about the Shadow side of his character. He was determined
to find signs of it and consciously scrutinize it. Bly was the bohemian
type of artist, very much active in the counterculture of the 1960s. His
artistic roots went back to the Romantic artists of the early nineteenth
century, men and women who extolled spontaneity and naturalness.
In much of Bly’s own writing, he railed at advertising men and
businesspeople—as he saw it, they were so calculating, planning
everything to the extreme, afraid of the chaos of life, and quite
manipulative.
And yet, as he looked inward, Bly could catch glimpses of such
calculating, manipulative qualities in himself. He too secretly feared
moments of chaos in life, liked to plan things out and control events.
He could be quite malicious with people he perceived to be so
different, but in fact there was a part of the stockbroker and
advertising man within him. Perhaps it was the deeper part of himself.
Others told him that they saw him as rather classical in his taste and in
his writing (constructing things well), something that bothered him,
since he thought the opposite. But as he became increasingly honest
with himself, he realized they were right. (People can often see our
Shadow better than we can, and it would be wise to elicit their frank
opinions on the subject.)
Step by step he unearthed the dark qualities within—rigid, overly
moralistic, et cetera—and in doing so he felt reconnected with the
other half of his psyche. He could be honest with himself and channel
the Shadow creatively. His depression lifted, as well as the writer’s
block.
Take this process deeper by reexamining the earlier version of
yourself. Look at traits in childhood that were drummed out of you by
your parents and peers—certain weaknesses or vulnerabilities or forms
of behavior, traits you were made to feel ashamed of. Perhaps your
parents did not like your introspective tendencies or your interest in
certain subjects that were not of their taste. They instead steered you
toward careers and interests that suited them. Look at emotions you
were once prone to, things that sparked a sense of awe or excitement
that has gone missing. You have become more like others as you have
gotten older, and you must rediscover the lost authentic parts of
yourself.
Finally, look at your dreams as the most direct and clear view of
your Shadow. Only there will you find the kinds of behavior you have
carefully avoided in conscious life. The Shadow is talking to you in
various ways. Don’t look for symbols or hidden meanings. Pay
attention instead to the emotional tone and overall feelings that they
inspire, holding on to them throughout the day. This could be
unexpected bold behavior on your part, or intense anxiety spurred by
certain situations, or sensations of being physically trapped or of
soaring above it all, or exploring a place that is forbidden and beyond
the boundaries. The anxieties could relate to insecurities you are not
confronting; the soaring and exploring are hidden desires trying to rise
to consciousness. Get in the habit of writing your dreams down and
paying deep attention to their feeling tone.
The more you go through this process and see the outlines of your
Shadow, the easier it will become. You will find more signs as your
tense muscles of repression loosen up. At a certain point, the pain of
going through this turns into excitement at what you’re uncovering.
Embrace the Shadow. Your natural reaction in uncovering and
facing up to your dark side is to feel uncomfortable and maintain only
a surface awareness of it. Your goal here must be the opposite—not
only complete acceptance of the Shadow but the desire to integrate it
into your present personality.
From an early age Abraham Lincoln liked to analyze himself, and a
recurrent theme in his self-examinations was that he had a split
personality—on the one hand an ambitious almost cruel streak to his
nature, and on the other a sensitivity and softness that made him
frequently depressed. Both sides of his nature made him feel
uncomfortable and odd. On the rough side, for instance, he loved
boxing and thoroughly thrashing his opponent in the ring. In law and
politics he had a rather scathing sense of humor.
Once he wrote some anonymous letters to a newspaper, attacking a
politician he thought of as a buffoon. The letters were so effective that
the target went mad with rage. He found out that Lincoln was the
source of them and challenged him to a duel. This became the talk of
the town and proved quite embarrassing to Lincoln. He managed to
get out of the duel, but he vowed to never indulge his cruel streak
again. He recognized the trait in himself and would not deny it.
Instead he would pour his aggressive, competitive energy into winning
debates and elections.
On his soft side, he loved poetry, felt tremendous affection for
animals, and hated witnessing any kind of physical cruelty. He hated
drinking and what it did to people. At his worst, he was prone to fits of
deep melancholy and brooding over death. All in all, he felt himself to
be far too sensitive for the rough-and-tumble world of politics. Instead
of denying this side of himself, he channeled it into incredible empathy
for the public, for the average man and woman. Caring deeply about
the loss of lives in the war, he put all his efforts into ending it early. He
did not project evil onto the South but rather empathized with its
plight and planned on a peace that was not retributive.
He also incorporated it into a healthy sense of humor about
himself, making frequent jokes about his ugliness, high-pitched voice,
and brooding nature. By embracing and integrating such opposing
qualities into his public persona, he gave the impression of
tremendous authenticity. People could identify with him in a way
never seen before with a political leader.
Explore the Shadow. Consider the Shadow as having depths that
contain great creative energy. You want to explore these depths, which
include more primitive forms of thinking and the darkest impulses
that come out of our animal nature.
As children, our minds were much more fluid and open. We would
make the most surprising and creative associations between ideas. But
as we get older, we tend to tighten this down. We live in a
sophisticated, high-tech world dominated by statistics and ideas
gleaned from big data. Free associations between ideas, images from
dreams, hunches, and intuitions seem irrational and subjective. But
this leads to the most sterile forms of thinking. The unconscious, the
Shadow side of the mind, has powers we must learn to tap into. And in
fact some of the most creative people in our midst actively engage this
side of thinking.
Albert Einstein based one of his theories of relativity on an image
from a dream. The mathematician Jacques Hadamard made his most
important discoveries while boarding a bus or taking a shower—
hunches that came out of nowhere, or what he claimed to be his
unconscious. Louis Pasteur made his great discovery about
immunization based on a rather free association of ideas after an
accident in his laboratory. Steve Jobs claimed that his most effective
ideas came from intuitions, moments when his mind roamed most
freely.
Understand: The conscious thinking we depend on is quite
limited. We can hold on to only so much information in short- and
long-term memory. But the unconscious contains an almost limitless
amount of material from memories, experiences, and information
absorbed in study. After prolonged research or work on a problem,
when we relax our minds in dreams or while we are performing
unrelated banal activities, the unconscious begins to go to work and
associate all sorts of random ideas, some of the more interesting ones
bubbling to the surface. We all have dreams, intuitions, and free
associations of ideas, but we often refuse to pay attention to them or
take them seriously. Instead you want to develop the habit of using
this form of thought more often by having unstructured time in which
you can play with ideas, widen the options you consider, and pay
serious attention to what comes to you in less conscious states of
mind.
In a similar vein, you want to explore from within your own darkest
impulses, even those that might seem criminal, and find a way to
express them in your work or externalize them in some fashion, in a
journal for instance. We all have aggressive and antisocial desires,
even toward those we love. We also have traumas from our earliest
years that are associated with emotions we prefer to forget. The
greatest art in all media somehow expresses these depths, which
causes a powerful reaction in us all because they are so repressed.
Such is the power of the films of Ingmar Bergman or the novels of
Fyodor Dostoyevsky, and you can have the same power by
externalizing your dark side.
Show the Shadow. Most of the time we secretly suffer from the
endless social codes we have to adhere to. We have to seem so nice and
agreeable, always going along with the group. We better not show too
much confidence or ambition. Seem humble and similar to everyone
else; that’s how the game is played. In following this path we gain
comfort by fitting in, but we also become defensive and secretly
resentful. Being so nice becomes a habit, which easily turns into
timidity, lack of confidence, and indecision. At the same time, our
Shadow will show itself, but unconsciously, in explosive fits and starts,
and often to our detriment.
It would be wise to look at those who are successful in their field.
Inevitably we will see that most of them are much less bound by these
codes. They are generally more assertive and overtly ambitious. They
care much less what others think of them. They flout the conventions
openly and proudly. And they are not punished but greatly rewarded.
Steve Jobs is a classic example. He showed his rough, Shadow side in
his way of working with others. Our tendency in looking at people like
Jobs is to admire their creativity and subtract their darker qualities as
unnecessary. If only he had been nicer, he would have been a saint.
But in fact the dark side was inextricably interwoven with his power
and creativity. His ability to not listen to others, to go his own way,
and be a bit rough about it were key parts of his success, which we
venerate. And so it is with many creative, powerful people. Subtract
their active Shadow, and they would be like everyone else.
Understand: You pay a greater price for being so nice and
deferential than for consciously showing your Shadow. First, to follow
the latter path you must begin by respecting your own opinions more
and those of others less, particularly when it comes to your areas of
expertise, to the field you have immersed yourself in. Trust your native
genius and the ideas you have come up with. Second, get in the habit
in your daily life of asserting yourself more and compromising less. Do
this under control and at opportune moments. Third, start caring less
what people think of you. You will feel a tremendous sense of
liberation. Fourth, realize that at times you must offend and even hurt
people who block your path, who have ugly values, who unjustly
criticize you. Use such moments of clear injustice to bring out your
Shadow and show it proudly. Fifth, feel free to play the impudent,
willful child who mocks the stupidity and hypocrisy of others.
Finally, flout the very conventions that others follow so
scrupulously. For centuries, and still to this day, gender roles
represent the most powerful convention of all. What men and women
can do or say has been highly controlled, to the point where it seems
almost to represent biological differences instead of social
conventions. Women in particular are socialized to be extra nice and
agreeable. They feel continual pressure to adhere to this and mistake it
for something natural and biological.
Some of the most influential women in history were those who
deliberately broke with these codes—performers like Marlene Dietrich
and Josephine Baker, political figures such as Eleanor Roosevelt,
businesswomen such as Coco Chanel. They brought out their Shadow
and showed it by acting in ways that were traditionally thought of as
masculine, blending and confusing gender roles.
Even Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis gained great power by playing
against the type of the traditional political wife. She had a pronounced
malicious streak. When Norman Mailer first met her in 1960 and she
seemed to poke fun at him, he saw that “something droll and hard
came into her eyes as if she were a very naughty eight-year-old
indeed.” When people displeased her, she showed it rather openly. She
seemed to care little what others thought of her. And she became a
sensation because of the naturalness she exuded.
In general, consider this a form of exorcism. Once you show these
desires and impulses, they no longer lie hidden in corners of your
personality, twisting and operating in secret ways. You have released
your demons and enhanced your presence as an authentic human. In
this way, the Shadow becomes your ally.
Unfortunately there is no doubt about the fact that man is, as a
whole, less good than he imagines himself or wants to be.
Everyone carries a shadow, and the less it is embodied in the
individual’s conscious life, the blacker and denser it is.
—Carl Jung
W
10
Beware the Fragile Ego
The Law of Envy
e humans are naturally compelled to compare ourselves with
one another. We are continually measuring people’s status, the
levels of respect and attention they receive, and noticing any
differences between what we have and what they have. For some of
us, this need to compare serves as a spur to excel through our work.
For others, it can turn into deep envy—feelings of inferiority and
frustration that lead to covert attacks and sabotage. Nobody admits
to acting out of envy. You must recognize the early warning signs—
praise and bids for friendship that seem effusive and out of
proportion; subtle digs at you under the guise of good-natured
humor; apparent uneasiness with your success. It is most likely to
crop up among friends or your peers in the same profession. Learn to
deflect envy by drawing attention away from yourself. Develop your
sense of self-worth from internal standards and not incessant
comparisons.
Fatal Friends
In late 1820, Mary Shelley (1797–1851), author of the novel
Frankenstein, and her twenty-eight-year-old husband, the poet Percy
Bysshe Shelley, moved to Pisa, Italy, after having spent several years
traveling through the country. Mary had had a rough time of it lately.
Her two young children had both died from fevers while in Italy. Mary
had been particularly close to her son William, and his death had
pushed her into a profound depression. She had recently given birth to
another child, a boy named Percy, but she felt continually anxious
about his health. The guilt and gloom she felt surrounding the death of
her children had finally caused some friction between her and her
husband. They had been so close, had experienced so much together,
that they could almost read each other’s thoughts and moods. Now her
husband was drifting away, interested in other women. She was
hoping that in Pisa they could finally settle down, reconnect, and do
some serious writing.
In early 1821, a young English couple named Jane and Edward
Williams arrived in Pisa, and their first stop in town was to visit the
Shelleys. They were close friends with one of Percy Shelley’s cousins.
They were thinking of living in Pisa, and they were clearly starstruck at
meeting the famous couple. Mary was used to these kinds of visitors;
she and her husband were so notorious that curious bohemians from
all over Europe would come to gawk at them and try to make their
acquaintance.
Certainly the Williamses, like all the other visitors, would have
known about the Shelleys’ past. They would have known that Mary
had two of the most illustrious intellectual parents in all of England.
Her mother, Mary Wollstonecraft (1759–1797) was perhaps the first
great feminist writer in history, renowned for her books and
scandalous love affairs. She had died giving birth to Mary. Mary’s
father was William Godwin (1756–1836), a celebrated writer and
philosopher who advocated many radical ideas, including the end of
private property. Famous writers would come to see the child Mary,
for she was an object of fascination, with striking red hair like her
mother, the most intense eyes, and an intelligence and imagination far
beyond her years.
The Williamses would have almost certainly known about her
meeting the poet Percy Shelley when she was sixteen and their
infamous love affair. Shelley, of aristocratic origins and due to inherit
a fortune from his wealthy father, had married a young beauty named
Harriet, but he left her for Mary, and along with Mary’s stepsister
Claire, they traveled through Europe, living together and creating a
scandal everywhere they went. Shelley was an ardent believer in free
love and an avowed atheist. His wife Harriet subsequently committed
suicide, which Mary would forever feel guilty about, even later
imagining that the children she had had with Shelley were somehow
cursed. Shortly after the death of Harriet, Mary and Percy got married.
The Williamses would undoubtedly know about the Shelleys’
relationship with the other great rebel of the time, the poet Lord
Byron. They had all spent time together in Switzerland, and it was
there, inspired by a midnight discussion of horror stories, that Mary
got the inspiration for her great novel Frankenstein, written when she
was nineteen. Lord Byron had his own scandals and numerous love
affairs. The three of them became a magnet for endless rumors, Lord
Byron now living in Italy as well. The English press had dubbed them
“the League of Incest and Atheism.”
At first Mary paid scant attention to the new English couple on the
scene, even after a few dinners together. She found Jane Williams a bit
dull and pretentious. As Mary wrote to her husband, who was away for
a few weeks: “Jane is certainly very pretty but she wants animation
and sense; her conversation is nothing particular and she speaks in a
slow, monotonous tone.” Jane was not well read. She loved nothing
more than to arrange flowers, play the pedal harp, sing songs from
India, where she had lived as a child, and pose rather prettily. Could
she be that superficial? Every now and then Mary would catch Jane
staring at her with an unpleasant look, which she quickly covered over
with a cheerful smile. More important, a common friend who had
known the Williamses in their travels across Europe had warned Mary
in a letter to keep her distance from Jane.
Edward Williams, however, was quite charming. He seemed to
worship Shelley and to want to be like him. He had aspirations to be a
writer. He was so eager to please and be of service. And then one day
he told Mary the story of the romance between him and Jane, and
Mary was quite moved.
The Williamses were not actually married. Jane Cleveland, who
came from the middle class, had married a high-ranking English
soldier, only to find out he was an abusive brute. When she met the
handsome Edward Williams—a military man who had lived in India,
as Jane had—she fell instantly in love. In 1819, although Jane was still
married to her first husband, she and Edward left for the Continent,
posing as a married couple. Like the Shelleys, they also had lived in
Switzerland and had come to Italy for adventure and the good
weather. Jane was now expecting her second child with Edward, just
as Mary was now pregnant again. It seemed, in a fateful way, that they
had much in common. More important, Mary empathized deeply with
their love affair and how much they had sacrificed for each other.
Then Jane had her second child. Now the two women could bond as
young mothers. Finally someone to talk to about the difficulties of
raising infants in a foreign land, something Mary’s husband could care
less about. Besides, the Shelleys had no English friends, since English
expatriates in Italy avoided them like the plague. It would be such a
relief to have some daily companionship in this moment of turbulence
in her life. Mary quickly became dependent on Jane’s company and
forgot any misgivings she might have had about her.
Shelley seemed to warm up to the couple as well. Edward was so
officious in offering to help Shelley in any way. Edward loved sailing
and boasted of his navigational skills. Sailing was an obsession of
Shelley’s, despite the fact he had never learned to swim. Perhaps
Edward could help him design the perfect sailing boat. And Jane
began to intrigue him the more he spent time around her. Jane was so
different from Mary. She never argued. She only looked at him
admiringly and seconded everything he said. She was so cheerful. He
could be her teacher, instructing her in poetry, and she could be his
new muse, a role his depressed wife could not fill anymore. He bought
Jane a guitar and loved to listen to the songs from India she seemed to
know so well. She had a beautiful voice. He wrote poems in her honor
and slowly became infatuated.
Mary noticed all this. She knew well her husband’s pattern. He was
always looking for a woman very different from the one he was with to
inspire him and break the monotony of a relationship. His first wife,
Harriet, had been more like Jane, pretty and simple, and so he fell for
the much more complicated Mary. Now the pattern was repeating as
he fell for the simpler Jane. But how could she take Jane seriously as a
rival? She was so ordinary. He was simply poeticizing her; he would
eventually see her as she was and grow bored. Mary did not fear losing
him.
In 1822 the Shelleys and Williamses, now rather inseparable,
decided to move together into a house further north along the coast,
overlooking the Bay of Lerici. From the beginning Mary hated the
place and begged her husband to find something else. It was so
isolated. It was not easy to find supplies. The local peasants seemed
rather brutal and unfriendly. The two couples would be completely
dependent on their servants. Nobody besides Mary seemed interested
in running the household, least of all Jane, who had proven to be quite
lazy. But worse than everything, Mary had terrible forebodings about
the place. She feared greatly for the fate of her child Percy, only three
years old. She smelled disaster in the walls of the isolated villa that
they occupied. She became nervous and hysterical. She knew she was
putting everyone off with her behavior, but she could not quell her
anxiety. Shelley reacted by spending more and more time with Jane.
Several months after settling at the villa, Mary had a miscarriage
and nearly died. Her husband attended to her for several weeks, and
she recovered. But just as quickly he seemed to become enamored with
a new plan that terrified Mary. He and Edward had designed a boat,
one that was beautiful to look at, sleek, and fast. In June of that year
some old friends of the Shelleys had arrived in Italy—Leigh Hunt and
his wife. Hunt was a publisher who championed young poets, and
Shelley was his favorite. Shelley planned to sail up the coast with
Edward to meet the Hunts. Mary was desperate for him not to go.
Shelley tried to reassure her: Edward was an expert navigator, and the
boat he had built was more than seaworthy. Mary did not believe this.
The boat seemed flimsy for the rough waters of the area.
Nevertheless Shelley and Edward left on July 1, with a third
crewmember. On July 8, as they started on their homeward journey,
they ran into one of the storms endemic to the region. Their boat had
indeed been badly designed, and went under. A few days later the
bodies of all three were found.
Almost immediately Mary was seized with remorse and guilt. She
played in her mind every angry word she had addressed to her
husband, every critique of his work, every doubt she had instilled in
him about her love. It was all too much, and she determined then and
there that she would devote the rest of her life to making Shelley’s
poetry famous.
At first Jane seemed extremely broken up by the tragedy, but she
recovered more quickly than Mary. She had to be practical. Mary
might have a nice inheritance from Shelley’s family. Jane had nothing.
She decided she would return to London and somehow find a way to
support her two children. Mary empathized with her plight. She gave
her a list of important contacts in England, including Shelley’s best
friend from his youth, Thomas Hogg, a lawyer. Hogg had his own
issues—he was always falling in love with the people closest to Shelley,
first Shelley’s sister, then Shelley’s first wife, and finally Mary herself,
whom he tried to seduce. But that had been years ago, they remained
good friends, and as a lawyer Hogg could be of some help to Jane.
Mary decided to stay in Italy. She had hardly any friends left, but
the Hunts were still in Italy. Much to her dismay, however, Leigh Hunt
had become surprisingly cold to her. In this, her most vulnerable
moment, he had apparently lost all sympathy for her, and she could
not figure out why. This only added to her misery. Certainly he must
know how deeply she had loved her husband and the depth of her
mourning? She was not one to show her emotions as openly as Jane,
but deep inside she suffered more than anyone. Other former friends
were now acting cold as well. Only Lord Byron stood by her, and they
grew closer.
Soon it became apparent that Shelley’s parents, who had been
shocked by their son’s libertine ways, would not recognize Percy as
their grandson, certainly as long as he was in the care of Mary. There
would be no money for her. She thought the only answer was to return
to London. Perhaps if the Shelley family met Percy and saw what a
devoted mother she was, they might change their minds. She wrote to
Jane and to Hogg for their advice. The two of them had now become
close friends. Hogg seemed to think she should wait before returning;
his letter was remarkably cold. Here was yet another person who had
suddenly become distant. But it was the response of Jane that most
surprised her. She advised giving up Percy and not coming to England.
As Mary tried to explain how impossible that would be for her
emotionally, Jane became even more adamant in her opinion. She
expressed this in practical terms—Mary would not be welcomed in
London, the Shelley family would turn against her even more—but it
seemed so unsympathetic.
In the months together in Italy after the deaths of their husbands,
they had grown quite close. Jane was the last real link to Mary’s
husband left in her life. She had forgiven Jane for any indiscretions
with her husband. Losing Jane’s friendship would be like experiencing
another death. She decided she would in fact return to London with
her son and rekindle the friendship with Jane.
Mary returned to London in August of 1823, only to find that she
had become quite a celebrity. Frankenstein had been turned into a
play that emphasized the horror elements in the book. And it was quite
a sensation. The story and the name “Frankenstein” now had seeped
into popular culture. Mary’s father, who had become a bookseller and
publisher, came out with a new edition of Frankenstein, with Mary
clearly identified as the author. (The first edition was published
anonymously.) Mary, her father, and Jane went to see the play version,
and it was clear now to all of them what an object of fascination Mary
had become to the public—this was the slight, very gentle woman who
had written such a powerful horror story?
When Lord Byron died in Greece shortly after Mary’s return to
London, Mary became even more famous, for she had been one of
Byron’s closest friends. All of the principal English intellectuals
wanted to meet her, to find out more about her, Lord Byron, and her
husband. Even Jane was now back to her friendly self, although at
times she seemed to withdraw from Mary.
Despite her fame, Mary was unhappy. She did not want the
attention, because it came with endless gossip about her past and
insinuations about her morality. She was tired of being looked at and
judged. She wanted to hide herself and raise her son. She decided she
would move close to where Jane was living, in a more remote part of
London. There Percy would be reunited with Jane’s children. They
could live for each other and share their memories, recapture the past.
Jane was so cheerful, and Mary needed cheering up. In return, she
would do whatever it took to take care of Jane.
In the summer of 1824 the two women saw much of each other. It
was now apparent that Hogg had been courting Jane, but he was such
an awkward and unpleasant man, Mary could hardly imagine Jane
reciprocating his attentions. Besides, it was so soon after the death of
her husband. But then one evening in January it became clear to Mary
that she had been deceived for quite a while. It was somewhat late at
night, at Jane’s house. She and Percy had stuck around, Percy to play
some games with Jane’s children and Mary to talk some more. Hogg
had arrived and Jane finally exploded at Mary, with a look Mary had
never seen before on her friend’s face. She asked Mary to leave so
abruptly and rudely that it was clear she and Hogg had been having an
affair and Jane could no longer conceal her irritation with Mary. She
had noticed for some time that Jane had become increasingly cold and
less interested in being with her. Now she understood this better.
They remained friends. Mary empathized with her plight as a lonely
widow, her need for a husband. Jane was now pregnant with Hogg’s
child. Mary struggled to get over her resentment and to help Jane as
best she could. They saw less and less of each other.
To distract her from her loneliness, Mary befriended a beautiful
young woman named Isabel Robinson who needed help—she had
given birth to an illegitimate child and her father would certainly
disown her if he discovered the truth. For weeks Mary conspired to
help her, planning to send Isabel to Paris to live with a “man” who
would act as the father—the man in this case being a woman known as
Miss Dods, a notorious lesbian who loved to dress as a man and could
easily pass for one.
Mary delighted in furthering this plot, but before accompanying
Isabel to Paris, one afternoon she received the shock of her life: Isabel
confided to her in complete detail the stories that Jane had been
telling her for months about Mary—that Shelley had never really loved
his wife; that he had admired her but had had no feelings for her; that
she was not the woman he had needed or wanted; that Jane was in fact
the great love of his life. Jane had even hinted to Isabel that Mary had
made him so unhappy that he had secretly wanted to die the day he
left on his fatal sailing venture, and that Mary was somehow
responsible for his death.
Mary could hardly believe this, but Isabel had no reason to make up
such a story. And as she thought about it more deeply, suddenly things
began to make sense—the sudden coldness of Hogg, Leigh Hunt, and
others who must have heard these stories; the looks Jane occasionally
threw at Mary when she was the center of attention in a group; that
look on her face when she threw Mary out of her house; the
vehemence with which she wanted Mary to stay away from London
and give up her child, which meant giving up their inheritance. All
these years she had been not a friend but a competitor, and now it
seemed clear that it was not Mary’s husband who had pursued Jane
but Jane who had actively seduced him with her poses, her coquettish
looks, her guitar, her put-on soft manner. She was false to the core. It
was, after the death of Mary’s husband, the harshest blow of all.
Not only did Jane believe these monstrous stories, but she had
made others believe them. Mary knew how well her husband had loved
her over so many years, and after so many shared experiences. To
spread the story that she had somehow caused his death was beyond
hurtful; it was like a knife being plunged into an old wound. She wrote
in her journal: “My friend has proved false & treacherous. Have I not
been a fool?”
After several months of brooding over this, Mary finally confronted
her. Jane burst into tears, creating a scene. She wanted to know who
had spread this awful story of her betrayal, which she denied. She
accused Mary of being cold and unaffectionate. But for Mary, it was as
if she had finally woken up from a dream. She could now see the fake
outrage, the phony love, the way Jane confused matters with her
drama. There was no going back.
Over the ensuing years Mary would not cut off ties with Jane, but
now their relationship was totally on her terms. Mary could only feel
some strange satisfaction to see Jane’s life slowly fall apart, the
relationship with Hogg turning into a disaster. As Mary became more
and more famous for her novels and her publishing of Shelley’s poems,
she mingled with the greatest writers and politicians of her time and
slowly cut off contact with Jane. She could never trust her again. As
she wrote some years later about this affair in her journal: “Life is not
ill till we wish to forget. Jane first inspired me with that miserable
feeling, staining past years as she did—taking sweetness from memory
and giving it instead a serpent’s tooth.”
•   •   •
Interpretation: Let us look at the many transformations that envy
causes in the mind, as we can clearly see in the example of Jane
Williams. When Jane first met Mary, she had conflicting emotions. On
the one hand, there was much to like and admire about Mary. She had
pleasant manners, was clearly brilliant, and felt deeply attached to her
son. She could be quite generous. On the other hand, she made Jane
feel deeply inferior; Jane lacked so many of the things that Mary had,
but which she felt she deserved—attention for her own talents, for her
willingness to sacrifice for love, for her charming nature. Inevitably,
along with the attraction to Mary came envy—the desire to have the
same things as Mary, the sense of being entitled to have them, but the
apparent inability to get them easily or legitimately. With envy comes
the secret desire to hurt, wound, or steal from the envied person, to
right the unfairness that comes with his or her supposed superiority.
There were many reasons for Jane to conceal and even repress the
envy stirring within her. First, it is socially toxic to display envy. It
reveals deep insecurity along with hostility, a very ugly brew, which is
certain to push people away. Second, she and her husband depended
on the Shelleys for their future livelihood, since Jane was determined
to get Edward attached to Shelley as a friend, assistant, and sailing
expert. Shelley was notoriously generous with money. Acting in a
hostile manner toward Mary would have put that all in jeopardy.
Finally, envy is a painful emotion, an admission of our own inferiority,
something rather unbearable for us humans. It is not an emotion we
want to sit with and brood over. We like to conceal it from ourselves
and not be aware that it motivates our actions.
Considering all this, Jane took the natural next step: she befriended
Mary, returning Mary’s friendly advances and then some. A part of her
liked the woman and felt flattered at the attention shown to her by
someone so famous. Jane was avid for attention. How could she now
imagine herself as feeling envy toward Mary, if she had chosen to
become her friend? But the more time she spent around Mary, the
more the imbalance between them became apparent. It was Mary who
had the illustrious, handsome husband, the possible large inheritance,
the deep friendship with Lord Byron, and the rich imagination that
made her so talented. And so the more time she spent with Mary, the
stronger her envious feelings became.
To conceal this envy from herself and others now required the next
logical step: she had to mentally convert Mary into an unsympathetic
character. Mary was not so talented; she was merely lucky; if it weren’t
for her famous parents and the men around her, she never would have
gotten to her fortunate position; she did not deserve her fame; she was
an irritating person to be around, moody, depressive, clinging, no fun;
she was not nice or loving toward her husband and was not much of a
woman. As Jane went through this process, hostility began to
overwhelm friendly feelings. She felt more than justified in actively
seducing Percy Shelley and concealing her true feelings from Mary.
Most devastating to Mary’s marital relationship, every time her
husband complained to Jane about Mary, Jane would reinforce this
with some new story or observation, deepening the rift between them.
Of course, in turning Mary into someone so unlikable, Jane had to
willfully ignore the context—the recent loss of two beloved children to
illness, Shelley’s own coldness toward his wife, and his pursuit of other
women. But in order for enviers to feel entitled to take harmful action,
they must create a narrative: everything the other person does reveals
some negative trait; they do not deserve their superior position. Now
Jane had what she had wanted—the adoring attention of Percy Shelley
along with the complete alienation of him from his wife. Once Shelley
died, she could vent her envy by spreading the malicious story that
Mary did not seem particularly sad at the loss, something so troubling
to those who heard this, including Leigh Hunt, that they distanced
themselves from Mary.
Once Jane was back in London and Mary joined her there, the
pattern repeated. A part of Jane was still drawn to Mary; over the
years they had shared much. But the more time she spent around her,
the more she had to see Mary’s growing fame, her circle of illustrious
friends, her generous nature toward other women who had been
mistreated, her total devotion to her son and to the memory of her
husband. None of this jibed with the narrative, and so Jane had to take
yet another step in her mind: “Mary is false, still living off the legacy of
her husband and others, motivated by her neediness, not by her
generosity. If only other people could see this.” So she stole Mary’s
friend Hogg, a weaker imitation of the original sin of stealing her
husband. And she continued to spread stories about Mary, but this
time with the added vicious twist that Jane was the last great love of
Shelley’s life, that he had never loved his wife, and that Mary had
driven him to suicide. Telling such lurid stories in London would do
maximum damage to Mary’s reputation.
It is hard to calculate the pain she inflicted over the years on Mary
—the quarrels with Mary’s husband exacerbated by Jane, the sudden
mysterious coldness of Mary’s closest friends, the push and pull Jane
played on Mary, always stepping back when Mary wanted more
closeness, and finally the revelation of the ultimate betrayal, and the
thought, which would haunt Mary for years, that so many had believed
Jane’s story. Such can be the hidden pain inflicted by one great envier.
Understand: Envy occurs most commonly and painfully among
friends. We assume that something in the course of the relationship
caused the friend to turn against us. Sometimes all we experience is
the betrayal, the sabotage, the ugly criticisms they throw at us, and we
never understand the underlying envy that inspired these actions.
What we need to grasp is something paradoxical: people who feel
envy in the first place are often motivated to become our friends. Like
Jane, they feel a mix of genuine interest, attraction, and envy, if we
have some qualities that make them feel inferior. Becoming our friend,
they can disguise the envy to themselves. They will often go even
further, becoming extra attentive and impatient to secure our
friendship. But as they draw closer, the problem gets worse. The
underlying envy is continually stirred. The very traits that might have
stimulated feelings of inferiority—the good position, the solid work
ethic, the likability—are now being witnessed on a daily basis.
And so as with Jane, a narrative is gradually constructed: the
envied person is lucky, overly ambitious, not nearly so great. As our
friends, enviers can discover our weak points and what will wound the
most. From within a friendship they are better positioned to sabotage
us, steal our spouse, spread mayhem. Once they attack us, we tend to
feel guilty and confused: “Perhaps I deserve some of their criticisms.”
If we respond angrily, this only feeds the narrative of our unlikable
nature. Because we were friends, we feel doubly wounded and
betrayed, and the deeper the wound, the greater the satisfaction for
the envier. We can even speculate that the envier is unconsciously
drawn to befriending the envied person in order to have this wounding
power.
Although such fatal friends are elusive and tricky, there are always
warning signs. Learn to pay deeper attention to your first impressions.
(If only Mary had done so.) Often we intuit that the other person is
false but then forget this as they make friendly overtures. We always
feel better about people who seem to like us, and enviers know this
well. Rely upon the opinions of friends and neutral third parties. Many
friends of Mary found Jane conniving and even a bit scary. The envy of
the friend will also tend to leak out in sudden looks and disparaging
comments. Enviers will give puzzling advice—something that seems
against our interests but well reasoned on their part. They want us to
make mistakes and will often try to find a way to lead us into them.
Any success or increase in attention that we experience will cause
greater leakage of their true feelings.
It is not a question of becoming paranoid but simply of being alert
once you pick up some signs of possible envy. Learn to spot the types
particularly prone to feeling envy (see the next section for more on
this) before you become too enmeshed in their drama. It is hard to
measure what you will gain by avoiding an envy attack, but think of it
this way: the pain inflicted by one envier friend can resonate and
poison you for years.
Every time a friend succeeds, I die a little.
—Gore Vidal
Keys to Human Nature
Of all the human emotions, none is trickier or more elusive than envy.
It is very difficult to actually discern the envy that motivates people’s
actions or to even know that we have suffered an envy attack from
another. This is what makes it so frustrating to deal with and so
dangerous.
The reason for this elusiveness is simple: we almost never directly
express the envy we are feeling. If we feel anger toward people because
of something they said or did, we may try to disguise our anger for
various reasons, but we are aware that we are feeling hostile.
Eventually the anger will leak out in some nonverbal behavior. And if
we act upon our anger, the target will feel it for what it is and more
often than not know what caused the anger in that moment. But envy
is very different.
All of us feel envy, the sensation that others have more of what we
want—possessions, attention, respect. We deserve to have as much as
they do yet feel somewhat helpless to get such things. But as discussed
above, envy entails the admission to ourselves that we are inferior to
another person in something we value. Not only is it painful to admit
this inferiority, but it is even worse for others to see that we are feeling
this.
And so almost as soon as we feel the initial pangs of envy, we are
motivated to disguise it to ourselves—it is not envy we feel but
unfairness at the distribution of goods or attention, resentment at this
unfairness, even anger. Furthermore, the other person is not really
superior but simply lucky, overly ambitious, or unscrupulous. That’s
how they got to where they are. Having convinced ourselves that envy
is not motivating us but something else, we also make it very difficult
for others to detect the underlying envy. They see only our anger,
indignation, hostile criticisms, poisonous praise, and so on.
In ancient times, those who felt intense envy might have acted upon
it through violence, forcefully taking what the other had or even
resorting to murder. In the Old Testament, Cain murdered Abel out of
envy; the brothers of Joseph threw him in a ditch in the desert to die
because their father seemed to favor him; on several occasions King
Saul tried to kill the younger David, so handsome and naturally gifted,
finally going mad with envy.
Today, however, people are much more political and indirect, able
to control any overt aggressive impulses and disguise what they’re
feeling. Instead of violence, enviers are likely to sabotage our work,
ruin a relationship, sully our reputation, torment us with criticisms
that are aimed at our most basic insecurities. This allows them to
maintain their social position while causing harm, their targets not
even suspecting envy as the motivation. They can justify these actions
to themselves as righting the perceived imbalance or unfairness.
If someone is angry with us and acts on it, we can analyze the anger
this person is feeling and figure out a way to defuse it or defend
ourselves. But if we cannot see the underlying envy, we are inevitably
confused by the hostile action of the envier, and this confusion doubles
the pain we experience. “Why are people suddenly being so cold to
me?” “Why did that project fail so unexpectedly?” “Why have I been
fired?” “Why is this person against me?”
Your task as a student of human nature is to transform yourself
into a master decoder of envy. You are ruthless in your analysis and
your determination to get to the root of what motivates people. The
signs that people emit of envy are harder to discern, but they exist, and
you can master the language with some effort and subtle discernment.
Think of it as an intellectual challenge. By being able to decode it, you
will not feel so confused. You will understand in hindsight that you
suffered an envy attack, which will help you get over it. You might be
able to see in advance the warning signs of such an attack and either
defuse or deflect it. And knowing the hidden pain that comes from one
well-aimed envy attack, you will spare yourself the emotional damage
that can last for years. This will not make you paranoid but only better
able to weed out the false and fatal friends (or colleagues) from the
real ones, the ones you can truly trust.
Before immersing yourself in the subtleties of the emotion, it is
important to distinguish between passive and active envy. All of us in
the course of a day will inevitably feel some pangs of envy, as we
unconsciously monitor the people around us and sense that they might
have more. It is a fact of social life that there are always people who
are superior to us in wealth, intelligence, likability, and other qualities.
If these pangs rise to the level of consciousness and are a bit acute, we
might say something hurtful or mean-spirited as a way to vent the
emotion. But generally as we experience this passive form of envy, we
do not do anything that would in any meaningful way harm the
relationship with a friend or colleague. In detecting signs of passive
envy in others (for instance, little put-downs and offhand comments),
you should simply tolerate this as a fact of being a social animal.
Sometimes, however, this passive envy turns active. The underlying
sense of inferiority is too strong, leading to hostility that cannot be
vented by a comment or put-down. Sitting with one’s envy over a long
period of time can be painful and frustrating. Feeling righteous
indignation against the envied person, however, can be invigorating.
Acting on envy, doing something to harm the other person, brings
satisfaction, as it did to Jane, although the satisfaction is short-lived
because enviers always find something new to envy.
Your goal is to detect the signs of this more acute form of envy
before it turns dangerous. You can do this in three ways: by learning
the signs of envy that manage to leak through, by being aware of the
types of people who are more prone to acting on envy, and by
understanding the circumstances and actions that might trigger active
envy in people. You can never see all of the actions motivated by envy;
people are simply too good at disguising it. But using all three
decoding devices will increase your chances of detection.
Signs of Envy
Although the signs are subtle, envious feelings tend to leak out and can
be detected if you are observant. Seeing one such sign in isolation
might indicate passive or weak envy. You want to look for
combinations or repetitions of the following signs, a pattern, before
moving to alert mode.
Microexpressions: When people first experience envy, they have
not yet fooled themselves into thinking it is something else, and so
they are more prone to leakage than later on. That is why first
impressions are often the most accurate and should be given added
weight in this case. Envy is most associated with the eyes. The root of
the Latin word for envy, invidia, means “to look through, to probe
with the eyes like a dagger.” The early meaning of the word was
associated with the “evil eye” and the belief that a look could actually
convey a curse and physically harm someone.
The eyes are indeed a telling indicator, but the envious
microexpression affects the entire face. You will notice the envier’s
eyes momentarily boring into you, with a look that suggests disdain
and a touch of hostility. It is the look of a child who feels cheated. With
this look the corners of the mouth will often be turned down, the nose
in a sneering, somewhat upturned position, the chin jutting out.
Although the look will be a little too direct and held a little too long, it
still will not last more than a second or two. It is usually followed with
a strained, fake smile. Often you will see the look by accident, as you
suddenly turn your head their direction, or you will feel their eyes
burning into you without directly looking at them.
The German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer (1788–1860)
devised a quick way to elicit these looks and test for envy. Tell
suspected enviers some good news about yourself—a promotion, a new
and exciting love interest, a book contract. You will notice a very quick
expression of disappointment. Their tone of voice as they congratulate
you will betray some tension and strain. Equally, tell them some
misfortune of yours and notice the uncontrollable microexpression of
joy in your pain, what is commonly known as schadenfreude. Their
eyes light up for a fleeting second. People who are envious cannot help
feeling some glee when they hear of the bad luck of those they envy.
If you see such looks in the first few encounters with someone, as
Mary did with Jane, and they happen more than once, be on the
lookout for a dangerous envier entering your life.
Poisonous praise: A major envy attack is often preceded by little
envy bites—offhand comments expertly designed to get under your
skin. Confusing, paradoxical praise is a common form of this. Let us
say you have completed a project—a book, a film, some creative
venture—and the initial response from the public is quite positive.
Enviers will make a comment praising the money you will now be
making, implying that that is the main reason you have worked on it.
You want praise for the work itself and the effort that went into it, and
instead they imply that you have done it for the money, that you have
sold out. You feel confused—they have praised you, but in a way that
makes you uncomfortable. These comments will also come at
moments chosen to cause maximum doubt and damage, for instance
just when you have heard the good news and feel a flush of joy.
Similarly, in noting your success, they may bring up the least
likable parts of your audience, the kinds of fans or consumers who do
not reflect well on you. “Well, I’m sure Wall Street executives are going
to love this.” This is thrown in among other normal comments, but the
guilt by association lingers in your mind. Or they will praise something
once you have lost it—a job, a house in a nice neighborhood, a spouse
who has left you. “That was such a beautiful house. What a shame.” It’s
all said in a way that seems compassionate but has a discomforting
effect. Poisonous praise almost always indicates envy. They feel the
need to praise, but what dominates is the underlying hostility. If they
have a habit of praising in this way, if you experience it several times,
it is probably an indication of something more intense stirring within
them.
Backbiting: If people like to gossip a lot, particularly about common
acquaintances, you can be sure they will gossip about you. And gossip
is a frequent cover for envy, a convenient way to vent it by sharing
malicious rumors and stories. When they talk about others behind
their backs, you will see their eyes light up and their voice become
animated—it gives them a joy comparable to schadenfreude. They will
elicit any kind of negative report about a common acquaintance. A
frequent theme in their gossip is that no one’s really that great, and
people aren’t what they pretend to be.
If you ever get wind of a story they have spread about you, subtly or
not so subtly negative, only one such instance should be enough to
raise your antennae. What indicates active envy in this case is that
they are your friend and they feel the need to vent their underlying
hostility to a third party rather than keep it to themselves. If you notice
that friends or colleagues are suddenly cooler to you than before for no
apparent reason, such gossiping might be the source and would be
worth ferreting out. In any event, serial gossipers do not make loyal
and trustworthy friends.
The push and pull: As we saw in the Jane Williams story, enviers
often use friendship and intimacy as the best way to wound the people
they envy. They display unusual eagerness to become your friend.
They saturate you with attention. If you are in any way insecure, this
will have great effect. They praise you a little too effusively too early
on. Through the closeness they establish they are able to gather
material on you and find your weak points. Suddenly, after your
emotions are engaged, they criticize you in pointed ways. The criticism
is confusing, not particularly related to anything you have done, but
still you feel guilty. They then return to their initial warmth. The
pattern repeats. You are trapped between the warm friendship and the
occasional pain they inflict.
In criticizing you, they are experts at picking out any possible flaws
in your character or words you might have regretted, and giving them
great emphasis. They are like lawyers building a case against you.
When you’ve had enough and decide to defend yourself or criticize
them or break off the friendship, they can now ascribe to you a mean
or even cruel streak and tell others of this. You will notice in their past
other intense relationships with dramatic breakups, always the other
person’s fault. And at the source of this pattern, something hard to
discern, is that they choose to befriend people whom they envy for
some quality, then subtly torture them.
In general, criticism of you that seems sincere but not directly
related to anything you have actually done is usually a strong sign of
envy. People want to bully and overwhelm you with something
negative, both wounding you and covering any tracks of envy.
Envier Types
According to the psychoanalyst Melanie Klein (1882–1960), certain
people are prone to feeling envy their entire lives, and this begins in
early infancy. In the first few weeks and months of life, the mother and
infant are almost never out of each other’s presence. But as they get
older, infants must deal with the mother’s absence for longer periods
of time, and this entails a painful adjustment. Some infants, however,
are more sensitive to the mother’s occasional withdrawal. They are
greedy for more feeding and more attention. They become aware of
the presence of the father, with whom they must compete for the
mother’s attention. They may also become aware of other siblings, who
are seen as rivals. Klein, who specialized in the study of infancy and
early childhood, noticed that some children feel greater degrees of
hostility and resentment toward the father and siblings for the
attention they are receiving at their (the enviers’) expense, and toward
the mother for not giving them enough.
Certainly there are parents who create or intensify such envy by
playing favorites, by withdrawing on purpose to make the child more
dependent. In any event, infants or children experiencing such envy
will not feel grateful and loved for the attention they do get but instead
feel continually deprived and unsatisfied. A pattern is set for their
entire lives—they are children and later adults for whom nothing is
ever quite good enough. All potentially positive experiences are spoiled
by the sensation that they should have more and better. Something is
missing, and they can only imagine that other people are cheating
them out of what they should have. They develop an eagle eye for what
others have that they don’t. This becomes their dominant passion.
Most of us experience moments in childhood in which we feel
another person is getting more of the attention that we deserve, but we
are able to counterbalance this with other moments in which we
experience undeniable love, and gratitude for it. As we get older, we
can transfer such positive emotions to a series of people—siblings,
teachers, mentors, friends, lovers, and spouses. We alternate between
wanting more and feeling relatively satisfied and grateful. Those prone
to envy, however, do not experience life the same way. Instead, they
transfer their initial envy and hostility to a series of others whom they
see as disappointing or hurting them. Their moments of satisfaction
and gratitude are rare or nonexistent. “I need, I want more,” they are
always telling themselves.
Because envy is a painful sensation, these types will enact lifelong
strategies to mitigate or repress these feelings that gnaw at them. They
will denigrate anything or anyone good in the world. This means there
aren’t really people out there worth envying. Or they will become
extremely independent. If they do not need people for anything, that
will expose them to fewer envy scenarios. At an extreme they will
devalue themselves. They don’t deserve good things in life and so have
no need to compete with others for attention and status. According to
Klein, these common strategies are brittle and will break down under
stress—a downturn in their career, bouts of depression, wounds to
their ego. The envy they experienced in their earliest years remains
continually latent and ready to be directed at others. They are literally
looking for people to envy so they can reexperience the primal
emotion.
Depending on their psychological makeup, they will tend to
conform to certain envying types. It is of great benefit to be able to
recognize such types early on, because they are the ones most likely to
turn active with their envy. The following are five common varieties of
enviers, how they tend to disguise themselves, and their particular
forms of attack.
The Leveler: When you first meet them, levelers can seem rather
entertaining and interesting. They tend to have a wicked sense of
humor. They are good at putting down those who are powerful and
deflating the pretentious. They also seem to have a keen nose for
injustice and unfairness in this world. But where they differ from
people with genuine empathy for underdogs is that levelers cannot
recognize or appreciate excellence in almost anyone, except those who
are dead. They have fragile egos. Those who have achieved things in
life make them feel insecure. They are highly sensitive to feelings of
inferiority. The envy they initially feel for those who are successful is
quickly covered up by indignation. They rail at high achievers for
gaming the system, for being far too ambitious, or simply for being
lucky and not really deserving praise. They have come to associate
excellence with unfairness, as a way to soothe their insecurities.
You will notice that though they can put others down, they do not
take easily to any jokes at their expense. They often celebrate low
culture and trash, because mediocre work does not stir their
insecurities. Besides their cynical humor, you can recognize this type
by how they talk about their own life: they love to tell stories of the
many injustices inflicted on them; they are always blameless. These
types make excellent professional critics—they can use this medium to
tear down those they secretly envy and be rewarded for it.
Their main goal is to bring everyone down to the same mediocre
level they occupy. This sometimes means leveling not only achievers
and the powerful but also those who are having too good a time, who
seem to be enjoying themselves too much, or who have too great a
sense of purpose, which levelers lack.
Be wary around such types, particularly in the workplace, because
they will make you feel guilty for your own impulse to excel. They will
begin with passive-aggressive comments that taint you with the ugly
word “ambition.” You might be a part of the oppressor class. They will
criticize you in ugly and hurtful ways. They may follow this up with
active sabotage of your work, which they justify to themselves as a
form of retributive justice.
The Self-entitled Slacker: In the world today many people rightfully
feel entitled to have success and the good things in life, but they
usually understand that this will require sacrifice and hard work.
Some people, however, feel they deserve attention and many rewards
in life as if these are naturally due to them. These self-entitled slackers
are generally quite narcissistic. They will make the briefest outline for
a novel or screenplay they want to write, or an “idea” for a brilliant
business, and feel that that is enough to attract praise and attention.
But deep down, these slackers feel insecure about their ability to get
what they want; that is why they have never really developed the
proper discipline. When they find themselves around high achievers
who work very hard and have earned true respect for their work, this
will make them aware of the doubts about themselves they have been
trying to repress. They will move quickly from envy to hostility.
Christopher Wren (1632–1723) was one of the great geniuses of his
age, a renowned scientist and one of the leading architects of the time,
his most famous work being St. Paul’s Cathedral in London. Wren was
also generally beloved by almost everyone who worked with him. His
enthusiasm, his obvious skill, and the long hours he gave on the job
made him popular with both the public and the workers on his
projects. One man, however, came to deeply envy him—William
Talman, a lower-level architect appointed as Wren’s assistant on
several important jobs. Talman believed that their roles should have
been reversed; he had an extremely high opinion of himself, a rather
sour attitude, and a pronounced lazy streak.
When a couple of accidents occurred on two of Wren’s projects,
killing some workmen, Talman went into overdrive, accusing his boss
of being negligent. He dug up every other possible misdeed in Wren’s
long career, trying to make the case that he did not deserve his lofty
reputation. For years he waged a campaign to besmirch Wren’s
reputation, calling him careless with lives and money and generally
overrated. He so muddied the waters that the king finally gave some
important commissions to the much less talented Talman, infuriating
Wren. Talman proceeded to steal and incorporate many of Wren’s
innovations. The ugly battle with Talman had a debilitating emotional
effect on Wren that lasted years.
Be extra careful in the work environment with those who like to
maintain their position through charm and being political, rather than
by getting things done. They are very prone to envying and hating
those who work hard and get results. They will slander and sabotage
you without any warning.
The Status Fiend: As social animals we humans are very sensitive to
our rank and position within any group. We can measure our status by
the attention and respect we receive. We are constantly monitoring
differences and comparing ourselves with others. But for some people
status is more than a way of measuring social position—it is the most
important determinant of their self-worth. You will notice such fiends
by the questions they ask about how much money you make, whether
you own your home, what kind of neighborhood it’s in, whether you
occasionally fly business class, and all of the other petty things that
they can use as points of comparison. If you are of a higher social
status than they are, they will conceal their envy by appearing to
admire your success. But if you are a peer or happen to work with
them, they will be sniffing for any sign of favoritism or privileges they
don’t have, and they will attack you in underhanded ways,
undermining your position within the group.
For baseball Hall of Famer Reggie Jackson (b. 1946), his Yankee
teammate Graig Nettles fit this type. To Jackson, Nettles seemed
extremely attentive to the credit and accolades others were getting that
he was not. He was always discussing and comparing salaries. What
embittered Nettles was the size of Jackson’s salary and the attention
he got from the media. Jackson had earned the salary and attention he
received through his batting prowess and colorful personality, but the
envious Nettles saw it differently. He thought Jackson simply knew
how to play the media and cozy up to the Yankees owner George
Steinbrenner. Jackson, he decided, was a manipulator. His envy
leaked out in wicked jokes at Jackson’s expense, poisonous praise, and
hostile looks. He turned much of the Yankee clubhouse against
Jackson and made his life miserable. As Jackson wrote of him in his
autobiography, “I always had the feeling he was behind me, ready to
turn the knife.” He also felt there was some tacit racism in Nettles’s
envy, as if a black athlete could not possibly earn a salary that much
larger than his own.
Recognize status fiends by how they reduce everything to material
considerations. When they comment on the clothes you wear or the
car you drive, they seem to focus on the money these things must have
cost, and as they talk about such things, you will notice something
childish in their demeanor, as if they were reliving a family drama in
which they felt cheated by a sibling who had something better. Don’t
be fooled by their driving an older car or dressing shabbily. These
types will often try to assert their status in the opposite direction, by
being the consummate monk, the idealistic hippie, while secretly
yearning for the luxuries they cannot get through hard work. If you are
around such types, try to downplay or conceal what you have that
might trigger envy, and talk up their possessions, skills, and status in
whatever way you can.
The Attacher: In any court-like environment of power, you will
inevitably find people who are drawn to those who are successful or
powerful, not out of admiration but out of secret envy. They find a way
to attach themselves as friends or assistants. They make themselves
useful. They may admire their boss for some qualities, but deep down
they believe they are entitled to have some of the attention he or she is
getting, without all the hard work. The longer they are around the high
achiever, the more this feeling gnaws at them. They have talent, they
have dreams—why should the person they work for be so favored?
They are good at concealing the undercurrent of envy through
excessive fawning. But these types attach themselves because it gives
them some kind of satisfaction to spoil and wound the person who has
more. They are drawn to the powerful out of a desire to harm them in
some way.
Yolanda Saldivar (b. 1960) is an extreme example of the type. She
started a major fan club for the popular Tejano singer Selena, then
ingratiated herself into Selena’s business by becoming manager of her
clothing stores and accumulated more power. No one was more
sycophantic to the singer. But feeling deeply envious of the fame of
Selena and turning quite hostile, she began to embezzle funds from the
business, which she felt more than justified in doing. When confronted
about this by Selena’s father, her response was to plot to murder
Selena herself, which she finally did in 1995.
These types have a trait that is quite common to all enviers: they
lack a clear sense of purpose in their life (see chapter 13 for more on
this). They do not know their calling; they could do many things, they
think, and often try different jobs. They wander around and feel empty
inside. They naturally envy those who act with a sense of purpose, and
will go so far as to attach themselves to such a person’s life, partly
wishing to get some of what they themselves are missing and partly
desiring to harm the other person.
In general, be wary of those who are too eager to attach themselves
to your life, too impatient to make themselves useful. They try to draw
you into a relationship not by their experience and competence but by
the flattery and attention they give you. Their form of attack is to
gather information on you that they can leak out or spread as gossip,
harming your reputation. Learn to hire and work with those who have
experience rather than just a pleasing manner.
The Insecure Master: For some people, reaching a high position
validates their self-opinion and boosts their self-esteem. But there are
some who are more anxious. Holding a high position tends to increase
their insecurities, which they are careful to conceal. Secretly they
doubt whether they are worthy of the responsibility. They look at
others who might have more talent, even those below them, with an
envious eye.
You will work for such bosses under the assumption that they are
self-assured and confident. How else could they have become the
boss? You will work extra hard to impress them, show them you’re a
person on the way up, only to find yourself after several months
suddenly demoted or fired, which makes little sense, since you had
clearly delivered results. You did not realize you were dealing with the
insecure variety and had inadvertently triggered their self-doubts.
They secretly envy your youth, your energy, your promise, and the
signs of your talent. Even worse if you are socially gifted and they are
not. They will justify the firing or demotion with some narrative they
have concocted; you will never discover the truth.
Michael Eisner, all-powerful CEO of Disney for twenty years, is just
such a type. In 1995 he fired his number two man, Jeffrey Katzenberg,
head of the film studio, ostensibly because of his abrasive personality,
saying he was not a team player. In truth, Katzenberg had had far too
much success in his position; the films he oversaw became the main
source of Disney’s revenue. He had the golden touch. Never admitting
this to himself, Eisner clearly envied Katzenberg for his talent and
transmuted this into hostility. This pattern repeated itself time and
again with new creative people he brought in.
Pay attention to those above you for signs of insecurity and envy.
They will inevitably have a track record of firing people for strange
reasons. They will not seem particularly happy with that excellent
report you turned in. Always play it safe by deferring to bosses,
making them look better, and earning their trust. Couch your brilliant
ideas as their ideas. Let them get all the credit for your hard work.
Your time to shine will come, but not if you inadvertently stimulate
their insecurities.
Envy Triggers
Although certain types are more prone to envy, you must also be aware
that there are circumstances that will tend to trigger envy in almost
anyone. You must be extra alert in such situations.
The most common trigger is a sudden change in your status, which
alters your relationship to friends and peers. This is particularly true
among people in your own profession. This has been known for a long
time. As Hesiod noted in the eighth century BC, “The potter envies the
potter, the craftsman the craftsman, the writer the writer.” If you
experience success, those in your field who have similar aspirations
but who are still struggling will naturally feel envious. You should be
reasonably tolerant of this because if the tables were reversed, you
would probably feel the same. Do not take so personally their faint
praise and veiled criticisms. But be aware that among some of these
peers envy can turn active and dangerous.
Renaissance artists who suddenly got commissions became targets
for envious rivals, who could turn quite vicious. Michelangelo clearly
envied the younger and talented Raphael and did what he could to
sully his reputation and block his commissions. Writers are
notoriously envious of other writers, particularly those with more
lucrative deals.
The best you can do in such situations is to have some self-
deprecating humor and to not rub people’s faces in your success,
which, after all, might contain some elements of luck. In fact, when
discussing your success with others who might envy you, always
emphasize or play up the element of luck. For those closest to you,
offer to help them in their struggles as best you can, without appearing
patronizing. In a similar vein, never make the mistake of praising a
writer in front of another writer, or an artist in front of an artist,
unless the person being praised is dead. If you detect signs of a more
active envy in peers, get as far away from them as possible.
Keep in mind that people who are getting older, with their careers
on the decline, have delicate egos and are quite prone to experiencing
envy.
Sometimes it is people’s natural gifts and talents that will stir up
the most intense forms of envy. We can strive to become proficient in a
field, but we cannot reengineer our physiology. Some people are born
with better looks, more raw athletic skill, an unusually vivid
imagination, or an open and generous nature. If people with natural
gifts also possess a good work ethic and have some luck in life, envy
will follow them wherever they go. Often making it worse for such
types, they also tend to be quite naive. They themselves do not feel
envy toward others, so they cannot understand the emotion at all.
Unaware of the dangers, they naturally display their talents and attract
even more envy. Mary Shelley was all of this—gifted with a brilliant
imagination and superior intellectual capabilities, and also quite naive.
What is worse, envying types secretly loathe those who are immune to
feeling envy. It makes their envious nature doubly apparent to
themselves and stirs the desire to hurt and wound.
If you have any natural gifts that elevate you above others, you
must be aware of the dangers and avoid flaunting such talents. Instead
you want to strategically reveal some flaws to blunt people’s envy and
mask your natural superiority. If you are gifted in the sciences, make it
clear to others how you wish you had more social skills. Show your
intellectual clumsiness at subjects outside your expertise.
John F. Kennedy seemed almost too perfect to the American public.
So handsome, intelligent, and charismatic, and with such a beautiful
wife—it was hard to identify with or like him. As soon as he made his
big mistake in the failed invasion of Cuba (known as the Bay of Pigs)
early on in his administration, and took full responsibility for the
debacle, his poll numbers skyrocketed. The mistake had humanized
him. Although this was not done by design, you can have a similar
effect by discussing the mistakes you have made in the past and
showing some selective awkwardness in certain areas that do not
diminish your overall reputation.
Women who achieve success and fame are more prone to attracting
envy and hostility, although this will always be veiled as something
else—such women are said to be too cold, or ambitious, or unfeminine.
Oftentimes we choose to admire people who achieve great things,
admiration being the opposite of envy. We do not feel personally
challenged or insecure in the face of their excellence. We might also
emulate them, use them as spurs toward trying to achieve more. But
unfortunately this is rarely the case with successful women. A high-
achieving woman inflicts greater feelings of inferiority in both other
women and men (“I’m inferior to a woman?”), which leads to envy and
hostility, not admiration.
Coco Chanel, the most successful businesswoman of her era,
especially considering her origins as an orphan (see chapter 5),
suffered from such envy her entire life. In 1931, at the height of her
power, she met Paul Iribe, an illustrator and designer whose career
was on the decline. Iribe was an expert seducer and they had much in
common. But several months into their relationship, he began to
criticize her for her extravagance and torment her about her other
flaws as he saw them. He wanted to control all aspects of her life.
Lonely and desperate for a relationship, she hung on, but she later
wrote of Iribe, “My growing celebrity eclipsed his declining glory. . . .
Iribe loved me with the secret hope of destroying me.” Love and envy
are not mutually exclusive.
Successful women will have to bear this burden until such
entrenched underlying values are changed. In the meantime, they will
have to be even more adept at deflecting envy and playing the humble
card.
Robert Rubin (b. 1938), two-term secretary of the treasury under
Bill Clinton, was a grand master when it came to masking his
excellence and defusing envy. He had begun his career at Goldman
Sachs in 1966, slowly rising through the ranks to become its cohead in
1990. He was one of the key figures who transformed Goldman Sachs
into the most powerful investment bank on Wall Street. He was a hard
worker and brilliant at finance, but as he became more powerful
within Goldman, he also became more deferential in all of his
interactions. In meetings in which he was clearly the most
knowledgeable person, he would make a point of asking for the
opinions of the most junior associate in attendance, and of listening to
what he or she had to say with rapt attention. When people who
worked for him asked him what should be done in relation to some
crisis or problem, he would look at them calmly and ask first, “What
do you think?” He would take their answer quite seriously.
As one colleague at Goldman later said of him, “There is no one
better at the humility shtick than Bob. The line, ‘just one’s man
opinion’ was something he would utter a dozen times a day.” What is
remarkable is how Rubin earned the admiration of so many people
and how few had anything bad to say about him, considering the
competitive environment within the company. This reveals the power
you have to short-circuit envy by placing attention on other people
instead of yourself and engaging with them on a meaningful level.
If you find yourself under an envy attack, your best strategy is to
control your emotions. It is much easier to do this once you realize
that envy is the source. The envier feeds upon your overreaction as
material to criticize you, justify their actions, and entangle you in some
further drama. At all costs, maintain your composure. If possible, get
some physical distance as well—fire them, cut off contact, whatever is
possible. Do not imagine you can somehow repair the relationship.
Your generosity in trying this will only intensify their feelings of
inferiority. They will strike again. By all means defend yourself from
any public attacks or gossip that they spread, but do not harbor
revenge fantasies. The envier is miserable. The best strategy is let to
them stew in their “cold poison” from a distance, without any future
means of wounding you, as Mary did to Jane. Their chronic
unhappiness is punishment enough.
Finally, you might imagine that envy is a somewhat rare occurrence
in the modern world. After all, it is a primitive, childish emotion, and
we live in such sophisticated times. Furthermore, not many people
discuss or analyze envy as a major social factor. But the truth is that
envy is more prevalent now than ever before, largely because of social
media.
Through social media we have a continual window into the lives of
friends, pseudofriends, and celebrities. And what we see is not some
unvarnished peek into their world but a highly idealized image that
they present. We see only the most exciting images from their
vacations, the happy faces of their friends and children, accounts of
their continual self-improvement, the fascinating people they are
meeting, the great causes and projects they are involved in, the
examples of success in their endeavors. Are we having as much fun?
Are our lives as seemingly fulfilled as theirs? Are we perhaps missing
out on something? We generally believe, and for good reason, that we
are all entitled to share in the good life, but if our peers seem to have
more, someone or something must be to blame.
What we experience in this case is a generalized feeling of
dissatisfaction. Low-grade envy sits inside us, waiting to be triggered
into the more acute variety if something we read or see intensifies our
insecurities. Such diffuse envy among large groups of people can even
become a political force, as demagogues can stir it against certain
individuals or groups of people who have or seem to have it easier than
others. People can be unified through their underlying envy, but as
with the personal variety, nobody will admit to this, nor will it ever be
seen as such. Public envy can be quickly turned against public figures,
especially in the form of schadenfreude when they experience some
misfortune. (Witness the piling on of hostility toward Martha Stewart
once she seemed to run afoul of the law.) Gossip about the powerful
becomes an industry.
What this means is simple: we will find more and more people
around us prone to feeling passive envy that can turn into the virulent
form if we are not careful. We must be prepared to feel its effects
coming from friends, colleagues, and the public if we are in the public
eye. In such an overheated social environment, learning to recognize
the signs and being able to identify envier types is an absolutely
critical skill to develop. And since we are now all more susceptible to
feeling envy ourselves, we must also learn how to manage this emotion
within ourselves, transforming it into something positive and
productive.
Beyond Envy
Like most humans, you will tend to deny that you ever experience
envy, at least strong enough to act on. You are simply not being honest
with yourself. As described above, you are only conscious of the
indignation or resentment you feel that covers up the initial pangs of
envy. You need to overcome the natural resistance to seeing the
emotion as it first stirs within you.
We all compare ourselves with others; we all feel unsettled by those
who are superior in some area that we esteem; and we all react to this
by feeling some form of envy. (It is wired into our nature; studies have
shown that monkeys feel envy.) You can begin with a simple
experiment: next time you hear or read about the sudden success of
someone in your field, notice the inevitable feeling of wanting the
same (the pang) and the subsequent hostility, however vague, toward
the person you envy. It happens quickly and you can easily miss the
transition, but try to catch it. It is natural to go through this emotional
sequence and there should be no guilt attached. Monitoring yourself
and seeing more such instances will only help you in the slow process
of moving beyond envy.
Let us be realistic, however, and realize that it is almost impossible
to rid ourselves of the compulsion to compare ourselves with others. It
is too ingrained in our nature as a social animal. Instead, what we
must aspire to is to slowly transform our comparing inclination into
something positive, productive, and prosocial. The following are five
simple exercises to help you in achieving this.
Move closer to what you envy. Envy thrives on relative closeness—in
a corporate environment where people see each other every day, in a
family, in a neighborhood, in any group of peers. But people tend to
hide their problems and to put their best face forward. We only see
and hear of their triumphs, their new relationships, their brilliant
ideas that will land them a gold mine. If we moved closer—if we saw
the quarrels that go on behind closed doors or the horrible boss that
goes with that new job—we would have less reason to feel envy.
Nothing is ever so perfect as it seems, and often we would see that we
are mistaken if we only looked closely enough. Spend time with that
family you envy and wish you had as your own, and you will begin to
reassess your opinion.
If you envy people with greater fame and attention, remind yourself
that with such attention comes a lot of hostility and scrutiny that is
quite painful. Wealthy people are often miserable. Read any account of
the last ten years of the life of Aristotle Onassis (1906–1975), one of
the wealthiest men in history, married to the glamorous Jacqueline
Kennedy, and you will see that his wealth brought him endless
nightmares, including the most spoiled and unloving of children.
The process of moving closer is twofold: on the one hand, try to
actually look behind the glittering façades people present, and on the
other hand, simply imagine the inevitable disadvantages that go along
with their position. This is not the same as leveling them down. You
are not diminishing the achievements of those who are great. You are
mitigating the envy you might feel for things in people’s personal lives.
Engage in downward comparisons. You normally focus on those
who seem to have more than you, but it would be wiser to look at those
who have less. There are always plenty of people to use for such a
comparison. They live in harsher environments, deal with more
threats to their lives, and have deeper levels of insecurity about the
future. You can even look at friends who have it much worse than you.
This should stimulate not only empathy for the many who have less
but also greater gratitude for what you actually possess. Such gratitude
is the best antidote to envy.
As a related exercise, you can write up all the positive things in your
life that you tend to take for granted—the people who have been kind
and helpful to you, the health that you presently enjoy. Gratitude is a
muscle that requires exercise or it will atrophy.
Practice Mitfreude. Schadenfreude, the experience of pleasure in
the pain of other people, is distinctly related to envy, as several studies
have demonstrated. When we envy someone, we are prone to feel
excitement, even joy, if they experience a setback or suffer in some
way. But it would be wise to practice instead the opposite, what the
philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche called Mitfreude—“joying with.” As he
wrote, “The serpent that stings us means to hurt us and rejoices as it
does so; the lowest animal can imagine the pain of others. But to
imagine the joy of others and to rejoice at it is the highest privilege of
the highest animals.”
This means that instead of merely congratulating people on their
good fortune, something easy to do and easily forgotten, you must
instead actively try to feel their joy, as a form of empathy. This can be
somewhat unnatural, as our first tendency is to feel a pang of envy, but
we can train ourselves to imagine how it must feel to others to
experience their happiness or satisfaction. This not only cleans our
brain of ugly envy but also creates an unusual form of rapport. If we
are the targets of Mitfreude, we feel the other person’s genuine
excitement at our good fortune, instead of just hearing words, and it
induces us to feel the same for them. Because it is such a rare
occurrence, it contains great power to bond people. And in
internalizing other people’s joy, we increase our own capacity to feel
this emotion in relation to our own experiences.
Transmute envy into emulation. We cannot stop the comparing
mechanism in our brains, so it is best to redirect it into something
productive and creative. Instead of wanting to hurt or steal from the
person who has achieved more, we should desire to raise ourselves up
to his or her level. In this way, envy becomes a spur to excellence. We
may even try to be around people who will stimulate such competitive
desires, people who are slightly above us in skill level.
To make this work requires a few psychological shifts. First, we
must come to believe that we have the capacity to raise ourselves up.
Confidence in our overall abilities to learn and improve will serve as a
tremendous antidote to envy. Instead of wishing to have what another
has and resorting to sabotage out of helplessness, we feel the urge to
get the same for ourselves and believe we have the ability to do so.
Second, we must develop a solid work ethic to back this up. If we are
rigorous and persistent, we will be able to overcome almost any
obstacle and elevate our position. People who are lazy and
undisciplined are much more prone to feeling envy.
Related to this, having a sense of purpose, a feel for your calling in
life, is a great way to immunize yourself against envy. You are focused
on your own life and plans, which are clear and invigorating. What
gives you satisfaction is realizing your potential, not earning attention
from the public, which is fleeting. You have much less need to
compare. Your sense of self-worth comes from within, not from
without.
Admire human greatness. Admiration is the polar opposite of envy
—we are acknowledging people’s achievements, celebrating them,
without having to feel insecure. We are admitting their superiority in
the arts or sciences or in business without feeling pain from this. But
this goes further. In recognizing the greatness of someone, we are
celebrating the highest potential of our species. We are experiencing
Mitfreude with the best in human nature. We share the pride that
comes from any great human achievement. Such admiration elevates
us above the pettiness of our day-to-day life and will have calming
effect.
Although it is easier to admire without any taint of envy those who
are dead, we must try to include at least one living person in our
pantheon. If we are young enough, such objects of admiration can also
serve as models to emulate, at least to some degree.
Finally, it is worth cultivating moments in life in which we feel
immense satisfaction and happiness divorced from our own success or
achievements. This happens commonly when we find ourselves in a
beautiful landscape—the mountains, the sea, a forest. We do not feel
the prying, comparing eyes of others, the need to have more attention
or to assert ourselves. We are simply in awe of what we see, and it is
intensely therapeutic. This can also occur when we contemplate the
immensity of the universe, the uncanny set of circumstances that had
to come together for us to be born, the vast reaches of time before us
and after us. These are sublime moments, and as far removed from the
pettiness and poisons of envy as possible.
For not many men . . . can love a friend who fortune prospers
without envying; and about the envious brain
cold poison clings and doubles all the pain
life brings him. His own woundings he must nurse,
and feel another’s gladness like a curse.
—Aeschylus
W
11
Know Your Limits
The Law of Grandiosity
e humans have a deep need to think highly of ourselves. If that
opinion of our goodness, greatness, and brilliance diverges
enough from reality, we become grandiose. We imagine our
superiority. Often a small measure of success will elevate our natural
grandiosity to even more dangerous levels. Our high self-opinion has
now been confirmed by events. We forget the role that luck may have
played in the success, or the contributions of others. We imagine we
have the golden touch. Losing contact with reality, we make
irrational decisions. That is why our success often does not last. Look
for the signs of elevated grandiosity in yourself and in others—
overbearing certainty in the positive outcome of your plans;
excessive touchiness if criticized; a disdain for any form of authority.
Counteract the pull of grandiosity by maintaining a realistic
assessment of yourself and your limits. Tie any feelings of greatness
to your work, your achievements, and your contributions to society.
The Success Delusion
By the summer of 1984, Michael Eisner (b. 1942), president of
Paramount Pictures, could no longer ignore the restlessness that had
been plaguing him for months. He was impatient to move on to a
bigger stage and shake the foundations of Hollywood. This
restlessness had been the story of his life. He had begun his career at
ABC, and never settling too comfortably within one department, after
nine years of various promotions he had risen to the position of head
of prime-time programming. But television began to seem small and
constricting to him. He needed a larger, grander stage. In 1976 Barry
Diller—a former boss at ABC and now the chairman of Paramount
Pictures—offered him the job of heading Paramount’s film studio, and
he jumped at the chance.
Paramount had long been in the doldrums, but working with Diller,
Eisner transformed it into the hottest studio in Hollywood, with a
string of remarkably successful films—Saturday Night Fever, Grease,
Flashdance, and Terms of Endearment. Although Diller certainly
played a part in this turnaround, Eisner saw himself as the main
driving force behind the studio’s success. After all, he had invented a
surefire formula for creating profitable films.
The formula depended on keeping costs down, an obsession of his.
To do so, a film had to begin with a great concept, one that was
original, easy to summarize, and dramatic. Executives could hire the
most expensive writers, directors, and actors for a film, but if the
underlying concept was weak, all the money in the world would be
wasted. Films with a strong concept, however, would market
themselves. A studio could churn these relatively inexpensive films out
in volume, and even if they were only moderate hits, they would
ensure a steady flow of income. This thinking went against the grain of
the blockbuster mentality of the late 1970s, but who could argue with
the undeniable profits Eisner had generated for Paramount? Eisner
immortalized this formula in a memo that soon spread around
Hollywood and became gospel.
But after so many years of sharing the limelight with Diller at
Paramount, trying to please corporate CEOs, and pushing back against
marketing directors and finance people, Eisner had had enough. If
only he could run his own studio, unfettered. With the formula he had
created and with his relentless ambition, he could forge the greatest
and most profitable entertainment empire in the world. He was tired
of other people piggybacking on his ideas and success. Operating on
top and alone, he could control the show and take all the credit.
As Eisner contemplated this next critical move in his career that
summer of ’84, he finally settled upon the perfect target for his
ambitions—the Walt Disney Company. At first glance, this would seem
a puzzling choice. Since the death of Walt Disney in 1966, the Walt
Disney film studio seemed frozen in time, getting weirder with each
passing year. The place operated more like a stodgy men’s club. Many
executives stopped working after lunch and spent their afternoons in
card games, or would lounge about in the steam room on site. Hardly
anyone was ever fired. The studio produced one animated film about
every four years and in 1983 produced a meager three live-action
films. They had not had a single hit film since The Love Bug in 1968.
The Disney lot in Burbank almost seemed like a ghost town. The actor
Tom Hanks, who worked on the lot in 1983, described it as “a
Greyhound bus station in the 1950s.”
Given its dilapidated condition, however, this would be the perfect
place for Eisner to work his magic. The studio and the corporation
could only move up. Its board members were desperate to turn it
around and avoid a hostile takeover. Eisner could dictate the terms of
his leadership position. Presenting himself to Roy Disney (Walt’s
nephew and the largest shareholder of Disney stock) as the company’s
savior, he laid out a detailed and inspiring plan for a dramatic
turnaround (greater than Paramount’s), and Roy was won over. With
Roy’s blessing the board approved the choice, and in September 1984
Eisner was named chairman and CEO of the Walt Disney Company.
Frank Wells, the former head of Warner Bros., was named president
and chief operating officer. Wells would focus on the business side. In
all matters Eisner was the boss; Wells was there to help and serve him.
Eisner wasted no time. He embarked on a major restructuring of
the company, which led to the departure of over a thousand
employees. He started filling the executive ranks with Paramount
people, most notably Jeffrey Katzenberg (b. 1950), who had worked as
Eisner’s right-hand man at Paramount and was now named chairman
of Walt Disney Studios. Katzenberg could be abrasive and downright
rude, but no one in Hollywood was more efficient or worked harder.
He simply got things done.
Within months Disney began to churn out a remarkable series of
hits, adhering to Eisner’s formula. Fifteen of its first seventeen films
(such as Down and Out in Beverly Hills and Who Framed Roger
Rabbit) generated profits, a run of success almost unheard of for any
studio in Hollywood.
One day, as Eisner explored the Burbank lot with Wells, they
entered the Disney library and discovered hundreds of cartoons from
the golden era that had never been shown. There on endless shelves
were stored all of the great Disney classic animated hits. Eisner’s eyes
lit up at the sight of this treasure. He could reissue all of these cartoons
and animated films on video (the home video market was in the midst
of exploding) and it would be pure profit. Based on these cartoons, the
company could create stores to market the various Disney characters.
Disney was a virtual gold mine waiting to be exploited, and Eisner
would make the most of this.
Soon the stores opened, the videos sold like crazy, the film hits kept
pumping profit into the company, and Disney’s stock price soared. It
had replaced Paramount as the hottest film studio in town. Wanting to
cultivate a more public presence, Eisner decided to revive the old The
Wonderful World of Disney, an hourlong television show from the
fifties and sixties hosted by Walt Disney himself. This time Eisner
would be the host. He was not a natural in front of the camera, but he
felt audiences would grow to like him. He could be comforting to
children, like Walt himself. In fact, he began to feel the two of them
were somehow magically connected, as if he were more than just the
head of the corporation but rather the natural son and successor to
Walt Disney himself.
Despite all his success, however, the old restlessness returned. He
needed a new venture, a bigger challenge, and soon he found it. The
Walt Disney Company had plans to create a new theme park in
Europe. The last one to open, Tokyo Disneyland in 1983, had been a
success. Those in charge of theme parks had settled upon two
potential sites for the new Disneyland—one near Barcelona, Spain, the
other near Paris. Although the Barcelona site made more economic
sense, since the weather there was much better, Eisner chose the
French site. This was going to be more than a theme park. This was
going to be a cultural statement. He would hire the best architects in
the world. Unlike the usual fiberglass castles at the other theme parks,
at Euro Disney—as it came to be known—the castles would be built out
of pink stone and feature handcrafted stained-glass windows with
scenes from various fairy tales. It would be a place even snobby French
elites would be excited to visit. Eisner loved architecture, and here he
could be a modern-day Medici.
As the years went by, the cost of Euro Disney mounted. Letting go
of his usual obsession with the bottom line, Eisner felt that if he built it
right, the crowds would come and the park would eventually pay for
itself. But when it finally opened as planned in 1992, it quickly became
clear that Eisner had not understood French tastes and vacation
habits. The French were not so willing to wait in line for rides,
particularly in bad weather. As in the other theme parks, no beer or
wine was served on the premises, and that seemed like sacrilege to the
French. The hotel rooms were too expensive for a family to stay there
more than a night. And despite all the attention to detail, the pink
stone castles still looked like kitschy versions of the originals.
Attendance was only half of what Eisner had anticipated. The debts
Disney had incurred in the construction had ballooned, and the money
coming in from visitors could not even service the interest on them. It
was shaping up to be a disaster, the first ever in his glorious career. As
he finally came to terms with this reality, he decided that Frank Wells
was to blame. It was his job to oversee the financial health of the
project, and he had failed. Whereas before Eisner had only had the
best things to say about their working relationship, now he often
complained about his second-in-command and contemplated firing
him.
In the middle of this growing debacle, Eisner felt a new threat on
the horizon—Jeffrey Katzenberg. He had once referred to Katzenberg
as his golden retriever—so loyal and hardworking. It was Katzenberg
who had overseen the string of early hits for the studio, including the
biggest hit of all, Beauty and the Beast, the film that had initiated the
renaissance of Disney’s animation department. But something about
Katzenberg was making him increasingly nervous. Perhaps it was the
memo that Katzenberg had written in 1990, in which he dissected the
string of flops Disney had recently produced in live action. “Since
1984, we have slowly drifted away from our original vision of how to
run a business,” he wrote. Katzenberg criticized the studio’s decision
to go for bigger-budget films such as Dick Tracy, trying to make “event
movies.” Disney had fallen for “the blockbuster mentality” and had
lost its soul in the process.
The memo made Eisner uncomfortable. Dick Tracy was Eisner’s
own pet project. Was Katzenberg indirectly criticizing his boss? When
he thought about it, it seemed like this was a clear imitation of his own
infamous memo at Paramount, in which he had advocated for less
expensive, high-concept films. Now it occurred to him that Katzenberg
saw himself as the next Eisner. Maybe he was angling to take Eisner’s
job, to subtly undermine his authority. This began to eat away at him.
Why was Katzenberg now cutting him out of story meetings?
The animation department soon became the primary generator of
profits for the studio, with new hits such as Aladdin and now The Lion
King, which had been Katzenberg’s baby—he had come up with the
story idea and developed it from start to finish. Magazine articles now
began to feature Katzenberg as if he were the creative genius behind
Disney’s resurgence in the genre. What about Roy Disney, the vice
chairman of animation? What about Eisner himself, who was in charge
of everything? To Eisner, Katzenberg was now playing the media,
building himself up. An executive had reported to Eisner that
Katzenberg was going around saying, “I’m the Walt Disney of today.”
Suspicion soon turned into hatred. Eisner could not stand to be
around him.
Then, in March of 1994, Frank Wells was killed in a helicopter
accident while on a skiing trip. To reassure shareholders and Wall
Street, Eisner soon announced that he would take over Wells’s
position as president. But suddenly here was Katzenberg pestering
him with phone calls and memos, reminding Eisner that he had
promised him the president’s job if Wells ever left the company. How
insensitive, so soon after the tragedy. He stopped returning
Katzenberg’s phone calls.
Finally, in August 1994, Eisner fired Jeffrey Katzenberg, shocking
almost everyone in Hollywood. He had fired the most successful studio
executive in town. The Lion King had become one of the most
profitable films in Hollywood history. It was Katzenberg who was
behind Disney’s acquisition of Miramax, considered a great coup with
the ensuing success of Pulp Fiction. It seemed like madness on his
part, but Eisner did not care. Finally freed of Katzenberg’s shadow, he
could relax and now take Disney to the next level, on his own and with
no more distractions.
To prove he had not lost his touch, he soon dazzled the
entertainment world by engineering Disney’s purchase of ABC. The
sheer audacity of this coup once again made him the center of
attention. Now he was forging an entertainment empire beyond what
anyone had ever attempted or imagined. This move, however, created
a problem for him. The company had virtually doubled in size. It was
too complex, too big for one man. Only a year earlier he had
undergone open-heart surgery, and he could not handle the added
stress.
He needed another Frank Wells, and his thoughts soon turned to
his old friend Michael Ovitz, one of the founders and the head of
Creative Artists Agency. Ovitz was the greatest deal maker in
Hollywood history, perhaps the most powerful man in town. Together
they could dominate the field. Many within the business warned him
against this hire—Ovitz was not like Frank Wells; he was not a finance
guy or a master of detail, as Ovitz himself would have admitted. Eisner
ignored such advice. People were being too conventional in their
thinking. He decided to lure Ovitz away from CAA with a very lucrative
package and offer him the title of president. He assured Ovitz in
several discussions that although Ovitz would be second in command,
they would eventually run the company as coleaders.
In a phone call Ovitz finally agreed to all of the terms, but the
moment Eisner hung up, he realized he had made the biggest mistake
of his life. What had he been thinking? They might have been the
closest of friends, but how would two such larger-than-life men ever be
able to work together? Ovitz was power hungry. This would be the
Katzenberg problem times two. It was too late, however. He had gotten
the board’s approval for the hire. His own reputation, his decision-
making process as a CEO, was at stake. He would have to make it
work.
He quickly decided upon a strategy—he would narrow Ovitz’s
responsibilities, keep a tight leash on him, and make him prove
himself as president. By doing so Ovitz could earn Eisner’s trust and
get more power. From day one Eisner wanted to signal to Ovitz who
was boss. Instead of moving him into Frank Wells’s old office on the
sixth floor at Disney headquarters, next to Eisner’s, Eisner put him in
a rather unimpressive office on the fifth floor. Ovitz liked to spread
money around with gifts and lavish parties to charm people; Eisner
had his team monitor every penny that Ovitz spent on such things, and
watch his every move. Was Ovitz contacting other executives behind
Eisner’s back? He would not nurture another Katzenberg at his breast.
Soon the following dynamic developed: Ovitz would approach him
with some potential deal, and Eisner would not discourage him from
exploring it. But once it came time to agree to the deal, Eisner would
give a firm no. Slowly word spread through the industry that Ovitz had
lost his touch and could no longer close a deal. Ovitz began to panic.
He wanted desperately to prove he had been worthy of the choice. He
offered to move to New York to help manage ABC, since the merger of
the two companies was not working out so smoothly, but Eisner said
no. He told his lieutenants to keep their distance from Ovitz. He was
not a man to be trusted—he was the son of a liquor salesman in the
San Fernando Valley, and like his father, Ovitz was just a smooth
salesman. He was addicted to attention from the media. Within the
company, Ovitz had become completely isolated.
As the months dragged on in this saga, Ovitz could see what was
happening, and he complained bitterly to Eisner. He had left his
agency for Disney; he had staked his reputation on what he would do
as president, and Eisner was destroying his reputation. Nobody
respected him any longer in the business. Eisner’s treatment of Ovitz
was downright sadistic. In Eisner’s mind, however, Ovitz had failed
the test he had laid out; he had not proven himself to be patient; he
was no Frank Wells. In December of 1996, after a mere fourteen
months on the job, Ovitz was fired, taking with him an enormous
severance package. It was a dizzying and rapid fall from grace.
Finally liberated from this great mistake, Eisner began to
consolidate power within the company. ABC was not doing so well. He
would have to intervene and take some control. He began to attend
programming meetings; he talked of his own golden days at ABC and
of the great shows he had created there, such as Laverne & Shirley and
Happy Days. ABC needed to go back to that earlier philosophy and
create high-concept shows for the family.
As the internet began to take off, Eisner had to get involved in a big
way. He nixed the purchase of Yahoo!, pushed by his executives.
Instead Disney would start its own internet portal, called Go. Over the
years he had learned the lesson—it was always best to design and run
your own show. Disney would dominate the internet. He had proven
himself a turnaround genius twice before, and with Disney now in a
slump, he would do it a third time.
Soon, however, a wave of disasters hit the corporation, one after
another. After being fired, Katzenberg had sued Disney for the bonus—
based on performance—he was due under his contract. When he had
been president, Ovitz had tried to settle the suit before it went to court
and had gotten Katzenberg to agree to $90 million, but at the last
minute Eisner had nixed this, certain he did not owe Katzenberg
anything. In 2001 the judge ruled in Katzenberg’s favor, and they had
to settle for a whopping $280 million. Disney had poured vast
resources into the creation of Go, and it was a terrific flop that had to
be shut down. The costs from Euro Disney were still bleeding the
company. Disney had a partnership with Pixar, and together they had
produced such hits as Toy Story. But now the CEO of Pixar, Steve
Jobs, made it clear he would never work with Disney again, deeply
resenting Eisner’s micromanaging. ABC was underperforming. Most
of the movies Disney produced were not just flops but expensive flops,
culminating in the biggest one of all, Pearl Harbor, which opened in
May of 2001.
Suddenly it seemed that Roy Disney had lost faith in Eisner. The
stock price was plummeting. He told Eisner it would be best for him to
resign. What ingratitude, what hubris! He, Eisner, was the man who
had singlehandedly brought the company back from the dead. He had
saved Roy from disaster and made him a fortune, Roy who had been
considered Walt’s idiot nephew. And now, in Eisner’s darkest hour,
Roy was going to betray him? Eisner had never felt more enraged. He
quickly struck back, forcing Roy to resign from the board. This only
seemed to embolden Roy. He organized a shareholder revolt known as
Save Disney, and in March of 2004 the shareholders voted a stinging
rebuke of Eisner’s leadership.
Soon the board decided to strip Eisner of his position as chairman
of the board. The empire he had forged was falling apart. In
September of 2005, with hardly an ally to lean on and feeling alone
and betrayed, Eisner officially resigned from Disney. How had it all
unraveled so quickly? They would come to miss him, he told friends,
and he meant all of Hollywood; there would never be another like him.
•   •   •
Interpretation: We can say that at a certain point in his career
Michael Eisner succumbed to a form of delusion when it came to
power, his thinking so divorced from reality that he made business
decisions with disastrous consequences. Let us follow the progress of
this particular form of delusion as it emerged and took over his mind.
At the beginning of his career at ABC, young Eisner had a solid
grasp on reality. He was fiercely practical. He understood and
exploited to the maximum his strengths—his ambitious and
competitive nature, his intense work ethic, his keen sense for the
entertainment tastes of the average American. Eisner had a quick
mind and the ability to encourage others to think creatively. Leaning
on these strengths, he rose quickly up the ladder. He possessed a high
degree of confidence in his talents, and the series of promotions he
received at ABC confirmed this self-opinion. He could afford to be a
little cocky, because he had learned a lot on the job and his skills as a
programmer had improved immensely. He was on a fast track toward
the top, which he reached at the age of thirty-four by being named
head of prime-time programming at ABC.
As a person of high ambition, he soon felt that the world of
television was somewhat constricting. There were limits to the kinds of
entertainment he could program. The film world offered something
looser, greater, and more glamorous. It was natural, then, for him to
accept the position at Paramount. But at Paramount something
occurred that began the subtle process of the unbalancing of his mind.
Because the stage was bigger and he was the head of the studio, he
began to receive attention from the media and the public. He was
featured on the cover of magazines as the hottest film executive in
Hollywood. This was qualitatively different from the attention and
satisfaction that had come from the promotions at ABC. Now he had
millions of people admiring him. How could their opinions be wrong?
To them he was a genius, a new kind of hero altering the landscape of
the studio system.
This was intoxicating. It inevitably elevated his estimation of his
skills. But it came with a great danger. The success that Eisner had had
at Paramount was not completely of his own doing. When he had
arrived at the studio, several films were already in preproduction,
including Saturday Night Fever, which would spark the turnaround.
Barry Diller was the perfect foil to Eisner. He would argue with him
endlessly about his ideas, forcing Eisner to sharpen them. But puffed
up by the attention he was receiving, Eisner had to imagine that he
deserved the accolades he received strictly for his own efforts, and so
naturally he subtracted from his success the elements of good timing
and the contributions of others. Now his mind was subtly divorcing
itself from reality. Instead of rigorously focusing on the audience and
how to entertain people, he started to increasingly focus on himself,
believing in the myth of his greatness as promulgated by others. He
imagined he had the golden touch.
At Disney the pattern repeated and grew more intense. He basked
in the glow of his amazing success there, quickly forgetting the
incredible good luck he had had in inheriting the Disney library at the
time of the explosion of home video and family entertainment. He
discounted the critical role that Wells had played in balancing him out.
With his sense of grandeur growing, he faced a dilemma. He had
become addicted to the attention that came from creating a splash,
doing something big. He could not content himself with simple success
and rising profits. He had to add to the myth to keep it alive. Euro
Disney would be the answer. He would show the world he was not just
a corporate executive but rather a renaissance man.
In building the park, he refused to listen to experienced advisers
who recommended the Barcelona site and advocated a modest theme
park to keep the costs down. He did not pay attention to French
culture but directed everything from Burbank. He operated under the
belief that his skills as the head of a film studio could be transferred to
theme parks and architecture. He was certainly overestimating his
creative powers, and now his business decisions revealed a large
enough detachment from reality to qualify as delusional. Once this
mental imbalance takes hold, it can only get worse, because to come
back down to earth is to admit that one’s earlier high self-opinion was
wrong, and the human animal will almost never admit that. Instead,
the tendency is to blame others for every failure or setback.
In the grips now of his delusion, he made his most serious mistake
of all—the firing of Jeffrey Katzenberg. The Disney system depended
on a steady flow of new animated hits, which fed the stores and theme
parks with new characters, merchandise, rides, and avenues for
publicity. Katzenberg clearly had developed the knack for creating
such hits, exemplified by the unprecedented success of The Lion King.
Firing him put the entire assembly line at risk. Who would take over?
Certainly not Roy Disney or Eisner himself? Furthermore, he had to
know that Katzenberg would take his skills elsewhere, which he did
when he cofounded a new studio, DreamWorks. There he churned out
more animated hits. The new studio drove up the price for skilled
animators, vastly increasing the cost of producing an animated film
and threatening Disney’s entire profit system. But instead of a firm
grip on this reality, Eisner was more focused on the competition for
attention. Katzenberg’s rise threatened his elevated self-opinion, and
he had to sacrifice profit and practicality to soothe his ego.
The downward spiral had begun. The acquisition of ABC, under the
belief that bigger is better, revealed his growing detachment from
reality. Television was a dying business model in the age of new media.
It was not a realistic business decision but a play for publicity. He had
created an entertainment behemoth, a blob without any clear identity.
The hiring and firing of Ovitz revealed an even greater level of
delusion. People had become mere instruments for Eisner to use.
Ovitz was considered the most feared and powerful man in Hollywood.
Perhaps Eisner was unconsciously driven by the desire to humiliate
Ovitz. If he had the power to make Ovitz beg for crumbs, he must be
the most powerful man in Hollywood.
Soon all of the problems that stemmed from his delusional thought
process began to cascade—the continually rising costs of Euro Disney,
the Katzenberg bonus, the lack of hits in both film divisions, the
continual drain on resources from ABC, the Ovitz severance package.
The board members could no longer ignore the falling stock price. The
firing of Katzenberg and Ovitz made Eisner the most hated man in
Hollywood, and as his fortunes fell, all of his enemies came out of the
woodwork to hasten his destruction. His fall from power was fast and
spectacular.
Understand: The story of Michael Eisner is much closer to you
than you think. His fate could easily be yours, albeit most likely on a
smaller scale. The reason is simple: we humans possess a weakness
that is latent in us all and will push us into the delusional process
without our ever being aware of the dynamic. The weakness stems
from our natural tendency to overestimate our skills. We normally
have a self-opinion that is somewhat elevated in relation to reality. We
have a deep need to feel ourselves superior to others in something—
intelligence, beauty, charm, popularity, or saintliness. This can be a
positive. A degree of confidence impels us to take on challenges, to
push past our supposed limits, and to learn in the process. But once
we experience success on any level—increased attention from an
individual or group, a promotion, funding for a project—that
confidence will tend to rise too quickly, and there will be an ever-
growing discrepancy between our self-opinion and reality.
Any success that we have in life inevitably depends on some good
luck, timing, the contributions of others, the teachers who helped us
along the way, the whims of the public in need of something new. Our
tendency is to forget all of this and imagine that any success stems
from our superior self. We begin to assume we can handle new
challenges well before we are ready. After all, people have confirmed
our greatness with their attention, and we want to keep it coming. We
imagine we have the golden touch and that we can now magically
transfer our skills to some other medium or field. Without realizing it,
we become more attuned to our ego and our fantasies than to the
people we work for and our audience. We grow distant from those who
are helping us, seeing them as tools to be used. And with any failures
that occur we tend to blame others. Success has an irresistible pull to it
that tends to cloud our minds.
Your task is the following: After any kind of success, analyze the
components. See the element of luck that is inevitably there, as well as
the role that other people, including mentors, played in your good
fortune. This will neutralize the tendency to inflate your powers.
Remind yourself that with success comes complacency, as attention
becomes more important than the work and old strategies are
repeated. With success you must raise your vigilance. Wipe the slate
clean with each new project, starting from zero. Try to pay less
attention to the applause as it grows louder. See the limits to what you
can accomplish and embrace them, working with what you have. Don’t
believe bigger is better; consolidating and concentrating your forces is
often the wiser choice. Be wary of offending with your growing sense
of superiority—you will need your allies. Compensate for the drug-like
effect of success by keeping your feet planted firmly on the ground.
The power you will build up in this slow and organic way will be more
real and lasting. Remember: the gods are merciless with those who fly
too high on the wings of grandiosity, and they will make you pay the
price.
Existence alone had never been enough for him; he had always
wanted more. Perhaps it was only from the force of his desires that
he had regarded himself as a man to whom more was permitted
than to others.
—Fyodor Dostoyevsky, Crime and Punishment
Keys to Human Nature
Let us say that you have a project to realize, or an individual or group
of people you wish to persuade to do something. We could describe a
realistic attitude toward reaching such goals in the following way:
Getting what you want is rarely easy. Success will depend on a lot of
effort and some luck. To make your project work, you will probably
have to jettison your previous strategy—circumstances are always
changing and you need to keep an open mind. The people you are
trying to reach never respond exactly as you might have imagined or
hoped. In fact, people will generally surprise and frustrate you in their
reactions. They have their own needs, experiences, and particular
psychology that are different from your own. To impress your targets,
you will have to focus on them and their spirit. If you fail to
accomplish what you want, you will have to examine carefully what
you did wrong and strive to learn from the experience.
You can think of the project or task ahead of you as a block of
marble you must sculpt into something precise and beautiful. The
block is much larger than you and the material is quite resistant, but
the task is not impossible. With enough effort, focus, and resiliency
you can slowly carve it into what you need. You must begin, however,
with a proper sense of proportion—goals are hard to reach, people are
resistant, and you have limits to what you can do. With such a realistic
attitude, you can summon up the requisite patience and get to work.
Imagine, however, that your brain has succumbed to a
psychological disease that affects your perception of size and
proportion. Instead of seeing the task you are facing as rather large
and the material resistant, under the influence of this disease you
perceive the block of marble as relatively small and malleable. Losing
your sense of proportion, you believe it won’t take long to fashion the
block into the image you have in your mind of the finished product.
You imagine that the people you are trying to reach are not naturally
resistant but quite predictable. You know how they’ll respond to your
great idea—they’ll love it. In fact, they need you and your work more
than you need them. They should seek you out. The emphasis is not on
what you need to do to succeed but on what you feel you deserve. You
can foresee a lot of attention coming your way with this project, but if
you fail, other people must be to blame, because you have gifts, your
cause is the right one, and only those who are malicious or envious
could stand in your way.
We can call this psychological disease grandiosity. As you feel its
effects, the normal realistic proportions are reversed—your self
becomes larger and greater than anything else around it. That is the
lens through which you view the task and the people you need to
reach. This is not merely deep narcissism (see chapter 2), in which
everything must revolve around you. This is seeing yourself as
enlarged (the root of the word grandiosity meaning “big” or “great”),
as superior and worthy of not only attention but of being adored. It is a
feeling of being not merely human but godlike.
You may think of powerful, egotistical leaders in the public eye as
the ones who contract such a disease, but you would be very wrong in
that assumption. Certainly we find many influential people, such as
Michael Eisner, with high-grade versions of grandiosity, where the
attention and accolades they receive create a more intense
enlargement of the self. But there is a low-grade, everyday version of
the disease that is common to almost all of us because it is a trait
embedded in human nature. It stems from our deep need to feel
important, esteemed by people, and superior to others in something.
You are rarely aware of your own grandiosity because by its nature
it alters your perception of reality and makes it hard to have an
accurate assessment of yourself. And so you are unaware of the
problems it might be causing you at this very moment. Your low-grade
grandiosity will cause you to overestimate your own skills and abilities
and to underestimate the obstacles that you face. And so you will take
on tasks that are beyond your actual capacity. You will feel certain that
people will respond to your idea in a particular way, and when they
don’t, you will become upset and blame others.
You may become restless and suddenly make a career change, not
realizing that grandiosity is at the root—your present work is not
confirming your greatness and superiority, because to be truly great
would require more years of training and the development of new
skills. Better to quit and be lured by the possibilities a new career
offers, allowing you to entertain fantasies of greatness. In this way, you
never quite master anything. You may have dozens of great ideas that
you never attempt to execute, because that would cause you to
confront the reality of your actual skill level. Without being aware of it,
you might become ever so slightly passive—you expect other people to
understand you, give you what you want, treat you well. Instead of
earning their praise, you feel entitled to it.
In all of these cases, your low-grade grandiosity will prevent you
from learning from your mistakes and developing yourself, because
you begin with the assumption that you are already large and great,
and it is too difficult to admit otherwise.
Your task as a student of human nature is threefold: First, you must
understand the phenomenon of grandiosity itself, why it is so
embedded in human nature, and why you will find many more
grandiose people in the world today than ever before. Second, you
need to recognize the signs of grandiosity and know how to manage
the people who display them. And third and most important, you must
see the signs of the disease in yourself and learn not only how to
control your grandiose tendencies but also how to channel this energy
into something productive (see “Practical Grandiosity,” on this page,
for more on this).
According to the renowned psychoanalyst Heinz Kohut (1913–
1981), grandiosity has its roots in the earliest years of our life. In our
first months, most of us bonded completely with our mother. We had
no sense of a separate identity. She met our every need. We came to
believe that the breast that gave us food was actually a part of
ourselves. We were omnipotent—all we had to do was feel hungry or
feel any need, and the mother was there to meet it, as if we had
magical powers to control her. But then, slowly, we had to go through
a second phase of life in which we were forced to confront the reality—
our mother was a separate being who had other people to attend to.
We were not omnipotent but rather weak, quite small, and dependent.
This realization was painful and the source of much of our acting out—
we had a deep need to assert ourselves, to show we were not so
helpless, and to fantasize about powers we did not possess. (Children
will often imagine the ability to see through walls, to fly, or to read
people’s minds, and that is why they are drawn to stories of
superheroes.)
As we get older, we may not be physically small anymore, but our
sense of insignificance only gets worse. We come to realize we are one
person not just in a larger family, school, or city but in an entire globe
filled with billions of people. Our lives are relatively short. We have
limited skills and brainpower. There is so much we cannot control,
particularly with our careers and global trends. The idea that we will
die and be quickly forgotten, swallowed up in eternity, is quite
intolerable. We want to feel significant in some way, to protest against
our natural smallness, to expand our sense of self. What we
experienced at the age of three or four unconsciously haunts us our
entire lives. We alternate between moments of sensing our smallness
and trying to deny it. This makes us prone to finding ways to imagine
our superiority.
Some children do not go through that second phase in early
childhood in which they must confront their relative smallness, and
these children are more vulnerable to deeper forms of grandiosity later
in life. They are the pampered, spoiled ones. The mother and the
father continue to make such children feel like they are the center of
the universe, shielding them from the pain of confronting the reality.
Their every wish becomes a command. If ever attempts are made to
instill the slightest amount of discipline, the parents are met with a
tantrum. Furthermore, such children come to disdain any form of
authority. Compared with themselves and what they can get, the father
figure seems rather weak.
This early pampering marks them for life. They need to be adored.
They become masters at manipulating others to pamper them and
shower them with attention. They naturally feel greater than anyone
above them. If they have any talent, they might rise quite far, as their
sense of being born with a crown on their head becomes a self-
fulfilling prophecy. Unlike others, they never really alternate between
feelings of smallness and greatness; they know only the latter.
Certainly Eisner came from such a background, as he had a mother
who met his every need, completed his homework for him, and
sheltered him from his cold and sometimes cruel father.
In the past, we humans were able to channel our grandiose needs
into religion. In ancient times, our sense of smallness was not just
something bred into us by the many years we spent dependent on our
parents; it also came from our weakness in relation to the hostile
powers in nature. Gods and spirits represented these elemental
powers of nature that dwarfed our own. By worshipping them we
could gain their protection. Connected to something much larger than
ourselves, we felt enlarged. After all, the gods or God cared about the
fate of our tribe or city; they cared about our individual soul, a sign of
our own significance. We did not merely die and disappear. Many
centuries later, in a similar manner, we channeled this energy into
worshipping leaders who represented a great cause and promoted a
future utopia, such as Napoleon Bonaparte and the French Revolution,
or Mao Zedong and communism.
Today, in the Western world, religions and great causes have lost
their binding power; we find it hard to believe in them and to satisfy
our grandiose energy through identification with a greater power. The
need to feel larger and significant, however, does not simply
disappear; it is stronger than ever. And absent any other channels,
people will tend to direct this energy toward themselves. They will find
a way to expand their sense of self, to feel great and superior. Although
rarely conscious of this, what they are choosing to idealize and
worship is the self. Because of this, we find more and more grandiose
individuals among us.
Other factors have also contributed to increases in grandiosity.
First, we find more people who experienced pampering attention in
their childhood than ever in the past. Feeling like they were once the
center of the universe becomes a hard thing to shake. They come to
believe that anything they do or produce should be seen as precious
and worthy of attention. Second, we find increasing numbers of people
who have little or no respect for authority or experts of any kind, no
matter the experts’ level of training and experience, which they
themselves lack. “Why should their opinion be any more valid than my
own?” they might tell themselves. “Nobody’s really that great; people
with power are just more privileged.” “My writing and music are just
as legitimate and worthy as anyone else’s.” Without a sense of anyone
rightly being above them and deserving authority, they can position
themselves among the highest.
Third, technology gives us the impression that everything in life can
be as fast and simple as the information we can glean online. It instills
the belief that we no longer have to spend years learning a skill;
instead, through a few tricks and with a few hours a week of practice
we can become proficient at anything. Similarly, people believe that
their skills can easily be transferred: “My ability to write means I can
also direct a film.” But more than anything it is social media that
spreads the grandiosity virus. Through social media we have almost
limitless powers to expand our presence, to create the illusion that we
have the attention and even adoration of thousands or millions of
people. We can possess the fame and ubiquity of the kings and queens
in the past, or even of the gods themselves.
With all of these elements combined, it is harder than ever for any
of us to maintain a realistic attitude and a proportionate sense of self.
In looking at the people around you, you must realize that their
grandiosity (and yours) can come in many different forms. Most
commonly people will try to satisfy the need by gaining social prestige.
People may claim they are interested in the work itself or in
contributing to humanity, but often deep down what is really
motivating them is the desire to have attention, to have their high self-
opinion confirmed by others who admire them, to feel powerful and
inflated. If they are talented, such types can get the attention they need
for several years or longer, but inevitably, as in the story of Eisner,
their need for accolades will lure them into overreaching.
If people are disappointed in their careers yet still believe they are
great and unrecognized, they may turn to various compensations—
drugs, alcohol, sex with as many partners as possible, shopping, a
superior, mocking attitude, et cetera. Those with unsatisfied
grandiosity will often become filled with manic energy—one moment
telling everyone about the great screenplays they will write or the
many women they will seduce, and the next moment falling into
depression as reality intrudes.
People still tend to idealize leaders and worship them, and you
must see this as a form of grandiosity. By believing someone else will
make everything great, followers can feel something of this greatness.
Their minds can soar along with the rhetoric of the leader. They can
feel superior to those who are not believers. On a more personal level,
people will often idealize those they love, elevating them to god or
goddess status and by extension feeling some of this power reflected
back on them.
In the world today, you will also notice the prevalence of negative
forms of grandiosity. Many people feel the need to disguise their
grandiose urges not only from others but also from themselves. They
will frequently make a show of their humility—they are not interested
in power or feeling important, or so they say. They are happy with
their small lot in life. They do not want a lot of possessions, do not own
a car, and disdain status. But you will notice they have a need to
display this humility in a public manner. It is grandiose humility—
their way to get attention and to feel morally superior.
A variation on this is the grandiose victim—they have suffered a lot
and been the victim numerous times. Although they may like to frame
it as being simply unlucky and unfortunate, you will notice that they
often have a tendency to fall for the worst types in intimate
relationships, or put themselves in circumstances in which they are
certain to fail and suffer. In essence, they are compelled to create the
drama that will turn them into a victim. As it turns out, any
relationship with them will have to revolve around their needs; they
have suffered too much in the past to attend to your needs. They are
the center of the universe. Feeling and expressing their misfortune
gives them their sense of importance, of being superior in suffering.
You can measure the levels of grandiosity in people in several
simple ways. For instance, notice how people respond to criticism of
them or their work. It’s normal for any of us to feel defensive and a bit
upset when criticized. But some people become enraged and
hysterical, because we have called into doubt their sense of greatness.
You can be sure that such a person has high levels of grandiosity.
Similarly, such types might conceal their rage behind a martyred,
pained expression meant to make you feel guilty. The emphasis is not
on the criticism itself and what they need to learn but on their sense of
grievance.
If people are successful, notice how they act in more private
moments. Are they able to relax and laugh at themselves, letting go of
their public mask, or have they so overidentified with their powerful
public image that it carries over into their private life? In the latter
case, they have come to believe in their own myth and are in the grip
of powerful grandiosity.
Grandiose people are generally big talkers. They take credit for
anything that is even tangential to their work; they invent past
successes. They talk of their prescience, how they foresaw certain
trends or predicted certain events, none of which can be verified. All
such talk should make you doubly dubious. If people in the public eye
suddenly say something that gets them into trouble for being
insensitive, you can ascribe that to their potent grandiosity. They are
so attuned to their own great opinions that they assume everyone else
will interpret them in the right spirit and agree with them.
Higher grandiose types generally display low levels of empathy.
They are not good listeners. When the attention is not on them, they
have a faraway look in their eyes and their fingers twitch with
impatience. Only when the spotlight is on them do they become
animated. They tend to see people as extensions of themselves—tools
to be used in their schemes, sources of attention. Finally, they exhibit
nonverbal behavior that can only be described as grandiose. Their
gestures are big and dramatic. At a meeting, they take up a lot of
personal space. Their voice tends to be louder than others, and they
speak at a fast pace, giving no one else time to interrupt.
With those who exhibit moderate amounts of grandiosity, you
should be indulgent. Almost all of us alternate between periods in
which we feel superior and great and others in which we come back
down to earth. Look for such moments of realism in people as signs of
normalcy. But with those whose self-opinion is so high they cannot
allow for any doubts, it is best to avoid relationships or entanglements.
In intimate relationships, they will tend to demand adoring one-sided
attention. If they are employees, business partners, or bosses, they will
oversell their skills. Their levels of confidence will distract you from
the deficiencies in their ideas, work habits, and character. If you
cannot avoid such a relationship, be aware of their tendency to feel
certain about the success of their ideas, and maintain your skepticism.
Look at the ideas themselves and don’t get caught up in their seductive
self-belief. Don’t entertain the illusion that you can confront them and
try to bring them down to earth; you may trigger a rage response.
If such types happen to be your rivals, consider yourself lucky. They
are easy to taunt and bait into overreactions. Casting doubts on their
greatness will make them apoplectic and doubly irrational.
Finally, you will need to manage your own grandiose tendencies.
Grandiosity has some positive and productive uses. The exuberance
and high self-belief that come from it can be channeled into your work
and help inspire you. (See “Practical Grandiosity,” on this page, for
more on this.) But in general it would be best for you to accept your
limitations and work with what you have, rather than fantasize about
godlike powers you can never attain. The greatest protection you can
have against grandiosity is to maintain a realistic attitude. You know
what subjects and activities you are naturally attracted to. You cannot
be skilled at everything. You need to play to your strengths and not
imagine you can be great at whatever you put your mind to. You must
have a thorough understanding of your energy levels, of how far you
can reasonably push yourself, and of how this changes with age. And
you must have a solid grasp on your social position—your allies, the
people with whom you have the greatest rapport, the natural audience
for your work. You cannot please everyone.
This self-awareness has a physical component to it that you must be
sensitive to. When you are doing activities that mesh with your natural
inclinations, you feel ease in the effort. You learn faster. You have
more energy and you can withstand the tedium that comes with
learning anything important. When you take on too much, more than
you can handle, you feel not only exhausted but also irritable and
nervous. You are prone to headaches. When you have success in life,
you will naturally feel a touch of fear, as if the good fortune could
disappear. You sense with this fear the dangers that can come from
rising too high (almost like vertigo) and feeling too superior. Your
anxiety is telling you to come back down to earth. You want to listen to
your body as it signals to you when you are working against your
strengths.
In knowing yourself, you accept your limits. You are simply one
person among many in the world, and not naturally superior to
anyone. You are not a god or an angel but a flawed human like the rest
of us. You accept the fact that you cannot control the people around
you and no strategy is ever foolproof. Human nature is too
unpredictable. With this self-knowledge and acceptance of limits you
will have a sense of proportion. You will search for greatness in your
work. And when you feel the pull to think more highly of yourself than
is reasonable, this self-knowledge will serve as a gravity mechanism,
pulling you back down and directing you toward the actions and
decisions that will best serve your particular nature.
Being realistic and pragmatic is what makes us humans so
powerful. It is how we overcame our physical weakness in a hostile
environment so many thousands of years ago, and learned to work
with others and form powerful communities and tools for survival.
Although we have veered away from this pragmatism, as we no longer
have to rely on our wits to survive, it is in fact our true nature as the
preeminent social animal on the planet. In becoming more realistic,
you are simply becoming more human.
The Grandiose Leader
If people with high levels of grandiosity also possess some talent and a
lot of assertive energy, they can rise to positions of great power. Their
boldness and confidence attract attention and give them a larger-than-
life presence. Mesmerized by their image, we often fail to see the
underlying irrationality in their decision-making process and so follow
them straight into some disaster. They can be very destructive.
You must realize a simple fact about these types—they depend on
the attention we give them. Without our attention, without being
adored by the public, they cannot have their high self-opinion
validated, and in such cases the very confidence they depend on
withers. To awe us and distract us from the reality, they employ
certain theatrical devices. It is imperative for us to see through their
stage tricks, to demythologize them and scale them back down to
human size. In doing so, we can resist their allure and avoid the
dangers they represent. The following are six common illusions they
like to create.
I am destined. Grandiose leaders often try to give the impression
that they were somehow destined for greatness. They tell stories of
their childhood and youth that indicate their uniqueness, as if fate had
singled them out. They highlight events that showed from early on
their unusual toughness or creativity, either making such stories up or
reinterpreting the past. They relate tales from earlier in their career in
which they overcame impossible odds. The future great leader was
already in gestation at a young age, or so they make it seem. When you
hear such things you must become skeptical. They are trying to forge a
myth, which they themselves probably have come to believe in. Look
for the more mundane facts behind the tales of destiny and, if possible,
publicize them.
I’m the common man/woman. In some cases grandiose leaders may
have risen from the lower classes, but in general they either come from
relatively privileged backgrounds or because of their success have lived
removed from the cares of everyday people for quite some time.
Nevertheless it is absolutely essential to present themselves to the
public as highly representative of the average man and woman out
there. Only through such a presentation can they attract the attention
and the adoration of large enough numbers to satisfy themselves.
Indira Gandhi, the prime minister of India from 1966 to 1977 and
1980 to 1984, came from political royalty, her father Jawaharlal Nehru
having been the first prime minister of the country. She was educated
in Europe and lived for most of her life far apart from the poorer
segments of India. But as a grandiose leader who later became quite
dictatorial, she positioned herself as one with the people, their voice
speaking through her. She altered her language when speaking in front
of large crowds and used homely metaphors when she visited small
villages. She would wear her sari as local women wore them and would
eat with her fingers. She liked to present herself as “Mother Indira,”
who ruled over India in a familiar, motherly manner. And this style
she assumed was highly effective in winning elections, even though it
was pure stagecraft.
The trick grandiose leaders play is to place the emphasis on their
cultural tastes, not on the actual class they come from. They may fly
first class and wear the most expensive suits, but they counteract this
by seeming to have the same culinary tastes as the public, enjoy the
same movies as others, and avoid at all costs the whiff of cultural
elitism. In fact, they will go out of their way to ridicule the elites, even
though they probably depend on such experts to guide them. They are
simply just like the common folk out there, but with a lot more money
and power. The public can now identify with them despite the obvious
contradictions. But the grandiosity of this goes beyond merely gaining
more attention. These leaders become vastly enlarged by this
identification with the masses. They are not merely one man or
woman but embody an entire nation or interest group. To follow them
is to be loyal to the group itself. To criticize them is to want to crucify
the leader and betray the cause.
Even in the prosaic corporate world of business we find such
religious-style identification: Eisner, for instance, liked to present
himself as embodying the entire Disney spirit, whatever that meant. If
you notice such paradoxes and primitive forms of popular association,
stand back and analyze the reality of what is going on. You will find at
the core something quasi-mystical, highly irrational, and quite
dangerous in that the grandiose leader now feels licensed to do
whatever he or she wants in the name of the public.
I will deliver you. These types often rise to power in times of trouble
and crisis. Their self-confidence is comforting to the public or to
shareholders. They will be the ones to deliver the people from the
many problems they are facing. In order to pull this off, their promises
have to be large yet vague. By being large they can inspire dreams; by
being vague, nobody can hold the person to account if they don’t come
to pass, since there are no specifics to get hold of. The more grandiose
the promises and visions of the future, the more grandiose the faith
they will inspire. The message must be simple to digest, reducible to a
slogan, and promising something large that stirs the emotions. As part
of this strategy these types require convenient scapegoats, often the
elites or outsiders, to tighten the group identification and to stir the
emotions even further. The movement around the leader begins to
crystallize around hatred of these scapegoats, who begin to stand for
every bit of pain and injustice each person in the crowd has ever
experienced. The leader’s promise to bring these invented enemies
down increases the leader’s power exponentially.
What you will find here is that they are creating a cult more than
leading a political movement or a business. You will see that their
name, image, and slogans must be reproduced in large numbers and
assume a godlike ubiquity. Certain colors, symbols, and perhaps music
are used to bind the group identity and appeal to the basest human
instincts. People who now believe in the cult are doubly mesmerized
and ready to excuse any kind of action. At such a point nothing will
dissuade true believers, but you must maintain your internal distance
and analytic powers.
I rewrite the rules. A secret wish of humans is to do without the
usual rules and conventions in place in any field—to gain power just by
following our own inner light. When grandiose leaders claim to have
such powers, we are secretly excited and wish to believe them.
Michael Cimino was the director of the Academy Award–winning
film The Deer Hunter (1978). To those who worked with and for him,
however, he was not simply a film director but rather a special genius
on a mission to disrupt the rigid, corporate Hollywood system. For his
next film, Heaven’s Gate (1980), he negotiated a contract that was
completely unique in Hollywood history, one that allowed him to
increase the budget as he saw fit and to create precisely the film he had
envisioned, with no strings attached. On the set, Cimino spent weeks
rehearsing the actors in the right kind of roller-skating he needed for
one scene. One day he waited hours before rolling cameras, just so the
perfect kind of cloud could pass into frame. The costs soared and the
film he initially turned in was over five hours long. In the end,
Heaven’s Gate was one of the greatest disasters in Hollywood history,
and it virtually destroyed Cimino’s career. It seemed that the
traditional contract had actually served a purpose—to rein in the
natural grandiosity of any film director and make him or her work
within limits. Most rules do have common sense and rationality
behind them.
As a variation on this, grandiose leaders will often rely on their
intuitions, disregarding the need for focus groups or any form of
scientific feedback. They have a special inside connection to the truth.
They like to create the myth that their hunches have led to fantastic
successes, but close scrutiny will reveal that their hunches miss as
often as they hit. When you hear leaders present themselves as the
consummate maverick, able to do away with rules and science, you
must see this only as a sign of madness, not divine inspiration.
I have the golden touch. Those with heightened grandiosity will try
to create the legend that they have never really failed. If there were
failures or setbacks in their career, it was always the fault of others
who betrayed them. U.S. Army general Douglas MacArthur was a
genius at deflecting blame; to hear him say it, in his long career he had
never lost a battle, although in fact he had lost many. But by
trumpeting his successes and finding endless excuses, such as
betrayals, for his losses, he created the myth of his magical battlefield
powers. Grandiose leaders inevitably resort to such marketing magic.
Related to this is the belief that they can easily transfer their skills—
a movie executive can become a theme park designer, a businessman
can become the leader of a nation. Because they are magically gifted,
they can try their hand at anything that attracts them. This is often a
fatal move on their part, as they attempt things beyond their expertise
and quickly become overwhelmed with the complexity and chaos that
come from their lack of experience. In dealing with such types, look
carefully at their record and notice how many glaring failures they
have had. Although people under the influence of their grandiosity will
probably not listen, publicize the truth of their record in as neutral a
manner as possible.
I’m invulnerable. The grandiose leader takes risks. This is what
often attracts attention in the first place, and combined with the
success that often attends the bold, they seem larger than life. But this
boldness is not really under control. They must take actions that create
a splash in order to keep the attention coming that feeds their high
self-opinion. They cannot rest or retreat, because that would cause a
lapse in publicity. To make things worse, they come to feel
invulnerable because so many times in the past they have gotten away
with risky maneuvers, and if they faced setbacks, they managed to
overcome them through more audacity. Furthermore, these daring
activities make them feel alive and on edge. It becomes a drug. They
need bigger stakes and rewards to maintain the feeling of godlike
invulnerability. They can work twenty hours a day when under this
form of pressure. They can walk through fire.
In fact they are rather invulnerable, until that fatal hubristic
maneuver in which they finally go too far and it all crashes down. This
could be MacArthur’s grandiose tour of the United States after the
Korean War, in which his irrational need for attention became
painfully apparent; or Mao’s fatal decision to unleash the Cultural
Revolution; or Stan O’Neal, CEO of Merrill Lynch, sticking with
mortgage-backed securities when everyone else was getting out,
essentially destroying one of the oldest financial institutions in the
country. Suddenly the aura of being invulnerable is shattered. This
occurs because their decisions are determined not by rational
considerations but by the need for attention and glory, and eventually
reality catches up, in one hard blow.
In general, in dealing with the grandiose leader, you want to try to
deflate the sacred, glorious image they have forged. They will overreact
and their followers will become rabid, but slowly a few followers may
have second thoughts. Creating a viral disenchantment is your best
hope.
Practical Grandiosity
Grandiosity is a form of primal energy we all possess. It impels us to
want something more than we have, to be recognized and esteemed by
others, and to feel connected to something larger. The problem is not
with the energy itself, which can be used to fuel our ambitions, but
with the direction it takes. Normally grandiosity makes us imagine we
are greater and more superior than is actually the case. We can call
this fantastical grandiosity because it is based on our fantasies and
the skewed impression we get from any attention we receive. The other
form, which we shall call practical grandiosity, is not easy to achieve
and does not come naturally to us, but it can be the source of
tremendous power and self-fulfillment.
Practical grandiosity is based not on fantasy but on reality. The
energy is channeled into our work and our desire to reach goals, to
solve problems, or to improve relationships. It impels us to develop
and hone our skills. Through our accomplishments we can feel greater.
We attract attention through our work. The attention we receive in this
way is gratifying and keeps us energized, but the greater sense of
gratification comes from the work itself and from overcoming our own
weaknesses. The desire for attention is under control and subordinate.
Our self-esteem is raised, but it is tied to real achievements, not to
nebulous, subjective fantasies. We feel our presence enlarged through
our work, through what we contribute to society.
Although the precise way to channel the energy will depend on your
field and skill level, the following are five basic principles that are
essential for attaining the high level of fulfillment that can come from
this reality-based form of grandiosity.
Come to terms with your grandiose needs. You need to begin from a
position of honesty. You must admit to yourself that you do want to
feel important and be the center of attention. This is natural. Yes, you
want to feel superior. You have ambitions like everyone else. In the
past, your grandiose needs may have led you into some bad decisions,
which you can now acknowledge and analyze. Denial is your worst
enemy. Only with this self-awareness can you begin to transform the
energy into something practical and productive.
Concentrate the energy. Fantastical grandiosity will make you flit
from one fantastic idea to another, imagining all the accolades and
attention you’ll receive but never realizing any of them. You must do
the opposite. You want to get into the habit of focusing deeply and
completely on a single project or problem. You want the goal to be
relatively simple to reach, and within a time frame of months and not
years. You will want to break this down into mini steps and goals along
the way. Your objective here is to enter a state of flow, in which your
mind becomes increasingly absorbed in the work, to the point at which
ideas come to you at odd hours. This feeling of flow should be
pleasurable and addicting. You don’t allow yourself to engage in
fantasies about other projects on the horizon. You want to absorb
yourself in the work as deeply as possible. If you do not enter this state
of flow, you are inevitably multitasking and stopping the focus. Work
on overcoming this.
This could be a project you work on outside your job. It is not the
number of hours you put in but the intensity and consistent effort you
bring to it.
Related to this, you want this project to involve skills you already
have or are in the process of developing. Your goal is to see continual
improvement in your skill level, which will certainly come from the
depth of your focus. Your confidence will rise. That should be enough
to keep you advancing.
Maintain a dialogue with reality. Your project begins with an idea,
and as you try to hone this idea, you let your imagination take flight,
being open to various possibilities. At some point you move from the
planning phase to execution. Now you must actively search for
feedback and criticism from people you respect or from your natural
audience. You want to hear about the flaws and inadequacies in your
plan, for that is the only way to improve your skills. If the project fails
to have the results you imagined, or the problem is not solved,
embrace this as the best way to learn. Analyze what you did wrong in
depth, being as brutal as possible.
Once you have feedback and have analyzed the results, you then
return to this project or start a new one, letting your imagination loose
again but incorporating what you have learned from the experience.
You keep cycling endlessly through this process, noticing with
excitement how you are improving by doing so. If you stay too long in
the imagination phase, what you create will tend to be grandiose and
detached from reality. If you only listen to feedback and try to make
the work a complete reflection of what others tell you or want, the
work will be conventional and flat. By maintaining a continual
dialogue between reality (feedback) and your imagination, you will
create something practical and powerful.
If you have any success with your projects, that is when you must
step back from the attention you are receiving. Look at the role that
luck may have played, or the help you received from others. Resist
falling for the success delusion. As you now focus on the next idea, see
yourself back at square one. Each new project represents a new
challenge and a fresh approach. You might very well fail. You need the
same level of focus as you had on the last project. Never rest on your
laurels or let up in your intensity.
Seek out calibrated challenges. The problem with fantastical
grandiosity is that you imagine some great new goal you will achieve—
that brilliant novel you will write, that lucrative start-up you will
create. The challenge is so great that you may start, but you will soon
peter out as you realize you are not up to it. Or if you are the
ambitious, assertive type, you might try to go all the way, but you will
end up in the Euro Disney syndrome, overwhelmed, failing in a large
fashion, blaming others for the fiasco, and never learning from the
experience.
Your goal with practical grandiosity is to continually look for
challenges just above your skill level. If the projects you attempt are
below or at your skill level, you will become easily bored and less
focused. If they are too ambitious, you will feel crushed by your failure.
However, if they are calibrated to be more challenging than the last
project, but to a moderate degree, you will find yourself excited and
energized. You must be up to this challenge so your focus levels will
rise as well. This is the optimum path toward learning. If you fail, you
will not feel overwhelmed and you will learn even more. If you
succeed, your confidence increases, but it is tied to your work and to
having met the challenge. Your sense of accomplishment will satisfy
your need for greatness.
Let loose your grandiose energy. Once you have tamed this energy,
made it serve your ambitions and goals, you should feel safe to let it
loose upon occasion. Think of it as a wild animal that needs to roam
free now and then or it will go mad from restlessness. What this means
is that you occasionally allow yourself to entertain ideas or projects
that represent greater challenges than you have considered in the past.
You feel increasingly confident and you want to test yourself. Consider
developing a new skill in an unrelated field, or writing that novel you
once considered a distraction from the real work. Or simply give freer
rein to your imagination when in the planning process.
If you are in the public eye and must perform before others, let go
of the restraint you have developed and let your grandiose energy fill
you with high levels of self-belief. This will animate your gestures and
give you greater charisma. If you are a leader and your group is facing
difficulties or a crisis, let yourself feel unusually grandiose and
confident in the success of your mission, to lift up and inspire the
troops. That was the kind of grandiosity that made Winston Churchill
such an effective leader during World War II.
In any event, you can allow yourself to feel ever so godlike because
you have come so far with your improved skills and actual
achievements. If you have taken the time to properly work through the
other principles, you will naturally return back down to earth after a
few days or hours of grandiose exuberance.
—
Finally, at the source of our infantile grandiosity was a feeling of
intense connection to the mother. This was so complete and satisfying
that we spend much of our time trying to recapture that feeling in
some way. It is the source of our desire to transcend our banal
existence, to want something so large we cannot express what it is. We
have glimmers of that original connection in intimate relationships
and in moments of unconditional love, but these are rare and fleeting.
Entering a state of flow with our work or cultivating deeper levels of
empathy with people (see chapter 2) will give us more such moments
and satisfy the urge. We feel oneness with the work or with other
people. We can take this even further by experiencing a deeper
connection to life itself, what Sigmund Freud called “the oceanic
feeling.”
Consider this in the following way: The formation of life itself on
the planet Earth so many billions of years ago required a
concatenation of events that were highly improbable. The beginning of
life was a tenuous experiment that could have expired at any moment
early on. The evolution since then of so many forms of life is
astounding, and at the end point of that evolution is the only animal
we know to be conscious of this entire process, the human.
Your being alive is an equally unlikely and uncanny event. It
required a very particular chain of events leading to the meeting of
your parents and your birth, all of which could have gone very
differently. At this moment, as you read this, you are conscious of life
along with billions of others, and only for a brief time, until you die.
Fully taking in this reality is what we shall call the Sublime. (For more
on this, see chapter 18.) It cannot be put into words. It is too awesome.
Feeling a part of that tenuous experiment of life is a kind of reverse
grandiosity—you are not disturbed by your relative smallness but
rather ecstatic at the sense of being a drop in this ocean.
Then, overwhelmed by the afflictions I suffered in connection with
my sons, I sent again and inquired of the god what I should do to
pass the rest of my life most happily; and he answered me:
“Knowing thyself, O Croesus—thus shall you live and be
happy.” . . . [But] spoiled by the wealth I had and by those who
were begging me to become their leader, by the gifts they gave me
and by the people who flattered me, saying that if I would consent
to take command they would all obey me and I should be the
greatest of men—puffed up by such words, when all the princes
round about chose me to be their leader in the war, I accepted the
command, deeming myself fit to be the greatest; but, as it seems, I
did not know myself. For I thought I was capable of carrying on
war against you; but I was no match for you. . . . Therefore, as I
was thus without knowledge, I have my just deserts.
—Xenophon, The Education of Cyrus
A
12
Reconnect to the Masculine or
Feminine Within You
The Law of Gender Rigidity
ll of us have masculine and feminine qualities—some of this is
genetic, and some of it comes from the profound influence of the
parent of the opposite sex. But in the need to present a consistent
identity in society, we tend to repress these qualities, overidentifying
with the masculine or feminine role expected of us. And we pay a
price for this. We lose valuable dimensions to our character. Our
thinking and ways of acting become rigid. Our relationships with
members of the opposite sex suffer as we project onto them our own
fantasies and hostilities. You must become aware of these lost
masculine or feminine traits and slowly reconnect to them,
unleashing creative powers in the process. You will become more
fluid in your thinking. In bringing out the masculine or feminine
undertone to your character, you will fascinate people by being
authentically yourself. Do not play the expected gender role, but
rather create the one that suits you.
The Authentic Gender
As a young girl, Caterina Sforza dreamed of great deeds that she would
be a part of as a member of the illustrious Sforza family of Milan. Born
in 1463, Caterina was the daughter out of wedlock of a beautiful
Milanese noblewoman and Galeazzo Maria Sforza, who became Duke
of Milan upon the death of his father in 1466. As duke, Galeazzo
ordered that his daughter be brought into the castle, Porta Giovia,
where he lived with his new wife, and that she be raised like any
legitimate member of the Sforza family. His wife, Caterina’s
stepmother, treated her as one of her own. The girl was to have the
finest education. The man who had served as Galeazzo’s tutor, the
famous humanist Francesco Filelfo, would now serve as Caterina’s
tutor. He taught her Latin, Greek, philosophy, the sciences, and even
military history.
Often alone, Caterina would wander almost daily into the vast
castle library, one of the largest in Europe. She had her favorite books
that she would read over and over. One of these was a history of the
Sforza family, written by Filelfo himself in the style of Homer. There,
in this enormous volume with its elaborate illustrations, she would
read about the remarkable rise to power of the Sforza family, from
condottiere (captains in mercenary armies) to ruling the duchy of
Milan itself. The Sforzas were renowned for their cleverness and
bravery in battle. Along with this, she loved to read books that
recounted the chivalric tales of real-life knights in armor, and the
stories of great leaders in the past; among these, one of her favorites
was Illustrious Women by Boccaccio, which related the deeds of the
most celebrated women in history. And as she whiled away her time in
the library, all of these books converging in her mind, she would
daydream about the future glory of the family, somehow herself in the
midst of it all. And at the center of these fantasies was the image of her
father, a man who to her was as great and legendary as anyone she had
read about.
Although the encounters with her father were often brief, to
Caterina they were intense. He treated her as an equal, marveling at
her intelligence and encouraging her in her studies. From early on, she
identified with her father—experiencing his traumas and triumphs as
if they were her own. As were all the Sforza children, girls included,
Caterina was taught sword fighting and underwent rigorous physical
training. As part of this side of her education, she would go on hunting
expeditions with the family in the nearby woods of Pavia. She was
trained to hunt and kill wild boars, stags, and other animals. On these
excursions she would watch her father with awe. He was a superior
horseman, riding with such impetuosity, as if nothing could harm him.
In the hunt, taking on the largest animals, he showed no signs of fear.
At court, he was the consummate diplomat yet always maintained the
upper hand. He confided in her his methods—think ahead, plot several
moves in advance, always with the goal of seizing the initiative in any
situation.
There was another side to her father, however, that deepened her
identification with him. He loved spectacle; he was like an artist. She
would never forget the time the family toured the region and visited
Florence. They brought with them various theater troupes, the actors
wearing outlandish costumes. They dined in the country inside the
most beautifully colored tents. On the march, the brightly caparisoned
horses and the accompanying soldiers—all decked in the Sforza colors,
scarlet and white—would fill the landscape. It was a hypnotic and
thrilling sight, all orchestrated by her father. He delighted in always
wearing the latest in Milanese fashions, with his elaborate and
bejeweled silk gowns. She came to share this interest, clothes and
jewels becoming her passion. He might seem so virile in battle, but she
would see him crying like a baby as he listened to his favorite choral
music. He had an endless appetite for all aspects of life, and her love
and admiration for him knew no bounds.
And so in 1473, when her father informed the ten-year-old Caterina
of the marriage he had arranged for her, her only thought was to fulfill
her duty as a Sforza and please her father. The man Galeazzo had
chosen for her was Girolamo Riario, the thirty-year-old nephew of
Pope Sixtus IV, a marriage that would forge a valuable alliance
between Rome and Milan. As part of the arrangement, the pope
purchased the city of Imola, in Romagna, which the Sforzas had taken
decades before, christening the new couple the Count and Countess of
Imola. Later the pope would add the nearby town of Forlì to their
possessions, giving them control of a very strategically located part of
northeastern Italy, just south of Venice.
In her initial encounters with him, Caterina’s husband seemed a
most unpleasant man. He was moody, self-absorbed, and high-strung.
He appeared interested in her only for sex and could not wait for her
to come of age. Fortunately, he continued to live in Rome and she
stayed in Milan. But a few years later some disgruntled noblemen in
Milan murdered her beloved father, and the power of the Sforzas
seemed in jeopardy. Her position as the marriage pawn solidifying the
partnership with Rome was now more important than ever. She
quickly installed herself in Rome. There she would have to play the
exemplary wife and keep on the good side of her husband. But the
more she saw of Girolamo, the less she respected him. He was a
hothead, making enemies wherever he turned. She had not imagined
that a man could be so weak, and compared with her father he failed
by every measure.
She turned her attention to the pope. She worked hard to gain his
favor and that of his courtiers. Caterina was now a beautiful young
woman with blond hair, a novelty in Rome. She ordered the most
elaborate gowns to be sent from Milan. She made sure to never be seen
wearing the same outfit twice. If she sported a turban with a long veil,
it suddenly became the latest craze. She reveled in the attention she
received as the most fashionable woman in Rome, Botticelli using her
as a model for some of his greatest paintings. Being so well read and
cultivated, she was the delight of the artists and writers in town, and
the Romans began to warm up to her.
Within a few years, however, everything unraveled. Her husband
instigated a feud with one of the leading families in Italy, the
Colonnas. Then in 1484 the pope suddenly died, and without his
protection Caterina and her husband were in grave danger. The
Colonnas were plotting their revenge. The Romans hated Girolamo.
And it was almost a certainty that the new pope would be a friend of
the Colonnas, in which case Caterina and her husband would lose
everything, including the towns of Forlì and Imola. Considering the
weak position of her own family in Milan, the situation began to look
desperate.
Until a new pope was elected, Girolamo was still the captain of the
papal armies, now stationed just outside Rome. For days Caterina
watched her husband, who was paralyzed with fear and unable to
make a decision. He dared not enter Rome, fearing battle with the
Colonnas and their many allies in the crowded streets. He would wait
it out, but with time their options seemed to narrow, and the news
kept getting worse—mobs had sacked the palace they lived in; what
few allies they had in Rome had now deserted them; the cardinals
were congregating to elect the new pope.
It was August and the sweltering heat made Caterina—seven
months pregnant with her fourth child—feel faint and continually
nauseated. But as she contemplated the impending doom, the thought
of her father began to occupy her mind; it was as if she could feel his
spirit inhabiting her. Thinking as he would think about the
predicament she faced, she felt a rush of excitement as she formulated
an audacious plan. Without telling a soul of her intentions, in the dark
of night she mounted a horse and snuck out of camp, riding as fast as
she could to Rome.
As she had expected, in her condition no one recognized her and
she was allowed to enter the city. She headed straight for the Castel
Sant’Angelo, the most strategic point in Rome—just across the Tiber
River from the city center and close to the Vatican. With its
impregnable walls and its cannons that could be aimed at all parts of
Rome, the person who controlled the castle controlled the city. Rome
was in tumult, mobs filling the streets everywhere. The castle was still
held by a lieutenant loyal to Girolamo. Identifying herself, Caterina
was let into Sant’Angelo.
Once inside, in the name of her husband she took possession of the
castle, throwing out the lieutenant, whom she did not trust. Sending
word out through the castle to soldiers who swore loyalty to her, she
managed to smuggle in more troops. With the cannons of Sant’Angelo
now pointing at all roads leading to the Vatican, she made it
impossible for the cardinals to meet in one location and elect the new
pope. To make her threats real, she had her soldiers fire the cannons
as a warning. She meant business. Her terms for surrendering the
castle were simple—that all of the property of the Riarios be
guaranteed to remain in their hands, including Forlì and Imola.
A few evenings after she had taken over Sant’Angelo, wearing some
armor over her gown, she marched along the ramparts of the castle. It
gave her a feeling of great power, so far above the city, looking down at
the frantic men below, helpless to fight against her, a single woman
hobbled by pregnancy. When an envoy of the cardinal who was
organizing the conclave to elect the new pope was sent to negotiate
with her and seemed reluctant to agree to her conditions of surrender,
she shouted down from the ramparts, so all could hear, “So [the
cardinal] wants a battle of wits with me, does he? What he doesn’t
understand is that I have the brains of Duke Galeazzo and I am as
brilliant as he!”
As she waited for their response, she knew she controlled the
situation. Her only fear was that her husband would surrender and
betray her, or that the August heat would make her too ill to wait it
out. Finally, sensing her resolve, a group of cardinals came to the
castle to negotiate, and they acceded to her demands. The following
morning, as the drawbridge was lowered to let the countess leave the
castle, she noticed an enormous crowd pushing close to her. Romans
of all classes had come to catch a glimpse of the woman who had
controlled Rome for eleven days. They had taken the countess for a
rather frivolous young woman addicted to clothes, the pope’s little pet.
Now they stared at her in astonishment—she was wearing one of her
silk gowns, with a heavy sword dangling from a man’s belt, her
pregnancy more than evident. They had never seen such a sight.
Their titles now secure, the count and countess moved to Forlì to
rule their domain. With no more funds coming from the papacy,
Girolamo’s main concern was how to get more money. And so he
increased the taxes on his subjects, stirring up much discontent in the
process. He quickly made enemies of the powerful Orsi family in the
region. Fearing plots against his life, the count holed himself up in
their palace. Slowly Caterina took over much of the day-to-day ruling
of their realm. Thinking ahead, she installed a trusted ally as the new
commander of the castle Ravaldino, which dominated the area. She
did everything she could to ingratiate herself with the locals, but in a
few short years her husband had done too much damage.
On April 14, 1488, a group of men, clad in armor and led by
Ludovico Orsi, stormed into the palace and stabbed the count to death,
throwing his body out the window and into the city square. The
countess, dining with her family in a nearby room, heard the shouts
and quickly shuffled her six children into a safer room in the palace’s
tower. She bolted the door and from a window, under which several of
her most trusted allies had gathered, she shouted instructions to them:
they were to notify the Sforzas in Milan and her other allies in the
region and urge them to send armies to rescue her; under no
circumstances should the keeper of Ravaldino ever surrender the
castle. Within minutes the assassins had broken into her room, taking
her and her children captive.
Several days later, Ludovico Orsi and his fellow conspirator
Giacomo del Ronche marched Caterina up to Ravaldino—she was to
order the castle’s commander to surrender it to the assassins. As the
commander she had installed, Tommaso Feo, looked down from the
ramparts, Caterina seemed to fear for her life. Her voice breaking with
emotion, she begged Feo to give up the fortress, but he refused.
As the two of them continued their dialogue, Ronche and Orsi
sensed the countess and Feo were playing some sort of game, talking
in code. Ronche had had enough of this. Pressing the sharp edge of his
lance tight against her chest, he threatened to run her through unless
she got Feo to surrender, and he gave her the sternest glare. Suddenly
the countess’s expression changed. She leaned further into the blade,
her face inches from Ronche, and with a voice dripping with disdain,
she told him, “Oh, Giacomo del Ronche, don’t you try to frighten
me. . . . You can hurt me, but you can’t scare me, because I am the
daughter of a man who knew no fear. Do what you want: you have
killed my lord, you can certainly kill me. After all, I’m just a woman!”
Confounded by her words and demeanor, Ronche and Orsi decided
they had to find other means to pressure her.
Several days later Feo communicated with the assassins that he
would indeed hand over the fortress, but only if the countess would
pay him his back wages and sign a letter absolving him of any guilt for
such surrender. Once again, Orsi and Ronche led her to the castle and
watched her closely as she seemed to negotiate with Feo. Finally Feo
insisted that the countess enter the fortress to sign the document. He
feared the assassins were trying to trick him and he insisted she enter
alone. Once the letter was signed, he would do as he had promised.
The conspirators, feeling they had no choice, granted his request
but gave the countess a brief time frame to conclude the business. For
a fleeting moment, just as she disappeared over the drawbridge into
Ravaldino, she turned with a sneer and gave the Italian equivalent of
“the finger” to Ronche and Orsi. The entire drama of the past few days
had been planned and staged by her and Feo, with whom she had
communicated through various messengers. She knew that the
Milanese had sent an army to rescue her and she only had to play for
time. A few hours later Feo stood on the ramparts and yelled down
that he was holding the countess hostage and that was that.
The enraged assassins had had enough. The next day they returned
to the castle with her six children and called Caterina to the ramparts.
With daggers and spears pointed at them in the most menacing
fashion, and with the children wailing and begging for mercy, they
ordered Caterina to surrender the fortress or they would kill them all.
Surely they had already proven they were more than willing to shed
blood. She might be fearless and the daughter of a Sforza, but no
mother could possibly watch her children die before her eyes. Caterina
wasted no time. She shouted down: “Do it then, you fools! I am already
pregnant with another child by Count Riario and I have the means to
make more!” at which she lifted her skirts, as if to emphasize her
meaning.
Caterina had foreseen the maneuver with the children and had
calculated that the assassins were weak and indecisive—they should
have killed her and her family on that first day, amid the mayhem.
Now they would not dare to kill them in cold blood: the assassins knew
that the Sforzas, on their way to Forlì, would take terrible revenge on
them if they ever did such a deed. And if she surrendered now, she and
her children would all be imprisoned, and some poison would find its
way into their food. She didn’t care what they thought of her as a
mother. She had to keep stalling. To emphasize her resolve, after
refusing to surrender, she had the cannons of the castle fire at the Orsi
palace.
Ten days later a Milanese army arrived to rescue her, and the
assassins scattered. The countess was quickly restored to power, the
new pope himself confirming her rule as regent until her eldest son,
Ottaviano, came of age. And as word of all that she had done—and
what she had yelled down to the assassins from the ramparts of
Ravaldino—spread throughout Italy, the legend of Caterina Sforza, the
beautiful warrior countess of Forlì, began to take on a life of its own.
Within a year after the death of her husband, the countess had
taken a lover, Giacomo Feo, the brother of the commander she had
installed in Ravaldino. Giacomo was seven years younger than
Caterina, and he was the polar opposite of Girolamo—handsome and
virile, he had come from the lower classes, having served as the stable
boy to the Riario family. Most important, he not only loved Caterina,
he worshipped her and showered her with attention. The countess had
spent her whole life mastering her emotions and subordinating her
personal interests to practical matters. Suddenly feeling herself
overwhelmed by Giacomo’s affection, she lost her habitual self-control
and fell hopelessly in love.
She made Giacomo the new commander of Ravaldino. As he now
had to live in the castle, she built a palace for herself inside it and soon
barely left its confines. Giacomo was decidedly insecure about his
status. Caterina had him knighted, and in a secret ceremony they
married. To allay his self-doubts, she increasingly handed over to him
governing powers of Forlì and Imola, and began to retire from public
affairs. She ignored the warnings of courtiers and diplomats that
Giacomo was out for himself and was in over his head. She did not
listen to her sons, who feared Giacomo had plans to get rid of them. In
her eyes, her husband could do no wrong. Then one day in 1495, as she
and Giacomo left the castle for a picnic, a group of assassins
surrounded her husband and killed him before her eyes.
Caught off guard by this action, Caterina reacted with fury. She
rounded up the conspirators and had them executed and their families
imprisoned. In the months after this, she fell into a deep depression,
even contemplating suicide. What had happened to her over the past
few years? How had she lost her way and given up her power? What
had happened to her girlhood dreams and the spirit of her father that
was her own? Something had clouded her mind. She turned to religion
and she returned to ruling her realm. Slowly she recovered.
Then one day she received a visit from Giovanni de’ Medici, a
thirty-year-old member of the famous family and one of Florence’s
leading businessmen. He had come to forge commercial ties between
the cities. More than anyone else, he reminded her of her father. He
was handsome, clever, extremely well read, and yet there was a
softness to his character. Finally here was a man who was her equal in
knowledge, power, and refinement. The admiration was mutual. Soon
they were inseparable, and in 1498 they married, uniting two of the
most illustrious families in Italy.
Now she could finally dream of creating a great regional power, but
events beyond her control would spoil her plans. That same year
Giovanni died from illness. And before she had time to grieve for him,
she had to deal with the latest and most dangerous threat of all to her
realm: The new pope, Alexander VI (formerly known as Roderigo
Borgia), had his eye on Forlì. He wanted to extend the papal domains
through conquest, his son Cesare Borgia serving as the commander of
the papal forces. Forlì would be a key acquisition for the pope, and he
began to maneuver to politically isolate Caterina from her allies.
To prepare for the imminent invasion, Caterina forged a new
alliance with the Venetians and built an elaborate series of defenses
within Ravaldino. The pope tried to pressure her to surrender her
domain, making her all kinds of promises in return. She knew better
than to trust a Borgia. But by the fall of 1499, it seemed that the end
had finally come. The pope had allied himself with France, and Cesare
Borgia had appeared in the region with an army of twelve thousand,
fortified by the addition of two thousand experienced French soldiers.
They quickly took Imola and easily entered the city of Forlì itself. All
that remained was Ravaldino, which by late December was
surrounded by Borgia’s troops.
On December 26, Cesare Borgia himself rode up to the castle on his
white horse, dressed all in black—quite a sight. As Caterina looked
down from the ramparts and contemplated the scene, she thought of
her father. It was the anniversary of his assassination. He represented
everything she valued, and she would not disappoint him. She was the
most like him of all his children. As he would have done, she had
thought ahead—her plan was to play for time until her remaining allies
could come to her defense. She had cleverly fortified Ravaldino in a
way that would allow her to keep retreating behind barricades if the
walls were breached. In the end, they would have to take the castle
from her by force, and she was more than prepared to die in defense of
it, sword in hand.
As she listened to Borgia address her, it was clear he had come to
flatter and flirt—everyone knew his reputation as a devilish seducer,
and many in Italy thought Caterina had rather loose morals. She
listened and smiled, occasionally reminding him of her past deeds and
her reputation as a Sforza—if he wanted her to surrender, he would
have to do better. He persisted in his courtship and asked to parley
with her personally.
She appeared to finally succumb to his charm; she was a woman,
after all. She ordered the drawbridge to be lowered and started
walking toward him. He continued to press his case, and she gave him
certain looks and smiles that indicated she was falling under his spell.
Now only inches away, he reached for her arm, and she playfully
withdrew it. They should discuss matters in the castle, she said with a
coy expression, and began to walk back, inviting him to follow. As he
stepped onto the drawbridge to catch up with her, it began to rise, and
he leaped back to the other side just in time. Enraged and embarrassed
by the trick she had tried to play, he swore revenge.
During the next few days he unleashed a torrent of cannon fire at
the castle walls, finally opening a breach. Borgia’s troops flooded in,
led by the more experienced French. It was now hand-to-hand combat,
and at the front of her remaining troops was Caterina. The head of the
French troops, Yves d’Allegre, stared at her in amazement as the
beautiful countess—her ornamented cuirass over her dress—charged
at his men from the front line, handling her sword deftly, without a
trace of fear.
She and her men were about to withdraw further into the castle,
hoping to prolong the battle for days, as she had planned, when one of
her own soldiers grabbed her from behind and, his sword at her
throat, marched her over to the other side. Borgia had put a price on
her head, and the soldier had betrayed her for the reward. The siege
was over, and Borgia himself took possession of his great prize. That
night he raped her and kept her confined in his rooms, trying to make
it seem to the world that the infamous warrior countess had willingly
succumbed to his charms.
Even under duress she refused to sign away her domain, and so she
was brought to Rome and soon thrown into the dreaded prison at
Castel Sant’Angelo. For one long year, in a small and windowless cell,
she endured her loneliness and the endless tortures devised by the
Borgias. Her health deteriorated and she seemed destined to die in
prison, defiant to the end, but the chivalric French captain Yves
d’Allegre had fallen under her spell. He persisted in demanding, in the
name of the French king, to have her freed, and he finally succeeded,
getting her safe passage to Florence.
In retirement from public life, Caterina began to receive letters
from men from all parts of Europe. Some had seen her over the years;
most had only heard of her. They obsessed over her story, confessed
their love, and begged for some memento, some relic to worship. One
man who had caught a glimpse of her when she had first come to
Rome wrote to her, “If I sleep, it seems that I am with you; if I eat, I
leave my food and talk to you. . . . You are engraved in my heart.”
Weakened by her year in prison, the countess died in 1509.
•   •   •
Interpretation: In Caterina Sforza’s time, the roles that a woman
could play were severely restricted. Her primary role was to be the
good mother and wife, but if unmarried, she could devote her life to
religion, or in rare cases she could become a courtesan. It was as if a
circle had been drawn around each and every woman, and she dared
not explore beyond that circle. It was in a woman’s earliest years and
education that she internalized these restrictions. If she studied only a
limited number of subjects and practiced only certain skills, she
couldn’t expand her role even if she wanted to. Knowledge was power.
Caterina stands out as a remarkable exception, and it was because
she benefited from a unique confluence of circumstances. The Sforzas
were new to power. They had discovered in their rise to the top that a
strong and capable wife could be of great assistance. They developed
the practice of training their daughters in hunting and sword fighting
as a way to toughen them up and make them fearless—important
qualities to have as marriage pawns. Caterina’s father, however, took
this further. Perhaps he saw in his daughter a female reflection of
himself. Giving her his own tutor signaled some sort of identification
he felt between them.
And so a unique experiment began in the castle at Porta Giovia.
Isolated from the outside world and allowed a tremendous degree of
freedom, Caterina could develop herself in any direction she desired.
Intellectually she could explore all forms of knowledge. She could
indulge herself in all of her natural interests—in her case, fashion and
the arts. In her physical training, she could give free rein to her own
bold and adventurous spirit. In this early education, she could bring
out the many different sides of her character.
And so when she entered public life at the age of ten, she naturally
drifted beyond that restricted circle imposed on women. She could
play many roles. As a dutiful Sforza, she could be the loyal wife.
Naturally empathetic and caring, she could be the devoted mother.
She felt great pleasure in being the most fashionable and beautiful
young woman at the papal court. But when the actions of her husband
appeared to doom her and her family, she felt herself called to play
another role. Trained to think for herself and inspired by her father,
she could turn into the daring soldier, bringing an entire city under
her control. She could become the keen strategist, plotting several
moves ahead in a crisis. She could lead her troops, sword in hand. As a
young girl she had fantasized about playing these various roles, and it
felt natural and deeply satisfying to do so in real life.
We could say of Caterina that she had a feminine spirit with a
pronounced masculine undertone, the reverse of her father. And these
feminine and masculine traits were blended together, giving her a
unique style of thinking and acting. When it came to ruling, she
displayed a high degree of empathy, something quite unusual for the
time. When plague struck Forlì, she comforted the sick, at great risk to
her own life. She was willing to suffer the worst conditions in prison to
safeguard the inheritance for her children, a rare act of self-sacrifice
for a person of power. But at the same time she was a shrewd and
tough negotiator, and she had no tolerance for the incompetent or the
weak. She was ambitious and proud of it.
In conflicts, she always strategized to outwit her aggressive male
opponents and avoid bloodshed. With Cesare Borgia, she tried to lure
him onto the drawbridge using her feminine wiles; later, she tried to
lure him deeper and deeper into the castle, trapping him in a
protracted battle, giving her allies plenty of time to rescue her. She
nearly succeeded in both efforts.
This ability to play many different roles, to blend the masculine
with the feminine, was the source of her power. The only time she
relinquished this was in her marriage to Giacomo Feo. When she fell
in love with Feo, she was in a highly vulnerable position. The pressures
on her had been immense—dealing with a hopeless and abusive
husband, surviving the numerous pregnancies that had worn her
down, holding together the tenuous political alliances she had built up.
And so suddenly experiencing Feo’s adoring attention, it was natural
for her to seek a respite from her burdens, to relinquish power and
control for love. But in narrowing herself down to the role of the
devoted wife, she had to repress her naturally expansive character. She
had to expend her energy in placating her husband’s insecurities. In
the process she lost all initiative and paid the price, experiencing a
deep depression that nearly killed her. She learned her lesson and
afterward would remain true to herself for the rest of her life.
Perhaps what is most surprising about the story of Caterina Sforza
is the effect she had on the men and women of her time. We would
expect that people would have condemned her as a witch or virago and
shunned her for all her flouting of gender conventions. Instead, she
fascinated almost everyone who came in contact with her. Women
admired her strength. Isabella d’Este, the ruler of Mantua and her
contemporary, found her inspiring and wrote after her capture by
Borgia, “If the French criticize the cowardliness of our men, at least
they should praise the daring and valor of the Italian woman.” Men of
all types—artists, soldiers, priests, nobility, servants—obsessed over
her. Even those who wanted to destroy her, like Cesare Borgia, felt an
initial attraction and the desire to possess her.
Men could talk battle and strategy with her and feel like they were
talking to an equal, not like the other women in their lives, with whom
they could barely converse. But more important, they sensed a
freedom in her that was exciting. They also had to play a gender role,
one that was not as constricting as a woman’s role but had its
disadvantages. They were expected to be always in control, tough and
indomitable. Secretly they were drawn to this dangerous woman with
whom they could lose control. She was not a feminine doll, all passive
and existing only to please men. She was unrepressed and authentic,
which inspired in them the desire to let go as well, to move past their
own constricted roles.
Understand: You might like to imagine that much has changed
when it comes to gender roles, that the world of Caterina Sforza is too
distant from our own to be relevant. But in thinking so you would be
greatly mistaken. The specific details of gender roles might fluctuate
according to culture and time period, but the pattern is essentially the
same and is as follows: We are all born as complete beings, with many
sides to us. We have qualities of the opposite sex, both genetically and
from the influence of the parent of the other gender. Our character has
natural depths and dimensions to it. When it comes to boys, studies
have shown that an early age they are actually more emotionally
reactive than girls. They have high degrees of empathy and sensitivity.
Girls have an adventurous and exploratory spirit that is natural to
them. They have powerful wills, which they like to exert in
transforming their environment.
As we get older, however, we have to present to the world a
consistent identity. We have to play certain roles and live up to certain
expectations. We have to trim and lop off natural qualities. Boys lose
their rich range of emotions and, in the struggle to get ahead, repress
their natural empathy. Girls have to sacrifice their assertive sides.
They are supposed to be nice, smiling, deferential, always considering
other people’s feelings before their own. A woman can be a boss, but
she must be tender and pliant, never too aggressive.
In this process, we become less and less dimensional; we conform
to the expected roles of our culture and time period. We lose valuable
and rich parts to our character. Sometimes we can realize this only
when we encounter those who are less repressed and we feel
fascination with them. Certainly Caterina Sforza had such an effect.
There are also many male counterparts to this in history—the
nineteenth-century British prime minister Benjamin Disraeli, Duke
Ellington, John F. Kennedy, David Bowie, all men who displayed an
unmistakable feminine undertone and intrigued people all the more
for this.
Your task is to let go of the rigidity that takes hold of you as you
overidentify with the expected gender role. Power lies in exploring that
middle range between the masculine and the feminine, in playing
against people’s expectations. Return to the harder or softer sides of
your character that you have lost or repressed. In relating to people,
expand your repertoire by developing greater empathy, or by learning
to be less deferential. When confronting a problem or resistance from
others, train yourself to respond in different ways—attacking when you
normally defend, or vice versa. In your thinking, learn to blend the
analytical with the intuitive in order to become more creative (see the
final section of this chapter for more on this).
Do not be afraid to bring out the more sensitive or ambitious sides
to your character. These repressed parts of you are yearning to be let
out. In the theater of life, expand the roles that you play. Don’t worry
about people’s reactions to any changes in you they sense. You are not
so easy to categorize, which will fascinate them and give you the power
to play with their perceptions of you, altering them at will.
It is the terrible deception of love that it begins by engaging us in
play not with a woman of the external world but with a doll
fashioned in our brain—the only woman moreover that we have
always at our disposal, the only one we shall ever possess.
—Marcel Proust
Keys to Human Nature
We humans like to believe that we are consistent and mature, and that
we have reasonable control over our lives. We make decisions based
on rational considerations, on what will benefit us the most. We have
free will. We know who we are, more or less. But in one particular
aspect of life these self-opinions are all easily shattered—when we fall
in love.
When in love, we become prey to emotions we cannot control. We
make choices of partners we cannot rationally explain, and often these
choices end up being unfortunate. Many of us will have at least one
successful relationship in our lives, but we will tend to have many
more that were decidedly unsuccessful, that ended unhappily. And
often we repeat the same types of bad choices of partners, as if
compelled by some inner demon.
We like to tell ourselves in retrospect that when we were in love, a
type of temporary madness overcame us. We think of such moments
as representing the exception, not the rule, to our character. But let us
entertain for the moment the opposite possibility—in our conscious
day-to-day life, we are sleepwalking, unaware of who we really are; we
present a front of reasonableness to the world, and we mistake the
mask for reality. When we fall in love, we are actually being more
ourselves. The mask slips off. We realize then how deeply unconscious
forces determine many of our actions. We are more connected to the
reality of the essential irrationality in our nature.
Let us look at some of the common changes that occur when we are
in love.
Normally our minds are in a state of distraction. The deeper we fall
in love, however, the more our attention is completely absorbed in one
person. We become obsessive.
We like to present a particular appearance to the world, one that
highlights our strengths. When in love, however, opposite traits often
come to the fore. A person who is normally strong and independent
can suddenly become rather helpless, dependent, and hysterical. A
nurturing, empathetic person can suddenly become tyrannical,
demanding, and self-absorbed.
As adults we feel relatively mature and practical, but in love we can
suddenly regress to behavior that can only be seen as childish. We
experience fears and insecurities that are greatly exaggerated. We feel
terror at the thought of being abandoned, like a baby who has been left
alone for a few minutes. We have wild mood swings—from love to
hate, from trust to paranoia.
Normally we like to imagine that we are good judges of other
people’s character. Once infatuated or in love, however, we mistake
the narcissist for a genius, the suffocator for a nurturer, the slacker for
the exciting rebel, the control freak for the protector. Others can often
see the truth and try to disabuse us of our fantasies, but we won’t
listen. And what is worse, we will often continue to make the same
types of mistaken judgments again and again.
In looking at these altered states, we might be tempted to describe
them as forms of possession. We are normally rational person A, but
under the influence of an infatuation, irrational person B begins to
emerge. At first, A and B can fluctuate and even blend into each other,
but the deeper we fall in love, the more it is person B who dominates.
Person B sees qualities in people that are not there, acts in ways that
are counterproductive and even self-destructive, is quite immature,
with unrealistic expectations, and makes decisions that are often
mysterious later on to person A.
When it comes to our behavior in these situations, we never really
completely understand what is happening. Too much of our
unconscious is at play, and we have no rational access to its processes.
But the eminent psychologist Carl Jung—who analyzed over the course
of his very long career thousands of men and women with stories of
painful love affairs—offered perhaps the most profound explanation
for what happens to us when we fall in love. According to Jung, we are
actually possessed in such moments. He gave the entity (person B)
that takes hold of us the name anima (for the male) and animus (for
the female). This entity exists in our unconscious but comes to the
surface when a person of the opposite sex fascinates us. The following
is the origin of the anima and the animus, and how they operate.
We all possess hormones and genes of the opposite sex. These
contrasexual traits are in the minority (to a greater or lesser extent,
depending on the individual), but they are within us all and they form
a part of our character. Equally significant is the influence on our
psyche of the parent of the opposite sex, from whom we absorb
feminine or masculine traits.
In our earliest years we were completely open and susceptible to
the influence of others. The parent of the opposite sex was our first
encounter with someone dramatically different from us. As we related
to their alien nature, much of our personality was formed in response,
becoming more dimensional and multifaceted. (With the parent of the
same sex there is often a level of comfort and immediate identification
that does not require the same adaptive energy).
For instance, small boys are often comfortable expressing emotions
and traits that they’ve learned from the mother, such as overt
affection, empathy, and sensitivity. Small girls, conversely, are often
comfortable expressing traits they’ve learned from the father, such as
aggression, boldness, intellectual rigor, and physical prowess. Each
child may also naturally possess these opposite-gender traits in him-
or herself. In addition, each parent will also have a shadow side that
the child must assimilate or deal with. For instance, a mother may be
narcissistic rather than empathetic, and a father may be domineering
or weak rather than protective and strong.
Children must adapt to this. In any event, the boy and the girl will
internalize the positive and the negative qualities of the parent of the
opposite sex in ways that are unconscious and profound. And the
association with the parent of the opposite sex will be charged with all
kinds of emotions—physical and sensual connections, tremendous
feelings of excitement, fascination, or disappointment at what one was
not given.
Soon, however, comes a critical period in our early lives in which
we must separate from our parents and forge our identity. And the
simplest and most powerful way to create this identity is around
gender roles, the masculine and the feminine. The boy will tend to
have an ambivalent relationship to his mother that will mark him for
life. On the one hand he craves the security and adoring attention she
gives him; on the other hand he feels threatened by her, as if she might
suffocate him in her femininity and he would lose himself. He fears
her authority and her power over his life. From a certain age forward,
he feels the need to differentiate himself. He needs to establish his
own sense of masculine identity. Certainly the physical changes that
occur as he gets older will fuel this identity with the masculine, but in
the process he will tend to overidentify with the role (unless he
identifies with the feminine role instead), playing up his toughness
and independence to emphasize his separation from the mother. The
other sides to his character—the empathy, the gentleness, the need for
connection, which he absorbed from the mother or were naturally a
part of him—will tend to become repressed and sink into the
unconscious.
The girl may have an adventurous spirit and may incorporate the
willpower and determination of her father into her own personality.
But as she gets older, she will most likely feel pressure to conform to
certain cultural norms and to forge her identity around what is
considered feminine. Girls are supposed to be nice, sweet, and
deferential. They are supposed to put the interests of others before
their own. They are supposed to tame any wild streaks, to look pretty
and to be objects of desire. For the individual girl, these expectations
turn into voices she hears in her head, continually judging her and
making her doubt her self-worth. These pressures may be subtler in
our day and age, but they still exert a powerful influence. The more
exploratory, aggressive, and darker sides of her character—both
naturally occurring and absorbed from the father—will tend to become
repressed and sink into the unconscious, if she adopts a more
traditionally feminine role.
The unconscious feminine part of the boy and the man is what Jung
calls the anima. The unconscious masculine part of the girl and
woman are the animus. Because they are parts of ourselves that are
deeply buried, we are never really aware of them in our daily life. But
once we become fascinated with a person of the opposite sex, the
anima and animus stir to life. The attraction we feel toward another
might be purely physical, but more often the person who draws our
attention unconsciously bears some resemblance—physical or
psychological—to our mother or father. Remember that this primal
relationship is full of charged energy, excitement, and obsessions that
are repressed but yearning to come out. A person who triggers these
associations in us will be a magnet for our attention, even though we
are not aware of the source of our attraction.
If the relationship to the mother or father was mostly positive, we
will tend to project onto the other person the desirable qualities that
our parent had, in the hope of reexperiencing that early paradise.
Take, for instance, a young man whose mother nurtured and adored
him. He may have been a sweet, loving little boy, devoted to his
mother and reflecting her nurturing energy, but he repressed these
traits in himself as he grew into an independent man with a masculine
image to uphold. In the woman who triggers an association with his
mother he will see the capacity to adore him that he secretly craves.
This feeling of getting what he wants will intensify his excitement and
physical attraction. She will supply him the qualities he never
developed in himself. He is falling in love with his own anima, in the
form of the desired woman.
If the feelings toward the mother or father were mostly ambivalent
(their attention inconsistent), we will often try to fix the original
relationship by falling in love with someone who reminds us of our
imperfect parent figure, in the hope that we can subtract their negative
qualities and get what we never quite got in our earliest years. If the
relationship was mostly negative, we may go in search of someone
with the opposite qualities to that parent, often of a dark, shadowy
nature. For instance, a girl who had a father who was too strict,
distant, and critical perhaps had the secret desire to rebel but didn’t
dare to. As a young woman she might be drawn to a rebellious,
unconventional young man who represents the wild side she was never
able to express, and is the polar opposite of her father. The rebel is her
animus, now externalized in the form of the young man.
In any case, whether the association is positive, negative, or
ambivalent, powerful emotions are triggered, and feeling ourselves
transported to the primal relationship in our childhood, we act in ways
that are often contrary to the persona we present. We become
hysterical, needy, obsessive, controlling. The anima and animus have
their own personalities, and so when they come to life we act like
person B. Because we are not really relating to women and men as
they are, but rather to our projections, we will eventually feel
disappointed in them, as if they are to blame for not being what we
had imagined. The relationship will often tend to fall apart from the
misreading and miscommunications on both sides, and not aware of
the source of this, we will go through precisely the same cycle with the
next person.
There are infinite variations on these patterns, because everyone
has very particular circumstances and mixes of the masculine and
feminine. For instance, there are men who are more psychologically
feminine than women and women who are more psychologically
masculine than men. If they are heterosexual, the man will be drawn
to masculine women who have the qualities he never developed in
himself. He has more of an animus than an anima. The woman will be
drawn to feminine men. There are many such contrasexual couples,
some more overt than others, and they can be successful if both sides
get what they want—a famous historical example would be the
composer Frédéric Chopin and the writer George Sand, Sand being
more like the husband and Chopin like the wife. If they are
homosexual, the man or woman will still be in search of the
contrasexual qualities undeveloped from within. In general, people are
imbalanced, overidentifying with the masculine or feminine and
drawn to the polar opposite.
Your task as a student of human nature is threefold: First you must
try to observe the anima and the animus as they manifest themselves
in others, particularly in their intimate relationships. By paying
attention to their behavior and patterns in these situations, you will
have access to their unconscious that is normally denied to you. You
will see the parts of themselves they have repressed, and you can use
such knowledge to great effect. Pay special attention to those who are
hypermasculine or hyperfeminine. You can be sure that below the
surface lurks a very feminine anima for the man and a very masculine
animus for the woman. When people go extra far in repressing their
feminine or masculine qualities, these will tend to leak out in a
caricatured form.
The hypermasculine man, for instance, will be secretly obsessed
with clothes and his looks. He will display an unusual interest in
people’s appearances, including other men, and make rather snippy
judgments about them. Richard Nixon desperately tried to project a
macho image to those who worked for him as president, but he was
constantly commenting on and fussing over the color of the suits they
wore and the drapes in his office. The hypermasculine man will
express strong opinions about cars, technology, or politics that are not
based on real knowledge, and when called on this, he will become
rather hysterical in his defense, throw a tantrum, or pout. He is always
trying to contain his emotions, but they can often have a life of their
own. For instance, without wanting to, he will suddenly become quite
sentimental.
The hyperfeminine woman will often be concealing a great deal of
repressed anger and resentment at the role she has been forced to
play. Her seductive, girlish behavior with men is actually a ploy for
power, to tease, entrap, and hurt the target. Her masculine side will
leak out in passive-aggressive behavior, attempts to dominate people
in relationships in underhanded ways. Underneath the sweet,
deferential façade, she can be quite willful and highly judgmental of
others. Her willfulness, always under the surface, will come out in
rather irrational stubbornness in petty matters.
Your second task is to become aware of the projecting mechanism
within yourself. (See the next section for common types of
projections.) Projections have a positive role to play in your life, and
you could not stop them even if you wanted to, because they are so
automatic and unconscious. Without them, you would not find
yourself paying deep attention to a person, becoming fascinated with
him or her, idealizing, and falling in love. But once the relationship
develops, you need to have the power and awareness to withdraw the
projections, so that you can begin to see women and men as they really
are. In doing so, perhaps you will realize how truly incompatible you
are, or the opposite. Once connected to the real person, you can
continue to idealize him or her, but this will be based on actual
positive qualities he or she possesses. Perhaps you can find his or her
faults charming. You can accomplish all of this by becoming aware of
your own patterns and the types of qualities you tend to project onto
others.
This also has relevance to relationships with the opposite sex that
are not intimate. Imagine that in an office situation a colleague
criticizes your work or postpones a meeting you asked for. If that
person happens to be of the opposite sex, all kinds of emotions—
resentments, fears, disappointments, hostility—will be stirred up,
along with various projections, whereas with someone of your own
gender there would be much less of a reaction. Seeing this dynamic in
everyday life, you will be better able to control it and have smoother
relationships with those of the opposite sex.
Your third task is to look inward, to see those feminine or
masculine qualities that are repressed and undeveloped within you.
You will catch glimpses of your anima or animus in your relationships
with the opposite sex. That assertiveness you desire to see in a man, or
empathy in a woman, is something you need to develop within
yourself, bringing out that feminine or masculine undertone. What
you are doing in essence is integrating into your everyday personality
the traits that are within you but are repressed. They will no longer
operate independently and automatically, in the form of possession.
They will become part of your everyday self, and people will be drawn
to the authenticity they sense in you. (For more on this, see the final
section of this chapter.)
—
Finally, when it comes to gender roles, we like to imagine a continual
line of progress leading to perfect equality, and to believe that we are
not far from reaching this ideal. But this is hardly the truth. Although
on one level we can see definite progress, on another level, one that is
deeper, we can see increasing tension and polarization between the
sexes, as if the old patterns of inequality between men and women
exert an unconscious influence upon us.
This tension can sometimes feel like a war, and it stems from a
growing psychological distance between the genders, in which people
of the opposite sex seem like alien creatures, with habits and patterns
of behavior we cannot begin to fathom. This distance can turn into
hostility among some. Although we can see this in both men and
women, the hostility is stronger among men. Perhaps this is related to
the latent hostility many men feel toward the mother figure, and the
feeling of dependency and weakness she unconsciously triggers. The
male sense of masculinity often has a defensive edge that reveals
underlying insecurities. Such insecurity has only become more acute
with shifting gender roles, and it increases the suspiciousness and
hostility between men and women.
This outer conflict between the genders, however, is merely a
reflection of an unresolved inner conflict. As long as the inner
feminine or masculine is denied, the outer distance will only grow.
When we bridge this distance from within, our attitude toward the
opposite sex changes as well. We feel a deeper connection. We can talk
and relate to them as if relating to parts of ourselves. The polarity
between the sexes still exists and still causes us to be attracted and fall
in love, but now it includes the desire to get closer to the feminine or
the masculine. This is much different from the polarization between
the genders, in which distance and hostility eventually come to the
fore in the relationship and push people further away. The inner
connection will vastly improve the outer connection and should be the
ideal we aim for.
Gender Projection—Types
Although there are infinite variations, below you will find six of the
more common types of gender projections. You must use this
knowledge in three ways: First, you must recognize in yourself any
tendency toward one of these forms of projection. This will help you
understand something profound about your earliest years and make it
much easier for you to withdraw your projections on other people.
Second, you must use this as an invaluable tool for gaining access to
the unconscious of other people, to seeing their anima and animus in
action.
And finally, you must be attentive to how others will project onto
you their needs and fantasies. Keep in mind that when you are the
target of other people’s projections, the temptation is to want to live up
to their idealization of you, to be their fantasy. You get caught up in
their excitement and you want to believe you are as great, strong, or
empathetic as they imagine. Without realizing it, you begin to play the
role they want you to play. You become the mother or father figure
they crave. Inevitably, however, you will come to resent this—you
cannot be yourself; you are not appreciated for your true qualities.
Better to be aware of this dynamic before it entraps you.
The Devilish Romantic: For the woman in this scenario, the man
who fascinates her—often older and successful—might seem like a
rake, the type who cannot help but chase after young women. But he is
also romantic. When he’s in love, he showers the woman with
attention. She decides she will seduce him and become the target of
his attention. She will play to his fantasies. How can he not want to
settle down with her and reform himself? She will bask in his love. But
somehow he is not as strong, masculine, or romantic as she had
imagined. He is a bit self-absorbed. She does not get the desired
attention, or it does not last very long. He cannot be reformed, and
leaves her.
This is often the projection of women who had rather intense, even
flirtatious relationships with the father. Such fathers often find their
wives boring, and the young daughter more charming and playful.
They turn to the daughter for inspiration; the daughter becomes
addicted to their attention and adept at playing the kind of girl that
daddy wants. It gives her a sense of power. It becomes her lifelong goal
to recapture this attention and the power that goes with it. Any
association with the father figure will spark the projecting mechanism,
and she will invent or exaggerate the man’s romantic nature.
A prime example of this type would be Jacqueline Kennedy
Onassis. Jack Bouvier, her father, adored his two daughters, but
Jacqueline was his favorite. Jack was devilishly handsome and
dashing. He was a narcissist obsessed with his body and the fine
clothes that he wore. He considered himself macho, a real risk taker,
but underneath the façade he was in fact quite feminine in his tastes
and totally immature. He was also a notorious womanizer. He treated
Jackie more like a playmate and lover than a daughter. For Jackie, he
could do no wrong. She took perverse pride in his popularity with
women. In the frequent fights between her mother and father, she
always took his side. Compared to the fun-loving father, the mother
was prudish and rigid.
Spending so much time in his company, even after her parents
divorced, and thinking of him constantly, Jackie deeply absorbed his
energy and spirit. As a young woman, she turned all of her attention to
older, powerful, and unconventional men, with whom she could re-
create the role she had played with her father—always the little girl in
need of his love, but also quite flirtatious. And she was continually
disappointed in the men she had chosen. John F. Kennedy was the
closest to her ideal, for in so many ways he was just like her father in
looks and in spirit. Kennedy, however, would never give her the
attention she craved. He was too self-absorbed. He was too busy
having affairs with other women. He was not really the romantic type.
She was continually frustrated in this relationship, but she was
trapped in this pattern, later marrying Aristotle Onassis, an older,
unconventional man of great power who seemed so dashing and
romantic but who would treat her horribly and cheat on her
continually.
Women in this scenario have become trapped by the early attention
paid to them by the father. They have to be continually charming,
inspiring, and flirtatious to elicit that attention later on. Their animus
is seductive, but with an aggressive, masculine edge, having absorbed
so much of the father’s energy. But they are in a continual search for a
man who does not exist. If the man were completely attentive and
tirelessly romantic, they would grow bored with him. He would be
seen as too weak. They are secretly drawn to the devilish side of their
fantasy man and to the narcissism that comes with it. Women trapped
in this projection will grow resentful over the years about how much
energy they have to expend playing to men’s fantasies and how little
they get in return. The only way out of the trap for such women is to
see the pattern itself, to stop mythologizing the father, and to focus
instead on the damage he has caused by the inappropriate attention he
paid to them.
The Elusive Woman of Perfection: He thinks he has found the ideal
woman. She will give him what he’s been missing in his prior
relationships, whether that’s some wildness, some comfort and
compassion, or a creative spark. Although he has had few actual
encounters with the woman in question, he can imagine all kinds of
positive experiences with her. The more he thinks of her, the more he’s
certain he cannot live without her. When he talks of this perfect
woman, you will notice there’s not a lot of concrete detail about what
makes her so perfect. If he does manage to forge a relationship, he will
quickly become disenchanted. She’s not who he thought she was; she
misled him. He then moves on to the next woman to project his
fantasy onto.
This is a common form of male projection. It contains all of the
elements he thinks he never got from his mother, never got from the
other women in his life. This ideal mate will haunt his dreams. She will
not appear to him in the form of someone he knows; she is a woman
fashioned in his imagination—often young, elusive, but promising
something great. In real life, certain types of women will tend to
trigger this projection. She is usually quite hard to pin down and
conforms to what Freud called the narcissistic woman—self-contained,
not really needing a man or anybody to complete her. She can be a bit
cold at the core and a blank screen upon which men can project
whatever they want. Alternatively, she can seem to be a free spirit, full
of creative energy but without a clear sense of her own identity. For
men she serves as a muse, a great spark to their imagination, a lure to
loosen up their own rigid mind.
The men prone to this projection often had mothers who were not
totally there for them. Perhaps such a mother expected the son to give
her the attention and validation she was not getting from her husband.
Because of this reversal, when the boy becomes a man, he feels a great
emptiness inside that he constantly needs to fill. He cannot exactly
verbalize what he wants or what he missed, hence the vagueness of his
fantasy. He will spend his life searching for this elusive figure and
never settle on a flesh-and-blood female. It’s always the next one who
will be perfect. If he falls for the narcissistic type, he will repeat the
problem he experienced with his mother, falling for a woman who
cannot give him what he wants. His own anima is a bit dreamy,
introspective, and moody, which is the behavior he will tend to exhibit
when in love.
Men of this type must recognize the nature of their pattern. What
they really need is to find and interact with a real woman, accept her
inevitable flaws, and give more of themselves. They often prefer to
chase their fantasy, because in such a scenario they are in control and
have the freedom to leave when reality sets in. To break the pattern,
such men will have to give up some of this control. When it comes to
their need for a muse, they must learn to find such inspiration from
within, to bring out more of the anima within themselves. They are too
alienated from their own feminine spirit and need to loosen up their
own thought processes. Not needing this wildness from their fantasy
woman, they will better relate to the actual women in their life.
The Lovable Rebel: For the woman who is drawn to this type, the
man who intrigues her has a noticeable disdain for authority. He is a
nonconformist. Unlike the Devilish Romantic, this man will often be
young and not so successful. He will also tend to be outside her usual
circle of acquaintances. To have a relationship with him would be ever
so slightly taboo—certainly her father would not approve, and perhaps
not her friends or colleagues. If a relationship does ensue, however,
she will see a totally different side to him. He can’t hold down a good
job, not because he’s a rebel but because he’s lazy and ineffectual.
Despite the tattoos and shaved head, he’s quite conventional,
controlling, and domineering. The relationship will break apart, but
the fantasy will remain.
The woman with this projection often had a strong, patriarchal
father who was distant and strict. The father represents order, rules,
and conventions. He was often quite critical of his daughter—she was
never good or pretty or smart enough. She internalized this critical
voice and hears it in her head all the time. As a girl she dreamed of
rebelling and asserting herself against the father’s control, but too
often she was reduced to obeying and playing the deferential daughter.
Her desire to rebel was repressed and went into her animus, which is
quite angry and resentful. Instead of developing the rebelliousness
herself, she looks to externalize it in the form of the rebellious male. If
she senses a man might be like this, based on his appearance, she will
project fantasies that are charged and sexual. Oftentimes she chooses a
man who is relatively young because this makes him less threatening,
less of a patriarch. But his youth and immaturity make it almost
impossible to form a stable relationship, and her angry side will come
out as she grows disenchanted.
Once a woman recognizes she is prone to this projection, she must
come to terms with a simple fact: what she really wants is to develop
the independence, assertiveness, and power to disobey in herself. It is
never too late to do so, but these qualities must be built up and
developed in small steps, everyday challenges in which she practices
saying no, breaking some rules, et cetera. Becoming more assertive,
she can begin to have relationships that are more equal and satisfying.
The Fallen Woman: To the man in question, the woman who
fascinates him seems so different from those he has known. Perhaps
she comes from a different culture or social class. Perhaps she is not as
educated as he is. There might be something dubious about her
character and her past; she is certainly less physically restrained than
most women. He thinks she’s earthy. She seems to be in need of
protection, education, and money. He will be the one to rescue and
elevate her. But somehow the closer he gets to her, the less it turns out
as he had expected.
In Swann’s Way, volume 1 of the novel In Search of Lost Time by
Marcel Proust, the protagonist, Charles Swann—based on a real
person—is an aesthete, a connoisseur of art. He is also a Don Juan who
is deathly afraid of any relationship or form of commitment. He has
seduced many women of his class. But then he meets a woman named
Odette, who is from a decidedly different social circle. She is
uneducated, a bit vulgar, and some would say she is a courtesan. She
intrigues him. Then one day, while staring at a reproduction of a
biblical scene from a Botticelli fresco, he decides she resembles a
woman in the painting. Now he is fascinated and begins to idealize
her. Odette must have had a hard life, and she deserves better. Despite
his fear of commitment, he will marry her and educate her in the finer
things of life. What he doesn’t realize is that she does not at all
resemble the woman he fantasizes about. She is extremely clever and
strong willed, much stronger than he is. She will end up making him
her passive slave, as she continues to have affairs with other men and
women.
Men of this type often had strong mother figures in their childhood.
They became good, obedient boys, excellent students at school.
Consciously they are attracted to well-educated women, to those who
seem good and perfect. But unconsciously they are drawn to women
who are imperfect, bad, of dubious character. They secretly crave what
is the opposite of themselves. It is the classic split of the
mother/whore—they want the mother figure for a wife but feel a much
stronger physical attraction to the whore, the Fallen Woman, the type
who likes to display her body. They have repressed the playful,
sensual, and earthy sides of the character they had as boys. They are
too rigid and civilized. The only way they can relate to these qualities is
through women who appear to be so different from themselves. Like
Swann, they find a way to idealize them with some highbrow reference
that has no relation to reality. They project onto such women
weakness and vulnerability. They tell themselves they want to help and
protect them. But what really attracts them is the danger and naughty
pleasures these women seem to promise. Underestimating the
strength of such women, they often end up as their pawns. Their
anima is passive and masochistic.
Men who engage in this kind of projection need to develop the less
conventional sides of their character. They need to move outside their
comfort zone and try new experiences on their own. They require more
challenges, and even a bit of danger that will help loosen them up.
Perhaps they need to take more risks at work. They also need to
develop the more physical and sensual side of their character. Not
having to get what they crave by looking for the Fallen Woman type,
they can actually begin to satisfy their urges with any type of woman,
not passively waiting for her to lead them astray but actively initiating
the guilty pleasures.
The Superior Man: He seems brilliant, skilled, strong, and stable.
He radiates confidence and power. He could be a high-powered
businessman, a professor, an artist, a guru. Even though he may be
older and not so physically attractive, his self-assurance gives him an
attractive aura. For the woman attracted to this type, a relationship
with him would give her an indirect feeling of strength and superiority.
In the novel Middlemarch (1872) by George Eliot, the main
character, Dorothea Brooke, is a nineteen-year-old orphan raised by
her wealthy uncle. Dorothea is quite beautiful and would be a
desirable match for marriage. In fact, a local young man named Sir
James Chettam is actively courting her. But one evening she meets the
much older Edward Causabon, a wealthy landowner who has devoted
his life to scholarly pursuits, and he intrigues her. She starts to pay
him attention and he courts her, much to the horror of her sister and
uncle. To them he is ugly, with moles on his face and a sallow
complexion. He slurps his food and talks very little. But to Dorothea
his face is full of a spiritual quality. He is too above people to care
about etiquette. He talks little because no one would understand him.
Being married to him would be like being married to Pascal or Kant.
She’ll learn Greek and Latin and help him complete his great
masterpiece, The Key to All Mythologies. And he will help educate and
elevate her. He will be the father she has been unconsciously missing.
Only after being married to him does she discover the truth—he’s dead
inside, and very controlling. He sees her as a glorified secretary. She
becomes trapped in a loveless marriage.
Although the relationship details might be quite different now, this
type of projection is all too common among women. It stems from
feelings of inferiority. The woman in this case has internalized the
voices of the father and others who have been so critical of her, who
have lowered her self-esteem by telling her who she is and how she
should behave. Not having ever developed her own strength or
confidence, she will tend to search for these qualities in men and
exaggerate any traces of them. Many of the men who respond to her
sense her low self-esteem and find this alluring. They like the adoring
attention of a woman, often younger, whom they can lord over and
control. This would be the classic professor seducing the student.
Because such men are rarely as brilliant, clever, and self-assured as
she imagines, the woman either is disappointed and leaves or is
trapped in her low self-esteem, bending to his manipulations and
blaming herself for any problems.
What such a woman needs to do is first realize that the source of
her insecurity is the critical opinions of others, which she has accepted
and internalized. It does not stem from her inherent lack of
intelligence or worthiness. She must actively work at developing her
assertiveness and self-confidence through her actions—taking on
projects, starting a business, mastering a craft. With men, she must
see herself as their natural equal, as potentially strong and creative as
they are, or even more so. With genuine self-confidence she will then
be able to gauge the true worth and character of the men she meets.
The Woman to Worship Him: He’s driven and ambitious, but his
life is hard. It’s a harsh, unforgiving world out there, and it’s not easy
to find any comfort. He feels something missing in his life. Then along
comes a woman who is attentive to him, warm, and engaging. She
seems to admire him. He feels overwhelmingly drawn to her and her
energy. This is the woman to complete him, to help comfort him. But
then, as the relationship develops, she no longer seems quite so nice
and attentive. She certainly has stopped admiring him. He concludes
that she has deceived him or has changed. Such a betrayal makes him
angry.
This male projection generally stems from a particular type of
relationship with the mother—she adores her son and showers him
with attention. Perhaps this is to compensate for never quite getting
what she wants from her husband. She fills the boy with confidence;
he becomes addicted to her attention and craves her warm, enveloping
presence, which is what she wants.
When he grows up, he is often quite ambitious, always trying to live
up to the expectations of his mother. He pushes himself hard. He
chooses a certain type of woman to pursue and then subtly positions
her to play the mother role—to comfort, adore, and pump up his ego.
In many instances, the woman will come to understand how he has
manipulated her into this role, and she will resent it. She will stop
being so soothing and reverential. He will blame her for changing, but
in fact he is the one projecting qualities that were never exactly there
and trying to make her conform to his expectations. The ensuing
breakup will be very painful for the man, because he has invested
energy from his earliest years and will feel this as abandonment from
the mother figure. Even if he is successful in getting the woman to play
the role, he himself will feel resentment at his dependency on her, the
same dependency and ambivalence he had toward his mother. He may
sabotage the relationship or withdraw. His anima has a sharp,
recriminating edge, always ready to complain and blame.
The man in this case must see the pattern of these relationships in
his life. What this should signal to him is that he needs to develop
from within more of the mothering qualities that he projects onto
women. He must see the nature of his ambition as stemming from his
desire to please his mother and live up to her expectations. He tends to
drive himself too hard. He must learn to comfort and soothe himself,
to withdraw from time to time and be satisfied with his
accomplishments. He needs to be able to care for himself. This will
drastically improve his relationships. He will give more, instead of
waiting to be adored and taken care of. He will relate to women as they
are, and in the end they will perhaps feel unconsciously impelled to
provide more of the comfort he needs, without being pushed into this.
The Original Man/Woman
A common experience for us humans is that at a certain point in life—
often near the age of forty—we go through what is known as a midlife
crisis. Our work has become mechanical and soulless. Our intimate
relationships have lost their excitement and spirit. We crave change,
and we look for it through a new career or relationship, some new
experiences, even some danger. Such changes may give us a short-
term therapeutic jolt, but they leave the real source of the problem
untouched, and the malaise will return.
Let us look at this phenomenon from a different angle—as a crisis
of identity. As children, we had a rather fluid sense of self. We
absorbed the energy of everyone and everything around us. We felt a
very wide range of emotions and were open to experience. But in our
youth we had to shape a social self, one that was cohesive and would
allow us to fit into a group. To do so we had to trim and tighten up our
freer-flowing spirit. And much of this tightening revolved around
gender roles. We had to repress masculine or feminine aspects of
ourselves, in order to feel and present a more consistent self.
In our late teens and into our twenties, we continually adjust this
identity in order to fit in—it is still a work in progress, and we derive
some pleasure in forging this identity. We feel our lives can go in many
directions, and the many possibilities enchant us. But as the years go
by, the gender role we play gets more and more fixed, and we begin to
sense that we have lost something essential, that we are almost
strangers to who we were in our youth. Our creative energies have
dried up. Naturally we look outward for the source of this crisis, but it
comes from within. We have become imbalanced, too rigidly identified
with our role and the mask we present to others. Our original nature
incorporated more of the qualities that we absorbed from the mother
or father, and of the traits of the opposite sex that are biologically a
part of us. At a certain point, we inwardly rebel at the loss of what is so
essentially a part of us.
In primitive cultures around the world, the wisest man or woman in
the tribe was the shaman, the healer who could communicate with the
spirit world. The male shaman had an inner woman or wife whom he
listened to closely and who guided him. The female shaman had the
inner husband. The shamans’ power came from the depth of their
communication with this inner figure, which was experienced as a real
woman or man from within. The shaman figure reflects a profound
psychological truth that our most primitive ancestors had access to. In
fact, in the myths of many ancient cultures—Persian, Hebrew, Greek,
Egyptian—original humans were believed to be both male and female;
this made them so powerful that the gods feared them and split them
in half.
Understand: The return to your original nature contains
elemental power. By relating more to the natural feminine or
masculine parts within you, you will unleash energy that has been
repressed; your mind will recover its natural fluidity; you will
understand and relate better to those of the opposite sex; and by
ridding yourself of the defensiveness you have in relation to your
gender role, you will feel secure in who you are. This return requires
that you play with styles of thinking and acting that are more
masculine or feminine, depending on your imbalance. But before
describing such a process, we must first come to terms with a deeply
ingrained human prejudice about the masculine and the feminine.
For millennia, it has been men who largely defined masculine and
feminine roles and who imposed value judgments on them. Feminine
styles of thinking were associated with irrationality, and feminine
ways of acting seen as weak and inferior. We may have outwardly
progressed in terms of inequality between the genders, but inwardly
these judgments still have profound roots in us. The masculine style of
thinking is still esteemed as superior, and femininity is still
experienced as soft and weak. Many women have internalized these
judgments. They feel that being equal means being able to be as tough
and aggressive as men. But what is truly needed in the modern world
is to see the masculine and the feminine as completely equal in
potential reasoning power and strength of action, but in different
ways.
Let us say there are feminine and masculine styles when it comes to
thinking, taking action, learning from experience, and relating to other
people. These styles have been reflected in the behavior of men and
women for thousands of years. Some are related to physiological
differences, some stem mostly from culture. Certainly there are men
who have more feminine styles and women more masculine styles, but
almost all of us are imbalanced to one side or the other. Our task is to
open ourselves up to the opposite. We have only our rigidity to lose.
Masculine and feminine styles of thinking: Masculine thinking
tends toward focusing on what separates phenomena from one
another and categorizing them. It looks for contrasts between things to
better label them. It wants to take things apart, like a machine, and
analyze the separate parts that go into the whole. Its thought process is
linear, figuring out the sequence of steps that goes into an event. It
prefers to look at things from the outside, with emotional detachment.
The masculine way of thinking tends to prefer specialization, to dig
deep into something specific. It feels pleasure in uncovering the order
in phenomena. It likes to build elaborate structures, whether in a book
or a business.
Feminine thinking orients itself differently. It likes to focus on the
whole, how the parts connect to one another, the overall gestalt. In
looking at a group of people, it wants to see how they relate to one
another. Instead of freezing phenomena in time in order to examine
them, it focuses on the organic process itself, how one thing grows into
another. In trying to solve a puzzle, the feminine style will prefer to
meditate on several aspects, absorb the patterns, and let answers or
solutions come to the individual over time, as if they needed to be
cooked. This form of thinking leads to insights when the hidden
connections between things suddenly become visible in intuitive
flashes. As opposed to specialization, it is more interested in how
different fields or forms of knowledge can connect to one another. In
studying another culture, for instance, it will want to get closer to it, to
understand how it is experienced from within. It is more sensitive to
information from the senses, not merely from abstract reasoning.
For too long the masculine style has been seen as more rational and
scientific, but this does not reflect the reality. All of the greatest
scientists in history have displayed a powerful mix of the masculine
and feminine styles. The biologist Louis Pasteur’s greatest discoveries
came from his ability to open his mind to as many explanations as
possible, to let them cook in his mind, in order to see the connections
between wide-ranging phenomena. Einstein attributed all of his
greatest discoveries to intuitions, in which long hours of thinking gave
way to sudden insights about the interconnection of certain facts. The
anthropologist Margaret Mead used the latest abstract models from
her time to rigorously analyze indigenous cultures, but she combined
this with months of living within it and gaining a feel from the inside
position.
In business, Warren Buffett is an example of someone who blends
the two styles. When he considers buying a company, he breaks it
down into its component parts and analyzes them in statistical depth,
but he also tries to get a feel for the overall gestalt of the business, how
the employees relate to one another, the spirit of the group as instilled
by the man or woman at the top—a lot of the intangibles most
businesspeople ignore. He looks at a company from both the outside
and the inside.
Almost all people will lean more toward one style of thinking. What
you want for yourself is to create balance by leaning more in the other
direction. If you are more on the masculine side, you want to widen
the fields you look at, finding connections between different forms of
knowledge. In looking for solutions, you want to consider more
possibilities, give greater time to the deliberative process, and allow
for freer associations. You need to take seriously the intuitions that
come to you after much deliberation, and not discount the value of
emotions in thinking. Without a sense of excitement and inspiration,
your thinking can become stale and lifeless.
If you lean more in the feminine direction, you need to be capable
of focusing and digging into specific problems, tamping down the
impulse to widen your search and multitask. You have to find pleasure
in boring into one aspect of a problem. Reconstructing a causal chain
and continually refining it will give depth to your thinking. You tend to
see structure and order as dull affairs, giving greater emphasis to
expressing an idea and feeling inspired by it. Instead, you need to
derive pleasure in paying deep attention to the structure of a book,
argument, or project. Being creative and clear with the structure will
give your material its power to influence people. Sometimes you need
to gain greater emotional distance to understand a problem, and you
must force yourself to do so.
Masculine and feminine styles of action: When it comes to taking
action, the masculine tendency is to move forward, explore the
situation, attack, and vanquish. If there are obstacles in the way, it will
try to push through them, this desire aptly expressed by the ancient
military leader Hannibal—“I will either find a way or make a way.” It
derives pleasure from staying on the offensive and taking risks. It
prefers to maintain its independence and room to maneuver.
When confronted with a problem or the need to take action, the
feminine style often prefers to first withdraw from the immediate
situation and contemplate more deeply the options. It will often look
for ways to avoid the conflict, to smooth out relations, to win without
having to go to battle. Sometimes the best action is nonaction—let the
dynamic play itself out to understand it better; let the enemy hang
itself by its aggressive actions.
This was the style of Queen Elizabeth I, whose primary strategy was
to wait and see: when confronted with an imminent invasion by
Spain’s vast seafaring armada, she decided to not commit to a strategy
until she knew exactly when the armada was launched and the weather
conditions of the moment, working to slow down its advance and let
the bad weather destroy it, with minimal loss of life. Instead of
charging forward, the feminine style lays traps for the enemy.
Independence is not an essential value in action; in fact, it is better to
focus on interdependent relationships and how one move might harm
an ally and cause ripple effects to an alliance.
In the West, this feminine style of strategizing and acting is
instinctively judged as weak and timid. But in other cultures the style
is viewed quite differently. To Chinese strategists, wu-wei, or
nonaction, is often the height of wisdom and aggressive action a sign
of stupidity because it narrows one’s options. There is in fact
tremendous strength contained within the feminine style—patience,
resilience, and flexibility. To the great samurai warrior Miyamoto
Musashi, the ability to stand back and wait, to let the opponent tire
himself out mentally before counterattacking, was critical for success.
For those with the aggressive, masculine inclination, balance would
come from training yourself to step back before taking any action.
Consider the possibility that it is better to wait and see how things play
out, or even to not respond at all. Taking action without proper
consideration reveals weakness and a lack of self-control. For balance,
always try to consider the interdependent relationships you are
involved in and how each group or individual will be affected by any
action. If you find yourself blocked in your career later in life, you
must learn the power of withdrawing and reflecting on who you are,
your needs, your strengths and weaknesses, your true interests before
making any important decisions. This could require weeks or months
of introspection. Some of the greatest leaders in history honed their
best ideas while in prison. As the French would say, reculer pour
mieux sauter (“step back in order to leap forward”).
For those with the feminine style, it is best to accustom yourself to
various degrees of conflict and confrontation, so that any avoidance of
it is strategic and not out of fear. This requires baby steps, confronting
people in small ways in everyday situations before handling larger
conflicts. Drop the need to always consider the other side’s feelings;
sometimes there are bad people who need to be thwarted, and being
empathetic only empowers them. You need to be comfortable saying
no and turning people down. Sometimes when you try to smooth
things out, it is not out of empathy or strategy but out of an aversion to
displeasing people. You have been trained to be deferential, and you
need to get rid of this impulse. You need to reconnect to the bold and
adventurous spirit you once had and widen your strategic options to
both offense and defense. Sometimes you can overthink things and
come up with too many options. Action for its own sake can be
therapeutic, and taking aggressive action can discomfit your
opponents.
Masculine and feminine styles of self-assessment and learning: As
studies have shown, when men make mistakes they tend to look
outward and find other people or circumstances to blame. Men’s sense
of self is deeply tied to their success, and they do not like to look
inward if they fail. This makes it difficult to learn from failures. On the
other hand, men will tend to feel that they are completely responsible
for any success in life. This will make them blind to the element of luck
and the help of others, which will feed their grandiose tendencies (see
chapter 11 for more on this). Similarly, if there is a problem, the
masculine style is to try to figure it out on one’s own—to ask for
assistance would be an admission of weakness. In general, men will
overestimate their abilities and display confidence in their skills that
are often not warranted by circumstances.
For women, it is the opposite: When there is failure, they tend to
blame themselves and look inward. If there is success, they are more
prone to look at the role of others in helping them. They find it easy to
ask for assistance; they do not see this as a sign of personal
inadequacy. They tend to underestimate their skills and are less prone
to the grandiose confidence that often fuels men.
For those with the masculine style, when it comes to learning and
improving yourself, it is best to reverse the order—to look inward
when you make mistakes and to look outward when you have success.
You will be able to benefit from experience by dropping the feeling
that your ego is so tied to the success of each action or decision you
make. Develop this reversal as a habit. Don’t be afraid of asking for
help or feedback; instead, make this a habit as well. Weakness comes
from the inability to ask questions and to learn. Lower your self-
opinion. You are not as great or skilled as you imagine. This will spur
you to actually improve yourself.
For those with the feminine style, it is easy to beat yourself up after
failures or mistakes. The introspection can go too far. The same can be
said of ascribing success to others. Women more than men will suffer
from low self-esteem, which is not natural but acquired. They often
have internalized critical voices from others. Jung called these animus
voices: all the men over the years who have judged women for their
looks and intelligence. You want to catch these voices as they occur
and rid yourself of them. Because failures or criticisms might affect
you too deeply, you can become afraid to try something again, which
narrows your learning possibilities. You need to adopt more of the
masculine self-confidence, without the attendant stupidity. In your
daily encounters, try to drop or minimize your emotional responses to
events and see them from a greater distance. You are training yourself
to not take things so personally.
Masculine and feminine styles of relating to people and leadership:
As with male chimpanzees, in a group setting the masculine style is to
require a leader, and to either aspire to that role or gain power by
being the most loyal follower. Leaders will designate various deputies
to do their bidding. Men form hierarchies and punish those who fall
out of line. They are highly status conscious, hyperaware of their place
in the group. Leaders will tend to use some element of fear to keep the
group cohesive. The masculine style of leadership is to identify clear
goals and reach them. It puts emphasis on results, however they are
achieved.
The feminine style is more about maintaining the group spirit and
keeping the relationships smoothed out, with fewer differences among
individuals. It is more empathetic, considering the feelings of each
member and trying to involve them more in the decision-making
process. Results are important, but the way they are achieved, the
process, is equally important.
For those with the masculine style, it is important to enlarge your
concept of leadership. When you think more deeply about the
individuals on the team and strategize to involve them more, you can
have superior results, engaging the energy and creativity of the group.
Studies have shown that boys are as empathetic as girls, highly
attuned, for instance, to the emotions of the mother. But empathy is
slowly drummed out of men as they come to develop their assertive
style. Some of the greatest male leaders in history, however, managed
to retain and develop their empathy. A leader such as Sir Ernest Henry
Shackleton (see chapter 2) was no less of a man for his constant
consideration of the emotions of each of the men he was responsible
for—he was simply a stronger and more effective leader. The same
could be said of Abraham Lincoln.
For those of the feminine style, you must not be afraid of assuming
a strong leadership role, particularly in times of crisis. Considering the
feelings of everyone and incorporating the ideas of too many will
weaken you and your plans. Although women are certainly better
listeners, sometimes it is best to know when to stop listening and go
with the plan you have opted for. Once you recognize the fools, the
incompetents, and the hyperselfish in the group, it is best to fire them
and to even find pleasure in getting rid of those who bring the whole
group down. Instilling a touch of fear in your lieutenants is not always
a bad thing.
—
Finally, look at it this way: We are compelled by nature to want to
move closer to what is feminine or masculine, in the form of an
attraction to another person. But if we are wise, we realize we are
equally compelled to do so inwardly. For centuries men have looked to
women as muses, sources of inspiration. The truth is that the muse,
for both genders, lies within. Moving closer to your anima or animus
will bring you closer to your unconscious, which contains untapped
creative treasures. The fascination you feel in relation to the feminine
or masculine in others you will now feel in relation to your work, to
your own thought process, and to life in general. Just as with shamans,
that inner wife or husband will become the source of uncanny powers.
What is most beautiful in virile men is something feminine; what
is most beautiful in feminine women is something masculine.
—Susan Sontag
U
13
Advance with a Sense of Purpose
The Law of Aimlessness
nlike animals, with their instincts to guide them past dangers,
we humans have to rely upon our conscious decisions. We do the
best we can when it comes to our career path and handling the
inevitable setbacks in life. But in the back of our minds we can sense
an overall lack of direction, as we are pulled this way and that way
by our moods and by the opinions of others. How did we end up in
this job, in this place? Such drifting can lead to dead ends. The way to
avoid such a fate is to develop a sense of purpose, discovering our
calling in life and using such knowledge to guide us in our decisions.
We come to know ourselves more deeply—our tastes and inclinations.
We trust ourselves, knowing which battles and detours to avoid. Even
our moments of doubt, even our failures have a purpose—to toughen
us up. With such energy and direction, our actions have unstoppable
force.
The Voice
Growing up in a staunchly middle-class black neighborhood in
Atlanta, Georgia, Martin Luther King Jr. (1929–1968) had a pleasant
and carefree childhood. His father, Martin Sr., was the pastor of the
large and thriving Ebenezer Baptist Church in Atlanta, so the Kings
were relatively well off. His parents were loving and devoted to their
children. Home life was stable and comfortable and included
Grandmother King, who doted on young Martin Jr. He had a wide
circle of friends. The few encounters he had with racism outside the
neighborhood marred this idyllic childhood but left him relatively
unscathed. Martin Jr., however, was exceptionally sensitive to the
feelings of those around him. And as he got older, he sensed
something from his father that began to trigger some inner tension
and discomfort.
His father was a strict disciplinarian who set solid boundaries of
behavior for the three King children. When Martin Jr. misbehaved in
any way, his father whipped him, telling the boy this was the only way
to turn him into a real man. The whippings continued until he was
fifteen. Once his father caught Martin Jr. at a church social dancing
with a girl, and his scolding of the boy in front of his friends was so
vehement, Martin Jr. strove to never repeat the experience by causing
his father’s displeasure. But none of this discipline came with the
slightest hint of hostility. Martin Sr.’s affection for his son was too real
and palpable for the boy to feel anything but guilt for disappointing
him.
And such feelings of guilt were all the more stressful for Martin Jr.
because of the high hopes the father placed on his son. As a boy,
Martin Jr. displayed an unusual way with words; he could talk his
friends into almost anything, and his eloquence was quite precocious.
He was certainly bright. A plan formed in Martin Sr.’s mind that his
elder son would follow in his father’s footsteps—attending Morehouse
College in Atlanta, becoming ordained as a minister, serving as
copastor at Ebenezer, and then eventually inheriting the father’s
position, just as Martin Sr. had inherited it from his father-in-law.
Sometimes the father shared this plan, but more than anything else
the boy could feel the weight of his father’s expectations in the prideful
way he looked at him and treated him. And it made him anxious. He
deeply admired his father—he was a man of very high principle. But
Martin Jr. could not avoid sensing the growing differences between
them in taste and temperament. The son was more easygoing. He
loved attending parties, wearing nice clothes, dating girls, and
dancing. As he got older, he developed a pronounced serious and
introspective side and was drawn to books and learning. It was almost
as if there were two people inside of him—one social, the other solitary
and reflective. His father, on the other hand, was not complicated at
all.
When it came to religion, Martin Jr. had his doubts. His father’s
faith was strong but simple. He was a fundamentalist who believed in
a literal interpretation of the Bible. His sermons were aimed at the
emotions of his parishioners, and they responded in kind. Martin Jr.,
on the other hand, had a cool temperament. He was rational and
practical. His father seemed more concerned with helping people in
the afterlife, whereas the son was more interested in life on earth and
how it could be improved and enjoyed.
The thought of becoming a minister intensified these inner
conflicts. At times he could imagine himself following his father’s
career path. As someone deeply sensitive to any form of suffering or
injustice, serving as a minister could be the perfect way to channel his
desire to help people. But could he be a minister with such tenuous
religious faith? He hated any kind of confrontation with his father,
with whom it was impossible to argue. He developed the strategy of
always saying yes to whatever his father said. His way of dealing with
the tension inside him was to postpone any decision that might cause a
rift. And so, when he graduated from high school at the age of fifteen,
he decided to attend Morehouse, delighting his father. But in his mind
he had a plan—he would study everything that interested him and
decide on his own the path he would take.
In the first few months he thought of a career in medicine, then
sociology, then law. He kept changing his mind about a major, excited
by all the subjects now open to him. He took a class in Bible studies,
and he was pleasantly surprised at the profound, earthy wisdom in the
book. There were professors at Morehouse who approached
Christianity from a very intellectual angle, and he found this quite
appealing. By his last year at Morehouse he had changed his mind yet
again: he would become ordained as a minister, and he would enroll at
Crozer Theological Seminary, located in Pennsylvania, for a divinity
degree. Now his father was quite ecstatic. He understood it was best to
let Martin Jr. explore religion on his own, as long as he ended up at
Ebenezer.
At Crozer, Martin Jr. discovered a whole other side to Christianity,
one that emphasized social commitment and political activism. He
read all of the major philosophers, devoured the works of Karl Marx,
and became fascinated with the story of Mahatma Gandhi. Finding the
life of an academic a pleasant one, he decided to continue his studies
at Boston University, where he gained a reputation among his
professors as a brilliant scholar in the making. But as he prepared to
graduate in 1954 from Boston University with a PhD in systematic
theology, he could no longer postpone the inevitable. His father had
lined up for him an irresistible offer—a position as copastor at
Ebenezer and a part-time teaching position at Morehouse, where he
could continue the academic studies he loved.
Martin had recently married, and his wife, Coretta, wanted them to
stay in the North, where life would be easier than in the troubled
South. He could get a teaching job at almost any university he wanted.
It was tempting to fall for either option—Ebenezer or teaching at a
northern university. They would certainly lead to a comfortable life.
In the past few months, however, he had had a different vision of
his future. He could not rationally explain where this came from, but it
was clear to him: He would return to the South, where he felt a primal
connection to his roots. He would become the minister of a large
congregation in a good-sized city, a place where he could help people,
serve the community, and make a practical difference. But it would not
be in Atlanta, as his father had planned. He was not destined to be a
professor or merely a preacher molded by his father. He would have to
resist the easy path. And this vision had become too strong for him to
deny it any longer—he would have to displease his father, breaking the
news as gently as possible.
Several months before graduating, he heard of an opening at Dexter
Avenue Baptist Church in Montgomery, Alabama. He visited the
church and gave a sermon there, impressing the church’s leaders. He
found the congregation at Dexter more solemn and thoughtful than at
Ebenezer, which suited his own temperament. Coretta tried to
dissuade him from such a choice. She had grown up not far from
Montgomery, and she knew how fiercely segregated the city was, and
the many ugly tensions below the surface. Martin would encounter
there a virulent racism he had never experienced in his relatively
sheltered life. To Martin Sr., Dexter and Montgomery spelled trouble.
He added his voice to Coretta’s. But when Dexter offered Martin Jr.
the job, he did not experience his usual ambivalence and need to think
things over. For some reason, he felt certain about the choice; it
seemed fateful and right.
Established at Dexter, Martin Jr. worked hard at imposing his
authority (he knew he looked a bit too young for the position). He
devoted a great deal of time and effort to his sermons. Preaching
became his passion, and he soon gained a reputation as the most
formidable preacher in the area. But unlike many other pastors, his
sermons were full of ideas, inspired by all of the books he had read. He
managed to make these ideas relevant to the day-to-day lives of his
congregation. The key theme he had begun to develop was the power
of love to transform people, a power that was desperately underused in
the world and that blacks would have to adopt in relation to their
white oppressors in order to change things.
He became active in the local chapter of the NAACP, but when he
was offered the position of president of the chapter, he turned it down.
Coretta had just given birth to their first child, and his responsibilities
as a father and as a minister were great enough. He would remain very
active in local politics, but his duty was to his church and family. He
reveled in the simple and satisfying life he was now leading. His
congregation adored him.
In early December of 1955, Dr. King (as he was now known)
watched with great interest as a protest movement began to take shape
in Montgomery. An older black woman named Rosa Parks had refused
to give up her seat on the bus to a white man, as prescribed by the
local law for segregated buses. Parks, an active member of the local
NAACP chapter, had spent years fuming at this treatment of black
people and at the abusive behavior of bus drivers. Finally she had had
enough. For her defiance of the law she was arrested. This served as a
catalyst for activists in Montgomery, and they decided upon a one-day
boycott of Montgomery buses to show their solidarity. Soon the
boycott stretched into a week, then several weeks as organizers
managed to create a substitute system of transportation. One of the
organizers of the boycott, E. D. Nixon, asked King to take a leading
role in the movement, but he was reluctant. He had so little time to
spare from his congregation work. He would do what he could to lend
his support.
As the boycott gained momentum, it became clear to its leaders that
the local chapter of the NAACP was not big enough to handle it. They
decided they would form a new organization, to be called the
Montgomery Improvement Association. Because of his youth, his
eloquence, and what seemed to be his natural leadership skills, at a
local town meeting those who had formed the MIA nominated King to
be its president. It was an offer they half expected him to refuse—they
knew of his past hesitations. King, however, could feel the energy in
the room and their faith in him. Without his usual careful
premeditation, he suddenly decided to accept.
As the boycott continued, the white administrators who controlled
the city became increasingly adamant in their refusal to end the
segregated practices on the city’s buses. The tension was escalating—
several blacks involved in the boycott movement had been shot at and
assaulted. In the speeches he now delivered to large crowds at the MIA
meetings, King developed his theme of nonviolent resistance, invoking
the name of Gandhi. They would defeat the other side through
peaceful protests and justified boycotts; they would take the campaign
further, aiming at complete integration in Montgomery’s public places.
Now the local authorities saw King as a dangerous man, an interloper
from outside the state. They initiated a whispering campaign,
inventing all sorts of rumors to be spread about King’s youthful
indiscretions, insinuating he was a communist.
Almost every night he received phone calls threatening his life and
that of his family, and such threats were not to be taken lightly in
Montgomery. A normally reserved man, he did not like all of the
attention from the press, which had now become national. There was
so much bickering within the MIA leadership, and the whites in power
were so devilishly tricky. It was all so much more than he had
bargained for when he had decided to become the MIA leader.
Several weeks after assuming the leadership position, King was
arrested while driving, ostensibly for speeding, and placed in a cell full
of the most hardened criminals. Once bail was posted, a trial was set
for two days later, and who could guess what trumped up charges they
might come up with? The night before his trial he received yet another
phone call: “Nigger, we are tired of you and your mess now. And if you
aren’t out of this town in three days we’re going to blow your brains
out, and blow up your house.” Something in the tone of the caller’s
voice sent chills down his spine—this seemed more than just a threat.
He tried to sleep that night but couldn’t, the man’s voice on the
phone call replaying in his mind. He went into the kitchen to make
some coffee and calm himself down. He was shaking. He was losing
his nerve and his confidence. Couldn’t he just find a way to gracefully
bow out of his leadership position and return to the comfortable life of
being just a minister? As he examined himself and contemplated his
past, he realized that up until these weeks he had never really known
true adversity. His life had been relatively easy and happy. His parents
had given him everything. He had not known what it was like to feel
such intense anxiety.
And as he went deeper with these thoughts, he realized that he had
simply inherited religion from his father. He had never personally
communicated with God or felt His presence from within. He thought
of his newborn daughter and the wife he loved. He couldn’t take much
more of this. He couldn’t call his father for advice or solace—it was
well past midnight. He felt a wave of panic.
Suddenly it came to him—there was only one way out of this crisis.
He bowed over the cup of coffee and prayed with a sense of urgency he
had never felt before: “Lord, I must confess that I’m weak now. I’m
faltering. I’m losing my courage. And I can’t let the people see me like
this, because if they see me weak and losing my courage, they will
begin to get weak.” At that moment, clear as could be, he heard a voice
from within: “Martin Luther, stand up for righteousness. Stand up for
justice. Stand up for truth. And lo, I will be with you, even until the
end of the world.” The voice—that of the Lord, he felt sure—promised
to never leave him, to come back to him when he needed it. Almost
immediately he felt a sense of tremendous relief, the burden of his
doubts and anxiety lifted from his shoulders. He could not help but
cry.
Several nights later, while King was attending an MIA meeting, his
house was bombed. By sheer luck, his wife and daughter were
unharmed. When informed of what had happened, he remained calm.
He felt that nothing could rattle him now. Addressing an angry crowd
of black supporters who had congregated outside his home, he said,
“We are not advocating violence. We want to love our enemies. I want
you to love our enemies. Be good to them. Love them and let them
know you love them.” After the bombing, his father pleaded with him
to return with his family to Atlanta, but with Coretta’s support, he
refused to leave.
Over the following months there would be many challenges as he
struggled to keep the boycott alive and maintain the pressure on the
local government. Finally, toward the end of 1956, the Supreme Court
affirmed a lower court decision ending bus segregation in
Montgomery. On the morning of December 18, King was the first
passenger to board the bus and sit wherever he liked. It was a great
victory.
Now came national attention and fame, and with it endless new
problems and headaches. The death threats continued. The older black
leaders in the MIA and the NAACP came to resent the attention he
now received. The infighting and the clash of egos became almost
intolerable. King decided to start a new organization, to be called the
Southern Christian Leadership Conference, its purpose to take the
movement beyond Montgomery. For King, however, the infighting and
envy only followed him.
In 1959 he returned to his hometown to serve as copastor at
Ebenezer and to lead various SCLC campaigns from the headquarters
in Atlanta. For some in the movement he was too charismatic, too
domineering, and his campaigns too ambitious; for others he was too
weak, too willing to compromise with white authorities. The criticism
from both sides was relentless. But what added most of all to King’s
burdens was the slippery and infuriating tactics of the whites in power,
who had no intention of accepting any substantial changes in
segregation laws or in practices that discouraged blacks from
registering to vote. They negotiated with King and agreed to
compromises, then as soon as the boycotts and sit-ins stopped, they
found all kinds of loopholes in the agreements and backtracked.
In one campaign King led in Albany, Georgia, to desegregate the
city, the mayor and police chief made a show of exaggerated calmness,
making it seem as if King and the SCLC were the unreasonable group,
just stirring up trouble from the outside.
The campaign in Albany was largely a failure, and it left King
depressed and exhausted. It was now the pattern in his life that in such
moments he yearned for the simpler, easier days of the past—his
happy childhood, his pleasant years at the university, the first year and
a half at Dexter. Perhaps he should retire from the leadership role and
devote his time to preaching, writing, and lecturing. Such thoughts
tugged him at him with greater frequency.
Then, toward the end of 1962, he received yet another request for
his services: Fred Shuttlesworth, one of the leading black activists in
Birmingham, Alabama, begged King and the SCLC to help him in his
efforts to desegregate stores in the downtown area. Birmingham was
one of the most fiercely segregated cities in the country. Rather than
comply with federal laws to desegregate public places, such as
swimming pools, they merely closed them down. Any form of protest
against the segregation practices was met with powerful violence and
terrorism. The city had come to be known as “Bombingham.” And
overseeing this bastion of the segregated South was the police chief,
Bull Connor, who seemed to relish the chance to use force—whips,
attack dogs, high-pressure fire hoses, billy clubs.
This would certainly be the most dangerous campaign so far.
Everything inside King leaned toward turning it down. The old doubts
and fears returned to him. What if people were killed, and the violence
touched him and his family? What if he failed? He suffered more
sleepless nights as he agonized over this.
Then the voice from seven years before returned to him, as loud
and clear as ever: he had been tasked to stand up for justice, not to
think of himself but to think of the mission. How foolish to be afraid
again. Yes, it was his mission to go to Birmingham. But as he mulled
this over, he could not help thinking more deeply about what the voice
had told him. Standing up for justice meant bringing it about in some
real and practical way, not talking or settling for useless compromises.
His fears of disappointing people and failing had made him too
cautious. He would have to be more strategic and more courageous
this time. He would have to raise the stakes and he would have to win.
No more fears or doubts.
He accepted Shuttlesworth’s offer, and as he planned the campaign
with his team, he made it clear to them they would need to learn from
past mistakes. King laid out to them the nature of the predicament
they faced. The Kennedy administration had proven to be incredibly
cautious when it came to civil rights. The president feared alienating
congressional southern Democrats, upon whom he depended. He
would make great promises but keep dragging his feet.
What they needed to do in Birmingham was to provoke a national
crisis, one that was bloody and ugly. The racism and segregation in the
South were largely invisible to moderate whites. Birmingham seemed
like just another sleepy southern town. Their goal must be to make the
racism so visible to the whites watching television that it would strike
their consciences, and with a growing sense of outrage, pressure would
be placed on the Kennedy administration that it could no longer resist.
Most of all, King was counting on the cooperation of Bull Connor in
his plans—his overreaction to the intensity of their campaign would be
the key to the whole drama they were hoping to enact.
In April 1963 King and his team put their plan into action. They
attacked on multiple fronts with sit-ins and demonstrations. Although
reluctant because of his fear of jails, King got himself arrested. This
would garner more publicity and stir the local population to emulate
him. But the campaign had a fatal weakness that became apparent
only as it evolved: local black support for the movement was tepid.
Many blacks in Birmingham resented Shuttlesworth’s autocratic style;
others reasonably feared the violence Connor would unleash. King
depended on large and boisterous crowds, but what he got was far
from that. The national press, not smelling a story, started to leave.
Then one of the leaders on his team, James Bevel, had an idea—
they would enlist the participation of students in local schools. King
had his fears and argued they should not bring in anyone under the
age of fourteen, but Bevel reminded him of the high stakes and the
need for numbers, and King relented. Many of those inside the
organization and sympathizers were shocked that King could be so
pragmatic and strategic in using such young people, but the campaign
had a higher purpose, and it was no time to be so delicate.
The students responded with great enthusiasm. It was just what the
movement needed. They filled the streets of Birmingham, more daring
and boisterous than their parents. Soon they were filling up the jails.
The press returned en masse. Out came the high-pressure fire hoses,
the attack dogs, and the night sticks, striking teenagers and even
children. Soon television screens around America were broadcasting
the tense, dramatic, and bloody scenes that ensued. Enormous crowds
now showed up for King’s speeches, drumming up support for the
cause. Federal authorities were forced to intervene to lessen the
tension.
King had learned his lesson from before—he had to keep up the
pressure to the very end. Representatives of the white power structure
reluctantly opened negotiations with King. At the same time, he
sanctioned the demonstrators to continue their downtown marches,
coming from all directions and stretching Connor’s police force to the
breaking point. Frightened local merchants had had enough and asked
the white negotiators to work on a comprehensive settlement with the
black leaders, essentially desegregating the downtown stores and
agreeing to the hiring of black employees.
It was his greatest triumph so far; he had realized his ambitious
goal. It did not matter now if the white authorities backtracked, as
they inevitably would; Kennedy was caught in the trap, his own
conscience pricked by what he had seen in Birmingham. Shortly after
the settlement, he addressed the nation on television, explaining the
need for immediate progress in civil rights and proposing some
ambitious new laws. This led to the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which
paved the way for the Voting Rights Act of 1965. It made King the
undisputed leader of the civil rights movement, and soon a winner of
the Nobel Peace Prize. Money now poured into the SCLC, and the
movement seemed to have ineluctable momentum. But as before, the
troubles and burdens for King only seemed to increase with each new
victory.
In the years following Birmingham he sensed a powerful reaction
forming among conservatives and Republicans against the gains of the
movement. They would work to halt further progress. He learned that
the FBI had placed listening devices in his hotel rooms and had spied
on him for years; they were now leaking stories and rumors to various
newspapers. He watched as America descended into cycles of violence,
starting with the assassination of Kennedy.
He saw a new generation of black activists emerge under the
banner of Black Power, and they criticized his adherence to
nonviolence as weak and antiquated. When King moved the campaign
to Chicago to try to stop discriminatory housing practices there, he
brokered a settlement with local authorities, but black activists around
the country harshly criticized him—he had settled for far too little.
Shortly after this, an audience at a Chicago Baptist church loudly
booed him, drowning out his talk with chants of “Black Power.”
He grew depressed and despondent. In early 1965, he saw images of
the Vietnam War in a magazine, and it sickened him. Something was
deeply wrong with America. That summer he toured the Watts
neighborhood in Los Angeles after the violent riots that had scorched
the area. The sight of so much poverty and devastation overwhelmed
him. Here in the heart of one of the most affluent cities in America, the
center of the fantasy industry, was an enormous neighborhood where
large numbers of people lived in poverty and felt no hope for the
future. And they were largely invisible. America had a cancer in its
system—extreme inequalities in wealth, and the willingness to spend
vast sums of money on an absurd war, while blacks in inner cities were
left to rot and riot.
His depression now mixed with growing anger. In his conversations
with friends, people noticed a new edge to him. In one retreat with his
staff, he said, “All too many people have seen power and love as polar
opposites. . . . [But] the two fulfill each other. Power without love is
reckless, and love without power is sentimental.” At another retreat,
he talked of new tactics. He would never abandon nonviolence as the
means, but the civil disobedience campaign would have to be altered
and intensified. “Nonviolence must mature to a new level . . . mass
civil disobedience. There must be more than a statement to the larger
society, there must be a force that interrupts its functioning at some
key point.” The movement was not about integrating blacks into the
values of American society but about actively altering those values at
their root.
He would add to the civil rights movement the need to address
poverty in inner cities and to protest the Vietnam War. On April 4,
1967, he expressed this widening of the struggle in a speech that got
lots of attention, almost all negative. Even his most ardent supporters
criticized it. Including the Vietnam War would only alienate the public
from the cause of civil rights, they said. It would anger the Johnson
administration, whose support they depended upon. It was not part of
his mandate to speak so broadly.
He had never felt so alone, so attacked by his many critics. By early
1968 his depression had become deeper than ever. He felt the end was
near—some among his many enemies were going to kill him for all
that he had said and done. He was exhausted by the tension and felt
spiritually at a loss. In March of that year, a pastor in Memphis,
Tennessee, invited King to his city, hoping he could help support a
strike by black sanitation workers, who had been treated horribly.
There had been marches, boycotts, and protests, and the police had
responded brutally. The situation was explosive. King put them off—he
felt depleted. But as so often happened in these circumstances, he
realized it was his duty to do what he could, and so he agreed. On
March 18 he addressed an enormous crowd in Memphis, and their
enthusiastic response cheered him up. He heard that voice once again
supporting and urging him forward. Memphis would have to be a key
part of his mission.
For the next few weeks he kept returning to Memphis to lend his
support and assistance, against the fierce resistance of the local
authorities. On Wednesday evening, April 4, he addressed another
crowd: “We got some difficult days ahead. But it really doesn’t matter
with me now, because I’ve been to the mountaintop. . . . Like anybody,
I would like to live a long life. . . . But I’m not concerned about that
now. I just want to do God’s will. And He’s allowed me to go up to the
mountain, and I’ve looked over, and I’ve seen the promised land. I
may not get there with you. But I want you to know tonight, that we, as
a people will get to the promised land.”
The speech left him revitalized and in a good mood. The next day
he expressed some concern about an upcoming march that could turn
violent but said fear should not stop them from proceeding. “I’d rather
be dead than afraid,” he told an aide. That evening, he dressed and
prepared for a dinner at a restaurant with his aides, and running late,
he finally appeared on the balcony outside his motel room when a rifle
shot rang out and a single bullet pierced his neck. He died within an
hour.
•   •   •
Interpretation: Martin Luther King Jr. was a complex man with
several sides to his character. There was the pleasure-loving King, who
loved nice clothes, food, dances, women, and mischievous behavior.
There was the practical King, always wanting to solve people’s
problems and think things through thoroughly. There was the
sensitive, introspective King, a side that increasingly inclined him
toward spiritual pursuits. These sides were often in conflict from
within, as he succumbed to passing moods. This was what often
caused him to agonize over decisions. Associates would often be
troubled by how deeply he considered his options and how often he
doubted himself, imagining that he was not worthy of the role that he
had been called upon to play.
His relationship to his father reflected this complexity. On the one
hand, he truly loved and respected him, enough to consider becoming
a minister and emulating his style of leadership. On the other hand, he
became aware from a very early age of the dangers that would ensue if
he allowed himself to be overwhelmed by his father’s dominating
presence. His younger brother, A.D. King, lacked such awareness, a
fact that caused him much pain in his life. A.D. became a minister, but
he never could assert his independence. His career was erratic as he
moved from one church to another. He developed an alcohol problem
and later in life revealed a definite self-destructive streak that troubled
his older brother. A.D. lived in their father’s shadow.
Something from deep within Martin Jr. impelled him to create
some distance and autonomy. This meant not mindlessly rebelling
against his father, which in the end would simply have revealed how
defined he had been by him in reverse. It meant understanding the
differences between them and using these differences as levers to
create space. It meant taking the best from his father—his discipline,
his high sense of principle, his caring nature. And it meant going his
own way when something from deep within urged him to do so. He
taught himself to listen to such intuitions, which led to his decision to
begin his public career in Montgomery and to accept the MIA
leadership position. In such moments, it was as if he could foresee his
destiny and drop his habit of overthinking things.
Then, a few weeks after becoming the MIA leader, as he began to
feel the increasing tension that went with the position, the many sides
of his character suddenly took over and led to an inner crisis. There
was the self-doubting King, the fearful King, the practical King
frustrated by the endless obstacles and infighting, the King who
yearned for a simpler and more pleasant life. This inner conflict
paralyzed him. And as all of that reached a peak the night he entered
his kitchen, suddenly those inclinations and intuitions that had guided
him before in his life transformed into an actual voice, the voice of
God, clarifying his destiny and offering continual support. He could
hear this voice so clearly from within that it would echo and
reverberate throughout his life.
From then on, in conversations and speeches, he would continually
refer to this “voice” that now guided him. And with this voice the
doubts, fears, and debilitating inner conflicts would disappear. He
could feel integrated on a whole new level. Certainly the moods and
anxieties would return, but so would the voice, making his mission
clear to him.
People were often surprised, and sometimes perturbed, by how
strategic he had become as his leadership role expanded to a national
level. During and after every civil rights campaign, he would conduct
deep analysis of the actions and reactions of the other side, learning
lessons and honing tactics. For some, this did not square with his
position as a spiritual leader—for instance, his decision to use children
and teenagers in Birmingham as a means to fill the city jails. Ministers
were not supposed to think like that. But to King, such pragmatism
was intimately connected to his mission. To merely inspire people with
speeches was sentimental, and he hated that. To not think deeply
about results was to merely seek attention for appearing righteous,
and to gratify the ego. He wanted to effect change, to dramatically and
palpably alter the conditions of blacks in the South.
And so he came to understand that the game was about gaining
leverage against the whites in power, who resisted change at every
step. He had to use sit-ins and boycotts to maximize the pain they felt,
even during the negotiating process. He had to maximize the attention
from the press and bring into the living rooms of white America the
ugly reality of life in the South for blacks. His strategic objective was
their conscience. He had to keep the movement unified in the face of
the increasing desire for violence among younger blacks. And as the
voice reminded him of his ultimate purpose, to stand up for and bring
about real justice, he naturally felt compelled to widen the struggle
into a mass civil disobedience campaign.
In a sense, King would serve as the voice for black America,
assuming a role similar to that of the voice that had guided him. He
would strive to bring unity to the cause and keep the movement
focused on practical results instead of debilitating infighting.
His bouts of depression, which became more intense in the later
years, stemmed from his deep sensitivity not only to the people around
him (the envy and continual criticisms he faced) but to the zeitgeist.
Before others did, he sensed the mood in America, the grim reality of
the war in Vietnam, the despair in the inner cities, the restlessness of
the young and their hunger to escape reality through drugs, the
cowardice of the political leadership. He linked this with his own sense
of doom—he knew he would be assassinated. Such moods would
overwhelm him. But the voice he had heard so many years before in
Montgomery allowed him to squelch his fears and rise above the
depression. Whenever he felt connected to his mission and purpose in
life, he would experience a profound sense of fulfillment. He was doing
what he was called to do, and he would not have traded this life for any
other. In his last days, the connection grew deeper: he would bring
change to the people of Memphis, but his fate would cut this short.
Understand: In many ways, the dilemma that King faced is the
dilemma that all of us face in life, because of a profound element in
human nature. We are all complex. We like to present a front to the
world that is consistent and mature, but we know inside that we are
subject to many different moods and wear many different faces,
depending on circumstances. We can be practical, social,
introspective, irrational, depending on the mood of the moment. And
this inner chaos actually causes us pain. We lack a sense of cohesion
and direction in life. We could choose any number of paths, depending
on our shifting emotions, which pull us this way and that. Why go here
instead of there? We wander through life, never quite reaching the
goals that we feel are so important to us, or realizing our potential. The
moments in which we feel clarity and purpose are fleeting. To soothe
the pain from our aimlessness, we might enmesh ourselves in various
addictions, pursue new forms of pleasure, or give ourselves over to
some cause that interests us for a few months or weeks.
The only solution to the dilemma is King’s solution—to find a
higher sense of purpose, a mission that will provide us our own
direction, not that of our parents, friends, or peers. This mission is
intimately connected to our individuality, to what makes us unique. As
King expressed it: “We have a responsibility to set out to discover what
we are made for, to discover our life’s work, to discover what we are
called to do. And after we discover that, we should set out to do it with
all the strength and all of the power that we can muster.” This “life’s
work” is what we were intended to do, as dictated by our particular
skills, gifts, and inclinations. It is our calling in life. For King, it was an
impulse to find his own particular path, to fuse the practical with the
spiritual. Finding this higher sense of purpose gives us the integration
and direction we all crave.
Consider this “life’s work” something that speaks to you from
within—a voice. This voice will often warn you when you are getting
involved in unnecessary entanglements or when you are about to
follow career paths that are unsuited to your character, by the
uneasiness that you feel. It directs you toward activities and goals that
mesh with your nature. When you are listening to it, you feel like you
have greater clarity and wholeness. If you listen closely enough, it will
direct you toward your particular destiny. It can be seen as something
spiritual or something personal, or both.
It is not the voice of your ego, which wants attention and quick
gratification, something that further divides you from within. Rather,
it absorbs you in your work and what you have to do. It is sometimes
hard to hear, as your head is full of the voices of others telling you
what you should and should not do. Hearing it involves introspection,
effort, and practice. When you follow its guidance, positive things tend
to happen. You have the inner strength to do what you must and not
be swayed by other people, who have their own agendas. Hearing this
voice will connect you to your larger goals and help you avoid detours.
It will make you more strategic, focused, and adaptive. Once you hear
it and understand your purpose, there will be no going back. Your
course has been set, and deviating from it will cause anxiety and pain.
He who has a why to live can bear with almost any how.
—Friedrich Nietzsche
Keys to Human Nature
In the world today, we humans face a particular predicament: As soon
as our schooling ends, we suddenly find ourselves thrown into the
work world, where people can be ruthless and the competition is
fierce. Only a few years before, if we were lucky, our parents met many
of our needs and were there to guide us; in some cases, they were
overprotective. Now we find ourselves on our own, with little or no life
experience to rely upon. We have to make decisions and choices that
will affect our entire future.
In the not-so-distant past, people’s career and life choices were
somewhat limited. They would settle into the particular jobs or roles
available to them and stay there for decades. Certain older figures—
mentors, family members, religious leaders—could offer some
direction if needed. But such stability and help is hard to find today, as
the world changes ever more quickly. Everyone is caught up in the
harsh struggle to make it; people have never been so preoccupied with
their own needs and agendas. The advice of our parents might be
totally antiquated in this new order. Facing this unprecedented state of
affairs, we tend to react in one of two ways.
Some of us, excited by all the changes, actually embrace this new
order. We are young and full of energy. The smorgasbord of
opportunities offered by the digital world dazzles us. We can
experiment, try many different jobs, have many different relationships
and adventures. Commitments to a single career or person feel like
unnecessary restrictions on this freedom. Obeying orders and listening
to authority figures is old-fashioned. Better to explore, have fun, and
be open. A time will come when we will figure out what exactly to do
with our lives. In the meantime, maintaining the freedom to do as we
wish and go where we please becomes our main motivation.
Some of us, however, react the opposite way: Frightened of the
chaos, we quickly opt for a career that is practical and lucrative,
hopefully related to some of our interests, but not necessarily. We
settle on an intimate relationship. We may even continue to cling to
our parents. What motivates us is to somehow establish the stability
that is so hard to find in this world.
Both paths, however, tend to lead to some problems further down
the road. In the first case, trying so many things out, we never really
develop solid skills in one particular area. We find it hard to focus on a
specific activity for too long because we are so used to flitting around
and distracting ourselves, which makes it doubly hard to learn new
skills if we want to. Because of this our career possibilities begin to
narrow. We become trapped into moving from one job to another. We
might now want a relationship that lasts, but we haven’t developed the
tolerance for compromise, and we cannot help but bristle at the
restrictions to our freedom that a lasting relationship will represent.
Although we might not like to admit it to ourselves, our freedom can
begin to wear on us.
In the second case, the career we committed to in our twenties
might begin to feel a bit lifeless in our thirties. We chose it for practical
purposes, and it has little connection to what actually interests us in
life. It begins to feel like just a job. Our minds disengage from the
work. And now that smorgasbord of opportunities in the modern
world begins to tempt us as we reach midlife. Perhaps we need some
new, exciting career or relationship or adventure.
In either case, we do what we can to manage our frustrations. But
as the years go by, we start to experience bouts of pain that we cannot
deny or repress. We are generally unaware of the source of our
discomfort—the lack of purpose and true direction in our lives.
This pain comes in several forms.
We feel increasingly bored. Not really engaged in our work, we turn
to various distractions to occupy our restless minds. But by the law of
diminishing returns, we need to continually find new and stronger
forms of diversion—the latest trend in entertainment, travel to an
exotic location, a new guru or cause to follow, hobbies that are taken
up and abandoned quickly, addictions of all kinds. Only when we are
alone or in down moments do we actually experience the chronic
boredom that motivates many of our actions and eats away at us.
We feel increasingly insecure. We all have dreams and a sense of
our own potential. If we have wandered aimlessly through life or gone
astray, we begin to become aware of the discrepancy between our
dreams and reality. We have no solid accomplishments. We feel
envious of those who do. Our ego becomes brittle, placing us in a trap.
We are too fragile to take criticism. Learning requires an admission
that we don’t know things and need to improve, but we feel too
insecure to admit this, and so our ideas become set and our skills
stagnate. We cover this up with an air of certainty and strong opinions,
or moral superiority, but the underlying insecurity cannot be shaken.
We often feel anxious and stressed but are never quite certain as to
why. Life involves inevitable obstacles and difficulties, but we have
spent much of our time trying to avoid anything painful. Perhaps we
didn’t take on responsibilities that would open us to failure. We
steered clear of tough choices and stressful situations. But then they
crop up in the present—we are forced to finish something by a
deadline, or we suddenly become ambitious and want to realize a
dream of ours. We have not learned in the past how to handle such
situations, and the anxiety and stress overwhelm us. Our avoidance
leads to a low-grade, continual anxiety.
And finally, we feel depressed. All of us want to believe that there is
some purpose and meaning to our life, that we are connected to
something larger than ourselves. We want to feel some weight and
significance to what we have done. Without that conviction, we
experience an emptiness and depression that we will ascribe to other
factors.
Understand: This feeling of being lost and confused is not
anyone’s fault. It is a natural reaction to having been born into times
of great change and chaos. The old support systems of the past—
religions, universal causes to believe in, social cohesion—have mostly
disappeared, at least in the Western world. Disappearing also are the
elaborate conventions, rules, and taboos that once channeled
behavior. We are all cast adrift, and it is no wonder that so many
people lose themselves in addictions and depression.
The problem here is simple: By our nature we humans crave a sense
of direction. Other living organisms rely upon elaborate instincts to
guide and determine their behavior. We have come to depend upon
our consciousness. But the human mind is a bottomless pit—it
provides us with endless mental spaces to explore. Our imagination
can take us anywhere and conjure up anything. At any moment, we
could choose to go in a hundred different directions. Without belief
systems or conventions in place, we seem to have no obvious compass
points to guide our behavior and decisions, and this can be
maddening.
Fortunately there is one way out of this predicament, and it is by
nature available to each and every one of us. There is no need to look
for gurus or to grow nostalgic for the past and its certainties. A
compass and guidance system does exist. It comes from looking for
and discovering the individual purpose to our lives. It is the path
taken by the greatest achievers and contributors to the advancement of
human culture, and we only have to see the path to take it. Here’s how
it works.
Each human individual is radically unique. This uniqueness is
inscribed in us in three ways—the one-of-a-kind configuration of our
DNA, the particular way our brains are wired, and our experiences as
we go through life, experiences that are unlike any other’s. Consider
this uniqueness as a seed that is planted at birth, with potential
growth. And this uniqueness has a purpose.
In nature, in a thriving ecosystem we can observe a high level of
diversity among species. With these diverse species operating in a
balance, the system is rich and feeds off itself, creating newer species
and more interrelationships. Ecosystems with little diversity are rather
barren, and their health is much more tenuous. We humans operate in
our own cultural ecosystem. Throughout history we can see that the
healthiest and most celebrated cultures have been the ones that
encouraged and exploited the greatest internal diversity among
individuals—ancient Athens, the Chinese Sung Dynasty, the Italian
Renaissance, the 1920s in the Western world, to name a few. These
were periods of tremendous creativity, high points in history. We can
contrast this with the conformity and cultural sterility in dictatorships.
By bringing our uniqueness to flower in the course of our life,
through our particular skills and the specific nature of our work, we
contribute our share to this needed diversity. This uniqueness actually
transcends our individual existence. It is stamped upon us by nature
itself. How can we explain why we are drawn to music, or to helping
other people, or to particular forms of knowledge? We have inherited
it, and it is there for a purpose.
Striving to connect to and cultivate this uniqueness provides us a
path to follow, an internal guidance system through life. But
connecting to this system does not come easily. Normally the signs of
our uniqueness are clearer to us in early childhood. We found
ourselves naturally drawn to particular subjects or activities, despite
the influence of our parents. We can call these primal inclinations.
They speak to us, like a voice. But as we get older, that voice becomes
drowned out by parents, peers, teachers, the culture at large. We are
told what to like, what is cool, what is not cool. We start to lose a sense
of who we are, what makes us different. We choose career paths
unsuited to our nature.
To tap into the guidance system, we must make the connection to
our uniqueness as strong as possible, and learn to trust that voice. (For
more on this, see “Discover your calling in life” in the next section.) To
the degree we manage to do so, we are richly rewarded. We have a
sense of direction, in the form of an overall career path that meshes
with our particular inclinations. We have a calling. We know which
skills we need and want to develop. We have goals and subgoals. When
we take detours from our path or become involved in entanglements
that distract us from our goals, we feel uncomfortable and quickly get
back on course. We may explore and have adventures, as is natural for
us when we are young, but there is a relative direction to our exploring
that frees us from continual doubts and distractions.
This path does not require that we follow one simple line, or that
our inclinations be narrowly focused. Perhaps we feel the pull of
several types of knowledge. Our path involves mastering a variety of
skills and combining them in highly inventive and creative ways. This
was the genius of Leonardo da Vinci, who combined his interests in
art, science, architecture, and engineering, having mastered each one
of them. This way of following the path goes well with our modern,
eclectic tastes and our love of wide exploration.
When we engage this internal guidance system, all of the negative
emotions that plague us in our aimlessness are neutralized and even
turned around into positive ones. For instance, we may feel boredom
in the process of accumulating skills. Practice can be tedious. But we
can embrace the tedium, knowing of the tremendous benefits to come.
We are learning something that excites us. We do not crave constant
distractions. Our minds are pleasantly absorbed in the work. We
develop the ability to focus deeply, and with such focus comes
momentum. We retain what we absorb because we are engaged
emotionally in learning. We then learn at a faster rate, which leads to
creative energy. With a mind teeming with fresh information, ideas
begin to come to us out of nowhere. Reaching such creative levels is
intensely satisfying, and it becomes ever easier to add new skills to our
repertoire.
With a sense of purpose, we feel much less insecure. We have an
overall sense that we are advancing, realizing some or all of our
potential. We can begin to look back at various accomplishments,
small or large. We got things done. We may have moments of doubt,
but they are generally related more to the quality of our work than to
our self-worth—did we do our best job? Focusing more on the work
itself and its quality than on what people think of us, we can
distinguish between practical and malicious criticism. We have an
inner resiliency, which helps us bounce back from failures and learn
from them. We know who we are, and this self-awareness becomes our
anchor in life.
With this guidance system in place, we can turn anxiety and stress
into productive emotions. In trying to reach our goals—a book, a
business, winning a political campaign—we have to manage a great
deal of anxiety and uncertainty, making daily decisions on what to do.
In the process, we learn to control our levels of anxiety—if we think too
much about how far we have to go, we might feel overwhelmed.
Instead we learn to focus on smaller goals along the way, while also
retaining a degree of urgency. We develop the ability to regulate our
anxiety—enough to keep us going and keep improving the work, but
not so much as to paralyze us. This is an important life skill.
We develop a high tolerance for stress as well, and even feed off of
it. We humans are actually built to handle stress. Our restless and
energetic minds thrive best when we are mentally and physically
active, our adrenaline pumping. It is a known phenomenon that
people tend to age more quickly and deteriorate more rapidly right
after they retire. Their minds have nothing to feed on. Anxious
thoughts return. They become less active. Maintaining some stress and
tension, and knowing how to handle it, can improve our health.
And finally, with a sense of purpose we are less prone to
depression. Yes, low moments are inevitable, even welcome. They
make us withdraw and reassess ourselves, as they did for King. But
more often we feel excited and lifted above the pettiness that so often
marks daily life in the modern world. We are on a mission. We are
realizing our life’s work. We are contributing to something much
larger than ourselves, and this ennobles us. We have moments of great
fulfillment that sustain us. Even death can lose its sting. What we have
accomplished will outlive us, and we do not have that debilitating
feeling of having wasted our potential.
Think of it this way: In military history, we can identify two types of
armies—those that fight for a cause or an idea, and those that fight
largely for money, as part of a job. Those that go to war for a cause,
such as the armies of Napoleon Bonaparte fighting to spread the
French Revolution, fight with greater intensity. They tie their
individual fate to that of the cause and the nation. They are more
willing to die in battle for the cause. Those in the army who are less
enthusiastic get swept up in the group spirit. The general can ask more
of his soldiers. The battalions are more unified, and the various
battalion leaders are more creative. Fighting for a cause is known as a
force multiplier—the greater the connection to the cause, the higher
the morale, which translates into greater force. Such an army can often
defeat one that is much larger but less motivated.
We can say something similar about your life: operating with a high
sense of purpose is a force multiplier. All of your decisions and actions
have greater power behind them because they are guided by a central
idea and purpose. The many sides to your character are channeled into
this purpose, giving you more sustained energy. Your focus and your
ability to bounce back from adversity give you ineluctable momentum.
You can ask more of yourself. And in a world where so many people
are meandering, you will spring past them with ease and attract
attention for this. People will want to be around you to imbibe your
spirit.
Your task as a student of human nature is twofold: First, you must
become aware of the primary role that a sense of purpose plays in
human life. By our nature, the need for purpose has a gravitational
pull to it that no one can resist. Look at the people around you and
gauge what is guiding their behavior, seeing patterns in their choices.
Is the freedom to do what they please their primary motivation? Are
they mostly after pleasure, money, attention, power for its own sake,
or a cause to join? These are what we shall call false purposes, and
they lead to obsessive behavior and various dead ends. (For more on
false purposes, see the last section of this chapter.) Once you identify
people as motivated by a false purpose, you should avoid hiring or
working with them, as they will tend to draw you downward with their
unproductive energy.
You will also notice some people who are struggling to find their
purpose in the form of their calling in life. Perhaps you can help them
or you can help each other. And finally, you may recognize a few
people who have a relatively high sense of purpose. This could be
someone young who seems destined for greatness. You will want to
befriend them and become infected with their enthusiasm. Others will
be older, with a string of accomplishments to their name. You will
want to associate with them in any way possible. They will draw you
upward.
Your second task is to find your sense of purpose and elevate it by
making the connection to it as deep as possible. (See the next section
for more on this.) If you are young, use what you find to give an overall
framework to your restless energy. Explore the world freely,
accumulate adventures, but all within a certain framework. Most
important, accumulate skills. If you are older and have gone astray,
take the skills you have acquired and find ways to gently channel them
in the direction that will eventually mesh with your inclinations and
spirit. Avoid sudden and drastic career changes that are impractical.
Keep in mind that your contribution to the culture can come in
many forms. You don’t have to become an entrepreneur or figure
largely on the world’s stage. You can do just as well operating as one
person in a group or organization, as long as you retain a strong point
of view that is your own and use this to gently exert your influence.
Your path can involve physical labor and craft—you take pride in the
excellence of the work, leaving your particular stamp on the quality. It
can be raising a family in the best way possible. No calling is superior
to another. What matters is that it be tied to a personal need and
inclination, and that your energy move you toward improvement and
continual learning from experience.
In any event, you will want to go as far as you can in cultivating
your uniqueness and the originality that goes with it. In a world full of
people who seem largely interchangeable, you cannot be replaced. You
are one of a kind. Your combination of skills and experience is not
replicable. That represents true freedom and the ultimate power we
humans can possess.
Strategies for Developing a High Sense of Purpose
Once you commit yourself to developing or strengthening your sense
of purpose, then the hard work begins. You will face many enemies
and obstacles impeding your progress—the distracting voices of others
who instill doubts about your calling and your uniqueness; your own
boredom and frustrations with the work itself and your slow progress;
the lack of trustworthy criticism from people to help you; the levels of
anxiety you must manage; and finally, the burnout that often
accompanies focused labor over long periods. The following five
strategies are designed to help you move past these obstacles. They are
in a loose order, the first being the essential starting point. You will
want to put them all into practice to ensure continual movement
forward.
Discover your calling in life. You begin this strategy by looking for
signs of primal inclinations in your earliest years, when they were
often the clearest. Some people can easily remember such early
indications, but for many of us it requires some introspection and
some digging. What you are looking for is moments in which you were
unusually fascinated by a particular subject, or certain objects, or
specific activities and forms of play.
The great nineteenth- and early-twentieth-century scientist Marie
Curie could distinctly recall the moment when she was four years old
and entered her father’s office, suddenly mesmerized by the sight of all
sorts of tubes and measuring devices for various chemistry
experiments placed behind a polished glass case. Her whole life she
would feel a similar visceral thrill whenever she entered a laboratory.
For Anton Chekhov, it was attending his first play in a theater as a boy
in his small town. The whole atmosphere of make-believe thrilled him.
For Steve Jobs, it was passing an electronics store as a child and seeing
the wondrous gadgets in the window, marveling at their design and
complexity. For Tiger Woods, it was, at the age of two, watching his
father hit golf balls into a net in the garage and being unable to contain
his excitement and desire to imitate him. For the writer Jean-Paul
Sartre, it was a childhood fascination with printed words on a page,
and the possible magical meanings each word possessed.
These moments of visceral attraction occurred suddenly and
without any prodding from parents or friends. It would be hard to put
into words why they occurred; they are signs of something beyond our
personal control. The actress Ingrid Bergman expressed it best, when
talking of the fascination she had with performing in front of her
father’s movie camera at a very early age: “I didn’t choose acting. It
chose me.”
Sometimes these moments can come when we are older, as when
Martin Luther King Jr. realized his mission in life as he got pulled into
the Montgomery bus boycott. And sometimes they can occur while
observing other people who are masters in their field.
As a young man, the future Japanese film director Akira Kurosawa
felt particularly aimless. He tried painting, then apprenticed as an
assistant director on films, a job he hated. He was ready to quit when
he got assigned to work for the director Kajiro Yamamoto in 1936.
Watching this great master at work, suddenly his eyes were opened to
the magical possibilities of film, and he realized his calling. As he later
described this, “It was like the wind in a mountain pass blowing across
my face. By this I mean that wonderfully refreshing wind you feel after
a painfully hard climb. The breath of that wind tells you you are
reaching the pass. Then you stand in the pass and look down over the
panorama as it opens up. When I stood behind Yama-san in his
director’s chair next to the camera, I felt my heart swell with that same
feeling—‘I’ve made it at last.’”
As another sign, examine moments in your life when certain tasks
or activities felt natural and easy to you, similar to swimming with a
current. In performing such activities, you have a greater tolerance for
the tedium of practicing. People’s criticisms don’t discourage you so
easily; you want to learn. You can contrast this with other subjects or
tasks that you find deeply boring and unfulfilling, which frustrate you.
Related to this, you will want to figure out the particular form of
intelligence that your brain is wired for. In his book Frames of Mind,
the psychologist Howard Gardner lists certain forms of intelligence for
which people usually have one particular gift or affinity. This could be
mathematics and logic, physical activity, words, images, or music. We
could also add to this social intelligence, a superior sensitivity to
people. When you are engaged in the activity that feels right, it will
correspond to that form of intelligence for which your brain is most
suited.
From these various factors you should be able to spot the outline of
your calling. In essence, in going through this process you are
discovering yourself, what makes you different, what predates the
opinions of others. You are reacquainting yourself with your natural
likes and dislikes. Later in life we often lose contact with our own
preferences for things, deeply influenced by what others are doing and
by the culture. You are subtracting such external influences. The
deeper you make this connection to your calling, the more you will be
able to resist the bad ideas of others. You will engage that internal
guidance system. Put some time into the process, working with a
journal if necessary. You are developing the habit of assessing and
listening to yourself, so that you can continually monitor your progress
and adjust this calling to the various stages in your life.
If you are young and just starting out in your career, you will want
to explore a relatively wide field related to your inclinations—for
instance, if your affinity is words and writing, try all the different types
of writing until you hit upon the right fit. If you are older and have
more experience, you will want to take the skills you have already
developed and find a way to adapt them more in the direction of your
true calling. Remember that the calling could be combining several
fields that fascinate you. For Jobs, it was the intersection of technology
and design. Keep the process open-ended; your experience will
instruct you as to the way.
Do not try to bypass the work of discovering your calling or imagine
that it will simply come to you naturally. Although it may come to a
few people early in life or in a lightning-bolt moment, for most of us it
requires continual introspection and effort. Experimenting with the
skills and options related to your personality and inclinations is not
only the single most essential step in developing a high sense of
purpose, it is perhaps the most important step in life in general.
Knowing in a deep way who you are, your uniqueness, will make it that
much easier to avoid all of the other pitfalls of human nature.
Use resistance and negative spurs. The key to success in any field is
first developing skills in various areas, which you can later combine in
unique and creative ways. But the process of doing so can be tedious
and painful, as you become aware of your limitations and relative lack
of skill. Most people, consciously or unconsciously, seek to avoid
tedium, pain, and any form of adversity. They try to put themselves in
places where they will face less criticism and minimize their chances of
failure. You must choose to move in the opposite direction. You want
to embrace negative experiences, limitations, and even pain as the
perfect means of building up your skill levels and sharpening your
sense of purpose.
When it comes to exercise, you understand the importance of
manageable levels of pain and discomfort, because they later yield
strength, stamina, and other positive sensations. The same will come
to you by actually embracing the tedium in your practice. Frustration
is a sign that you are making progress as your mind becomes aware of
higher levels of skill that you have yet to attain.
You want to use and embrace any kind of deadline. If you give
yourself a year to finish a project or start up a business, you will
generally take a year or more. If you give yourself three months, you
will finish it that much sooner, and the concentrated energy with
which you work will raise your skill level and make the end result that
much better. If necessary, manufacture reasonably tight deadlines to
intensify your sense of purpose.
Thomas Edison knew he could take far too long to realize his
inventions, and so he developed the habit of talking about their future
greatness to journalists, overselling his ideas. With publicity, he would
now be put in the position of having to make it happen, and relatively
soon, or be ridiculed. He would now have to rise to the occasion, and
he almost always did. The great eighteenth-century Zen master
Hakuin took this further. He became greatly frustrated by the
particular koans (paradoxical anecdotes designed to spark
enlightenment) presented to him by his master. His lack of progress
made him feel desperate, so he told himself, in all seriousness, “If I fail
to master one of these koans in seven days, I will kill myself.” This
worked for him and kept on working for him, until he attained total
enlightenment.
As you progress on your path, you will be subject to more and more
of people’s criticisms. Some of them might be constructive and worth
paying attention to, but many of them come from envy. You can
recognize the latter by the person’s emotional tone in expressing their
negative opinions. They go a little too far, speak with a bit too much
vehemence; they make it personal, instilling doubts about your overall
ability, emphasizing your personality more than the work; they lack
specific details about what and how to improve. Once recognized, the
trick is not to internalize these criticisms in any form. Becoming
defensive is a sign they have gotten to you. Instead, use their negative
opinions to motivate you and add to your sense of purpose.
Absorb purposeful energy. We humans are extremely susceptible to
the moods and energy of other people. For this reason, you want to
avoid too much contact with those who have a low or false sense of
purpose. On the other hand, you always want to try to find and
associate with those who have a high sense of purpose. This could be
the perfect mentor or teacher or partner on a project. Such people will
tend to bring out the best in you, and you will find it easier and even
refreshing to receive their criticisms.
This was the strategy that brought Coco Chanel (see chapter 5) so
much power. She began life from a position of great weakness—an
orphan with little or no resources in life. She realized in her early
twenties that her calling was to design clothes and to start her own
apparel line. She desperately needed guidance, however, particularly
when it came to the business side. She looked for people who could
help her find her way. At the age of twenty-five she met the perfect
target, a wealthy older English businessman named Arthur “Boy”
Capel. She was attracted to his ambition, his well-rounded experience,
his knowledge of the arts, and his ruthless practicality.
She latched onto him with great vehemence. He was able to instill
in her the confidence that she could become a famous designer. He
taught her about business in general. He offered her tough criticisms
that she could accept because of her deep respect for him. He helped
guide her in her first important decisions in setting up her business.
From him she developed a very honed sense of purpose that she
retained her entire life. Without his influence, her path would have
been too confusing and difficult. Later in life, she kept returning to this
strategy. She found other men and women who had skills she lacked or
needed to strengthen—social graciousness, marketing, a nose for
cultural trends—and developed relationships that allowed her to learn
from them.
In this case, you want to find people who are pragmatic and not
merely those who are charismatic or visionaries. You want their
practical advice, and to absorb their spirit of getting things done. If
possible, collect around you a group of people from different fields, as
friends or associates, who have similar energy. You will help elevate
one another’s sense of purpose. Do not settle for virtual associations or
mentors. They will not have the same effect.
Create a ladder of descending goals. Operating with long-term goals
will bring you tremendous clarity and resolve. These goals—a project
or business to create, for instance—can be relatively ambitious, enough
to bring out the best in you. The problem, however, is that they will
also tend to generate anxiety as you look at all you have to do to reach
them from the present vantage point. To manage such anxiety, you
must create a ladder of smaller goals along the way, reaching down to
the present. Such objectives are simpler the further down the ladder
you go, and you can realize them in relatively short time frames, giving
you moments of satisfaction and a sense of progress. Always break
tasks into smaller bites. Each day or week you must have microgoals.
This will help you focus and avoid entanglements or detours that will
waste your energy.
At the same time, you want to continually remind yourself of the
larger goal, to avoid losing track of it or getting too mired in details.
Periodically return to your original vision and imagine the immense
satisfaction you will have when it comes to fruition. This will give you
clarity and inspire you forward. You will also want a degree of
flexibility built into the process. At certain moments you reassess your
progress and adjust the various goals as necessary, constantly learning
from experience and adapting and improving your original objective.
Remember that what you are after is a series of practical results and
accomplishments, not a list of unrealized dreams and aborted projects.
Working with smaller, embedded goals will keep you moving in such a
direction.
Lose yourself in the work. Perhaps the greatest difficulty you will
face in maintaining a high and consistent sense of purpose is the level
of commitment that is required over time and the sacrifices that go
with this. You have to handle many moments of frustration, boredom,
and failure, and the endless temptations in our culture for more
immediate pleasures. The benefits listed above in the Keys are often
not immediately apparent. And as the years pile up, you can face
burnout.
To offset this tedium, you need to have moments of flow in which
your mind becomes so deeply immersed in the work that you are
transported beyond your ego. You experience feelings of profound
calmness and joy. The psychologist Abraham Maslow called these
“peak experiences”—once you have them, you are forever changed.
You will feel the compulsion to repeat them. The more immediate
pleasures the world offers will pale in comparison. And when you feel
rewarded for your dedication and sacrifices, your sense of purpose will
be intensified.
These experiences cannot be manufactured, but you can set the
stage for them and vastly increase your odds. First, it is essential to
wait until you are further along in the process—at least more than
halfway through a project, or after several years of study in your field.
At such moments, your mind will be naturally filled with all kinds of
information and practice, ripe for a peak experience.
Second, you must plan on giving yourself uninterrupted time with
the work—as many hours in the day as possible, and as many days in
the week. For this purpose, you have to rigorously eliminate the usual
level of distractions, even plan on disappearing for a period of time.
Think of it as a type of religious retreat. Steve Jobs would close the
door to his office, spend the entire day holed up in the room, and wait
until he fell into a state of deep focus. Once you become adept at this,
you can do it almost anywhere. Einstein would notoriously go into
such a deep state of absorption that he would lose himself in the city
streets or while sailing on a lake.
Third, the emphasis must be on the work, never on yourself or the
desire for recognition. You are fusing your mind with the work itself,
and any intrusive thoughts from your ego or doubts about yourself or
personal obsessions will interrupt the flow. Not only will you find this
flow immensely therapeutic, but it will also yield uncannily creative
results.
For the time period that the actress Ingrid Bergman was engaged in
a particular film project, she poured every ounce of her energy into it,
forgetting everything else about her life. Unlike other actors, who gave
greater importance to the money they earned or the attention they
received, Bergman saw only the opportunity to completely embody the
role she was to play and bring it to life. For this purpose, she would
engage with the writers and the director involved, actively altering the
role itself and some of the dialogue, making it more real; they would
trust her in this, because her ideas were almost always excellent and
were based on deep thinking about the character.
Once she had gone far enough in the writing and thinking process,
she would go through days or weeks feeling herself fuse with the role,
and not interacting with others. In doing so, she could forget about all
the pain in her life—the loss of her parents when she was young, her
abusive husband. These were the moments of genuine joy in her life,
and she translated such peak experiences to the screen. Audiences
could sense something profoundly realistic in her performances, and
they identified unusually intensely with the characters she played.
Knowing she would periodically have such experiences, and the results
that went with them, kept her moving past the pain and sacrifices that
she demanded of herself.
Look at this as a form of religious devotion to your life’s work. Such
devotion will eventually yield moments of union with the work itself,
and a type of ecstasy that is impossible to verbalize until you have
experienced it.
The Lure of False Purposes
The gravitational pull we feel toward finding a purpose comes from
two elements in human nature. First, unable to rely on instincts as
other animals do, we require some means of having a sense of
direction, a way to guide and restrict our behavior. Second, we
humans are aware of our puniness as individuals in a world with
billions of others in a vast universe. We are aware of our mortality, and
how we will eventually be swallowed up in the eternity of time. We
need to feel larger than just the individuals we are, and connected to
something that transcends us.
Human nature being what it is, however, many people seek to
create purpose and a feeling of transcendence on the cheap, to find it
in the easiest and most accessible way, with the least amount of effort.
Such people give themselves over to false purposes, those that merely
supply the illusion of purpose and transcendence. We can contrast
them with real purposes in the following way: The real purpose comes
from within. It is an idea, a calling, a sense of mission that we feel
personally and intimately connected to. It is our own; we may have
been inspired by others, but nobody imposed it upon us and nobody
can take it away. If we are religious, we don’t merely accept the
orthodoxy; we go through rigorous introspection and make our belief
inward, true to ourselves. False purposes come from external sources
—belief systems that we swallow whole, conformity to what other
people are doing.
The real purpose leads us upward, to a more human level. We
improve our skills and sharpen our minds; we realize our potential
and contribute to society. False purposes lead downward, to the
animal side of our nature—to addictions, loss of mental powers,
mindless conformity, and cynicism.
It is critical that we become aware of these false forms of purpose.
Inevitably all of us at some point in our lives fall for them because they
are so easy, popular, and cheap. If we can eliminate the impulse
toward these lower forms, we will naturally gravitate toward the
higher, in our unavoidable search for meaning and purpose. Here are
five of the most common forms of false purposes that have appealed to
humans since the beginning of civilization.
The pursuit of pleasure: For many of us, work is just an irritating
necessity of life. What really motivates us is avoiding pain, and finding
as much pleasure as possible in our time outside work. The pleasures
we pursue can take various forms—sex, stimulants, entertainment,
eating, shopping, gambling, technological fads, games of all sorts.
No matter the objects of the pursuit, they tend to lead to a dynamic
of diminishing returns. The moments of pleasure we get tend to get
duller through repetition. We need either more and more of the same
or constantly new diversions. Our need often turns into an addiction,
and with the dependency comes a diminishing of health and mental
powers. We become possessed by the objects we crave and lose
ourselves. Under the influence of drugs or alcohol, for instance, we can
temporarily feel transported beyond the banality of our lives.
This form of false purpose is very common in the world today,
largely because of the cornucopia of distractions we can choose from.
But it goes against a basic element of human nature: to have deeper
levels of pleasure, we have to learn to limit ourselves. Reading a
variety of books for entertainment, in rapid succession, leads to a
diminishing sense of satisfaction with each book; our minds are
overwhelmed and overstimulated; and we must reach for a new one
right away. Reading one excellent book and absorbing ourselves in it
has a relaxing and uplifting effect as we discover hidden riches within
it. In the moments when we are not reading, we think of the book
again and again.
All of us require pleasurable moments outside work, ways to relieve
our tension. But when we operate with a sense of purpose, we know
the value of limiting ourselves, opting for depth of experience rather
than overstimulation.
Causes and cults: People have a profound need to believe in
something, and in the absence of great unifying belief systems, this
void is easily filled by all kinds of microcauses and cults. We notice
that such groups tend not to last very long. Within ten years they
already seem passé. During their brief existence, their adherents will
substitute extreme conviction and hyperbelief for a clear vision of what
they are after. For this purpose, enemies are quickly found and are
said to be the source of all that is wrong in the world. Such groups
become the means for people to vent their personal frustrations, envy,
and hatred. They also get to feel superior, as part of some clique with
special access to the truth.
We can recognize a microcause or cult by the vagueness of what its
disciples want. They cannot describe the kind of world or society they
desire in concrete, practical terms. Much of their raison d’être revolves
around negative definitions—get rid of these people or those practices
and the world will become a paradise. They have no sense of strategy
or defined ways of reaching their nebulous goals, which is a clear sign
that their group is merely about the release of emotions.
Often such groups will depend on large public gatherings in which
people can become intoxicated by numbers and shared feelings. Wily
rulers throughout history have used this to great effect. People in a
crowd are highly suggestible. Through short, simple phrases, with lots
of repetition, they can be made to chant back slogans and swallow the
most absurd and irrational ideas. In a crowd people can feel relieved of
any personal responsibility, which can lead to violence. They feel
transported beyond themselves and not so puny, but such
enlargement is an illusion. They are actually made smaller by losing
their will and their individual voice.
Allying ourselves with a cause can be an important part of our sense
of purpose, as it was for Martin Luther King Jr. But it must emerge
from an internal process in which we have thought deeply about the
subject and are committing ourselves to the cause as part of our life’s
work. We are not simply a cog in the machinery of such a group but
active contributors, bringing our uniqueness into play and not
mimicking the company line. We are not joining out of a need to
gratify our ego or to vent ugly emotions, but rather out of a hunger for
justice and truth that springs from deep within our own sense of
purpose.
Money and success: For many people, the pursuit of money and
status can supply them with plenty of motivation and focus. Such
types would consider figuring out their calling in life a monumental
waste of time and an antiquated notion. But in the long run this
philosophy often yields the most impractical of results.
First, more often than not such types enter the field in which they
can make the most money the fastest. They aim for the biggest
paychecks. Their career choices have slight or no connection to their
actual inclinations. The fields they choose will tend to be crowded with
other insatiable hunters of money and success, and so the competition
is fierce. If they are zealous enough, they might do quite well for a
while, but as they get older, they begin to feel restless and ever so
slightly bored. They try different avenues for money and success; they
need new challenges. They have to keep finding ways to motivate
themselves. Often they make big mistakes in their obsessive pursuit of
money because their thinking is so short term, as we saw with those
who went all in on the derivatives frenzy leading up to the crash of
2008.
Second, money and success that last come from remaining original
and not mindlessly following the path that others are following. If we
make money our primary goal, we never truly cultivate our
uniqueness, and eventually someone younger and hungrier will
supplant us.
And finally, what often motivates people in this quest is to simply
have more money and status than other people, and to feel superior.
With that standard, it is difficult to know when they have enough,
because there are always people with more. And so the quest is endless
and exhausting. And since the connection to their work is not
personal, such people become alienated from themselves; the pursuit
feels soulless; they are workaholics without a true calling. They may
become depressed or manic, and they will often lose what they have
gained if they become manic enough.
We all know the effects of “hyperintention”: If we want and need
desperately to sleep, we are less likely to fall asleep. If we absolutely
must give the best talk possible at some conference, we become
hyperanxious about the result, and the performance suffers. If we
desperately need to find an intimate partner or make friends, we are
more likely to push them away. If instead we relax and focus on other
things, we are more likely to fall asleep or give a great talk or charm
people. The most pleasurable things in life occur as a result of
something not directly intended and expected. When we try to
manufacture happy moments, they tend to disappoint us.
The same goes for the dogged pursuit of money and success. Many
of the most successful, famous, and wealthy individuals do not begin
with an obsession with money and status. One prime example would
be Steve Jobs, who amassed quite a fortune in his relatively short life.
He actually cared very little for material possessions. His singular
focus was on creating the best and most original designs, and when he
did so, good fortune followed him. Concentrate on maintaining a high
sense of purpose, and the success will flow to you naturally.
Attention: People have always pursued fame and attention as a way
to feel enlarged and more important. They become dependent on the
number of people applauding, the size of the army they command, the
crowd of courtiers that serve them. But this false sense of purpose has
become greatly democratized and widespread through social media.
Now almost any one of us can have the quantity of attention that past
kings and conquerors could only dream about. Our self-image and
self-esteem become tied to the attention we receive on a daily basis. In
social media, this often requires becoming increasingly outrageous to
capture eyeballs. It is an exhausting and alienating quest, as we
become more of a clown than anything else. And each moment that
the attention ebbs ever so slightly, a gnawing pain eats away at us: Are
we losing it? Who is siphoning off the flow of attention that was ours?
As with money and success, we have a much greater chance of
attracting attention by developing a high sense of purpose and
creating work that will naturally draw people to it. When the attention
is unexpected, as with the success we suddenly have, it is all the more
pleasurable.
Cynicism: According to Friedrich Nietzsche, “Man would rather
have the void as purpose than be void of purpose.” Cynicism, the
feeling that there is no purpose or meaning in life, is what we shall call
having “the void as purpose.” In the world today, with growing
disenchantment with politics and the belief systems of the past, this
form of the false purpose is becoming increasingly common.
Such cynicism involves some or all of the following beliefs: Life is
absurd, meaningless, and random. Standards of truth, excellence, or
meaning are completely old-fashioned. Everything is relative. People’s
judgments are simply interpretations of the world, none better than
another. All politicians are corrupt, so it’s not really worth it to get
involved; better to abstain or choose a leader who will deliberately tear
it all down. People who are successful get there through gaming the
system. Any form of authority should be naturally mistrusted. Look
behind people’s motives and you will see that they are selfish. Reality
is quite brutal and ugly; better to accept this and be skeptical. It’s
really hard to take anything so seriously; we should just laugh and
have a good time. It’s all the same.
This attitude presents itself as cool and hip. Its adherents display a
somewhat apathetic and sardonic air that gives them the appearance
that they see through it all. But the attitude is not what it seems.
Behind it is the adolescent pose of appearing to not care, which
disguises a great fear of trying and failing, of standing out and being
ridiculed. It stems from sheer laziness and offers its believers
consolation for their lack of accomplishments.
As hunters for purpose and meaning, we want to move in the
opposite direction. Reality is not brutal and ugly—it contains much
that is sublime, beautiful, and worthy of wonder. We see this in the
great works of other achievers. We want to have more encounters with
the Sublime. Nothing is more awe-inspiring than the human brain
itself—its complexity, its untapped potential. We want to realize some
of that potential in our lives, not wallow in the cynical slacker attitude.
We see a purpose behind everything that we experience and see. In the
end, what we want is to fuse the curiosity and excitement we had
toward the world as children, when almost everything seemed
enchanting, with our adult intelligence.
The whole law of human existence consists in nothing other than a
man’s always being able to bow before the immeasurably great. If
people are deprived of the immeasurably great, they will not live
and will die in despair. The immeasurable and infinite are as
necessary for man as the small planet he inhabits.
—Fyodor Dostoyevsky
W
14
Resist the Downward Pull of the
Group
The Law of Conformity
e have a side to our character that we are generally unaware of
—our social personality, the different person we become when
we operate in groups of people. In the group setting, we
unconsciously imitate what others are saying and doing. We think
differently, more concerned with fitting in and believing what others
believe. We feel different emotions, infected by the group mood. We
are more prone to taking risks, to acting irrationally, because
everyone else is. This social personality can come to dominate who
we are. Listening so much to others and conforming our behavior to
them, we slowly lose a sense of our uniqueness and the ability to
think for ourselves. The only solution is to develop self-awareness
and a superior understanding of the changes that occur in us in
groups. With such intelligence, we can become superior social actors,
able to outwardly fit in and cooperate with others on a high level,
while retaining our independence and rationality.
An Experiment in Human Nature
As a young boy growing up in communist China, Gao Jianhua (b.
1952) dreamed of becoming a great writer. He loved literature, and his
teachers commended him for his essays and poems. In 1964 he gained
admittance to the Yizhen Middle School (YMS), not far from where his
family lived. Located in the town of Yizhen, several hundred miles
north of Beijing, YMS was labeled a “key school”—over 90 percent of
its students went on to college. It was difficult to get into and quite
prestigious. At YMS, Jianhua was a quiet and studious boy; he had
ambitions of graduating in six years with a top record, good enough to
get into Beijing University, from where he would launch the writing
career he dreamed about.
Students at YMS lived on campus, and life there could be rather
dull, since the Communist Party regulated almost every aspect of life
in China, including education. There were daily military drills,
propaganda classes, manual labor duty, and regular classes, which
could be rigorous.
At YMS, Jianhua developed a close friendship with a classmate
named Fangpu, perhaps the most zealous communist at school. Pale
and thin and wearing glasses, Fangpu looked the type of the
intellectual revolutionary. He was four years older than Jianhua, but
they had bonded over their common love of literature and their desire
to become writers. They had their differences—Fangpu’s poetry
centered on political issues; he worshipped Chairman Mao Zedong
and wanted to emulate not only his writings but also his revolutionary
career. Jianhua, on the other hand, had little interest in politics, even
though his father was a respected communist war veteran and
government official. But they enjoyed their literary discussions, and
Fangpu treated Jianhua like a younger brother.
In May of 1966, as Jianhua was engrossed in his studies, preparing
for the final exams to end his second year, Fangpu paid him a visit,
and he seemed unusually animated. He had been scouring the Beijing
newspapers to keep up with trends in the capital, and recently he had
read of a literary debate started by several renowned intellectuals that
he had to share with Jianhua.
These intellectuals had accused well-known, respected writers of
hiding counterrevolutionary messages in their plays, films, and
magazine articles. They based these accusations on careful readings of
certain passages in the writers’ work that could be seen as veiled
criticisms of Mao himself. “Certain people are using art and literature
to attack the party and socialism,” said Fangpu. This debate is about
the future of the revolution, he said, and Mao must be behind it all. To
Jianhua it all seemed a bit tedious and academic, but he trusted his
older friend’s instincts, and he promised to follow the events in the
newspaper.
Fangpu’s words proved prophetic: within a week, papers
throughout China had picked up the story of the raging debate.
Teachers at YMS began to talk about some of the newspaper articles in
their classes. One day the school’s Communist Party secretary, a
paunchy man named Ding Yi, called for an assembly and gave a speech
recounting almost verbatim an editorial against the
counterrevolutionary writers. Something was definitely in the air. The
students now had to devote so many hours every day to discussing the
latest turns in the debate.
Throughout Beijing, posters with large headlines had appeared
everywhere attacking the “antiparty black line,” meaning those who
were secretly trying to put the brakes on the communist revolution.
Ding supplied the students with materials for making their own
posters, and the students happily threw themselves into the task. They
largely copied the posters from Beijing; Jianhua’s friend Zongwei, a
talented artist, made the most attractive posters of all, with his elegant
calligraphy. Within days, almost all of the walls of the school were
covered with posters, and Secretary Ding roamed around the campus
reading them, smiling and approving of the work. To Jianhua it was all
quite novel and exciting, and he loved the new look of the campus
walls.
The campaign in Beijing focused on local intellectuals everyone
knew, but in Yizhen this seemed rather distant. If China was being
infiltrated by all kinds of counterrevolutionaries, that meant that they
had also probably infiltrated the school itself, and the only logical
place for the students to look for such class enemies was among their
teachers and school officials. They began to scrutinize their lectures
and lessons for hidden messages, much as the intellectuals had done
with the work of famous writers.
The geography teacher Liu always talked about the beautiful
landscapes of China but hardly ever mentioned the inspiring words of
Mao. Could that mean something? The physics teacher Feng had an
American father who had served in the U.S. Navy; was he secretly an
imperialist? Li, the teacher of Chinese, had fought initially on the side
of the nationalists against the communists during the revolution, but
in the last year had switched sides. The students had always trusted
his version of events, and he was Jianhua’s favorite teacher because he
had such a flair for telling stories. But in retrospect he seemed a bit
old-fashioned and bourgeois. Could he still be a counterrevolutionary
nationalist at heart? Soon a few posters appeared that questioned the
fervor of some of these teachers. Secretary Ding found this a trivial
application of the debate, and he ordered a ban on all posters attacking
teachers.
By June the movement sweeping Beijing, and soon all of China, had
acquired a name—the Great Socialist Cultural Revolution. It was
indeed Mao himself who had instigated it all by setting up the
newspaper articles, and he was to be the ongoing leader of the new
movement. He feared that China had been slipping back into its feudal
past. Old ways of thinking and acting had returned. Bureaucracies had
become breeding grounds for a new type of elite. Peasants remained
relatively powerless.
He wanted a wake-up call to revive the revolutionary spirit. He
wanted the younger generation to experience revolution firsthand by
making it themselves. He proclaimed to young people that it was
“right to rebel,” but the word he used in Chinese for this was zao fan,
which literally means to turn everything upside down. It was young
people’s duty, he said, to question authority. Those who secretly
worked to pull China back into its past he called “revisionists,” and he
implored students to help him uncover the revisionists and root them
out of the new revolutionary China.
Taking these pronouncements of Mao as a call to action, Fangpu
created the most audacious poster anyone had yet seen—it was a direct
attack on Secretary Ding himself. Ding was not only the school’s party
secretary but also a veteran of the revolution and a highly respected
figure. According to Fangpu, however, his prohibition on criticizing
teachers proved he was a revisionist, bent on suppressing the
questioning spirit Mao had encouraged. This created quite a stir. The
students had been reared to unquestioningly obey those in authority,
particularly respected party members. Fangpu had broken this taboo.
Had he gone too far?
A few days after the appearance of Fangpu’s poster, some strangers
arrived on campus from Beijing. They were part of “work teams” sent
to schools around China to help supervise and maintain some
discipline over the bourgeoning Cultural Revolution. The work team at
YMS ordered Fangpu to publicly apologize to Secretary Ding. At the
same time, however, they lifted the ban on posters that criticized
teachers. As in schools around China, they also suspended all classes
and exams at YMS. Students were to devote themselves to making
revolution, under their watchful eye.
Suddenly feeling free of the yoke of the past and all the habits of
obedience drummed into them, the students at YMS began to brazenly
attack those teachers who had demonstrated less than revolutionary
zeal or had been unkind to students.
Jianhua felt compelled to join the campaign, but this was difficult—
he happened to like almost all of his teachers. He did not want to
seem, however, like a revisionist. Besides, he respected the wisdom
and authority of Mao. He decided to make a poster attacking Teacher
Wen, who had criticized him once for not being sufficiently interested
in politics, which had bothered him at the time. He made his criticism
of her as gentle as possible. Others took this up and went further with
their attacks on Teacher Wen, and Jianhua felt bad.
To satisfy the students’ growing anger, some teachers began to
confess to some minor revolutionary sins, but this made the students
feel they were hiding even more. They had to apply more pressure to
get them to reveal the truth, and a student nicknamed “Little Bawang”
(bawang meaning “overseer,” referring to his love of giving orders)
had an idea on how to do this. He had read Mao’s description of how
during the revolution in the 1940s peasants had captured the most
notorious landlords and paraded them through their villages with
enormous dunce caps on their heads and heavy wooden boards—with
inscriptions describing their crimes—hung around their necks. To
avoid such public humiliation, certainly the teachers would come clean
and confess. The students agreed to try this, and their first target for
such treatment was to be Teacher Li, Jianhua’s favorite.
Teacher Li was accused of faking his switch to communism. Stories
began to come out of his telling other teachers about his visits to
brothels in Shanghai. Clearly he had a secret life, and Jianhua now felt
disappointed in Li. China before the communist revolution had been a
cruel place, and if Li was working to bring that back, he could only
hate him. Unwilling to confess to any crimes, Li was the first to be
paraded through school with the dunce cap and board around his
neck. Along the way some students poured a bucket of poster paste
over his head. Jianhua followed the parade from a distance, trying to
repress his uneasiness at the humiliation of his teacher.
Led by Little Bawang, the students imposed the same fate on more
teachers, the dunce caps becoming unbearably tall and the boards
heavier. Imitating their revolutionary brothers and sisters in Beijing,
the students initiated “struggle meetings” in which they forced certain
teachers into the jet-plane position—a student standing on either side,
pushing teachers to their knees, pulling their hair back with a jerk,
then holding their arms out and back, like the wings of a jet plane. It
was a most painful position, but it seemed to work, as after an hour or
two of this, with students jeering at them, many teachers began to
confess. The students were right in their suspicions—the school had
been teeming with revisionists, right under their noses!
Soon the students’ attention turned to the vice principal, Lin Sheng,
who they discovered was the son of a notorious landlord. He was the
third-highest official at school, which made this bit of news all the
more salacious. Jianhua had been sent to his office once for
misbehavior, and Sheng had been quite lenient with him, which he
had appreciated at the time. The students locked Lin Sheng in a room,
where he was to stay between the struggle meetings, but one morning
Jianhua, serving as the guard on duty, opened the room to discover
the vice principal had hung himself. Once again Jianhua struggled to
repress his discomfort, but he had to admit the suicide made it seem
as if Lin Sheng was indeed guilty of something.
One day, in the midst of all this, Jianhua ran into Fangpu, who was
bursting with excitement. Since his forced public apology over his
poster attacking Ding, he had been laying low. He had spent his time
devouring the writings of Mao and Marx and plotting his next move.
Word had come from Beijing that the work teams were to be
withdrawn from all schools. Students were to form their own
committee, choose a school official to be its head, and run the school
itself through the committee. Fangpu planned on becoming the
student leader of the committee. And he was going to wage open
revolution against Secretary Ding. Jianhua could only admire his
bravery and persistence.
Through Little Bawang, who had forced more and more confessions
from teachers, Fangpu learned that Secretary Ding had had affairs
with at least two female teachers, revealing his audacious hypocrisy.
He was the one continually ranting against Western decadence and
was always admonishing the male and female students at Yizhen to
keep their distance from each other. Bawang and Fangpu ransacked
his office and found that he had been hoarding food coupons and
possessed a fancy radio and bottles of nice wine, all hidden away.
Now posters attacking Ding filled the walls. Even Jianhua felt
indignant at his behavior. Soon Ding Yi was paraded through school
and then through the town of Yizhen, on his head the most enormous
dunce cap, decorated with drawings of monsters, and a very heavy
drum hung around his neck. As he drummed with one hand while
holding the cap with the other, he had to chant, “I am Ding Yi, ox
demon and snake spirit.” Citizens of Yizhen, who knew Secretary Ding,
gaped at the spectacle. The world had indeed been turned upside
down.
By the middle of the summer, most of the teachers had fled. When
it came time to form the committee to run the school, only a few
remained to serve as chairman of the committee, and with Fangpu as
the student leader, a little-known and rather harmless teacher named
Deng Zeng was named chairman. Now the work team left YMS, and
Deng and the committee were in charge.
And as the students progressed in making revolution, Jianhua
began to feel increasingly excited. He and his friend Zongwei carried
old spears and swords as they patrolled the school looking for spies,
and it was just like in the novels he loved to read. He and the other
students marched in columns into town, waving enormous red flags,
carrying large posters of Chairman Mao and copies of his little red
book, chanting slogans, banging on drums, and crashing cymbals. It
was so dramatic, and it felt like they were indeed participating in
revolution. One day, they marched through Yizhen tearing down store
and street signs that were vestiges of prerevolutionary China. Mao
would be proud of them.
In Beijing, some students had formed groups to support and defend
Mao in his Cultural Revolution; they called themselves Red Guards,
and their members wore bright red armbands. Mao gave his personal
approval to this, and now Red Guard units began to appear in schools
and universities around the country. Only the purest and most fervent
revolutionaries could be admitted to the Red Guards, and competition
was fierce to join their ranks. Because of his father’s illustrious past,
Jianhua became a member of the Red Guards, and now he basked in
the admiring glances of fellow students and local citizens who noticed
the bright red armband that never left him.
There was one wrinkle, however, in these exciting events: On a visit
home to see his family in the nearby town of Lingzhi, Jianhua
discovered that local students had accused his father of being a
revisionist. He cared more about farming and economics than about
making revolution, said the students. They had gotten him dismissed
from his government position; he had had to suffer through various
struggle meetings in the jet-plane position. The family was in disgrace.
Although he loved and admired his father and worried for him, he
could not help but feel anxious that, if news of this disgrace reached
his school, he might lose his red armband and be ostracized. He would
have to be careful when talking about his family.
When he returned to school several weeks later, he noticed some
radical changes that had already occurred: Fangpu had consolidated
power. He had formed a new group called the East-Is-Red Corps; he
and his team had kicked out Chairman Deng and were now running
the school themselves. They had started their own newspaper, called
Battlefield News, to promote and defend their actions. Jianhua also
learned that another teacher had died under suspicious circumstances.
One day, Fangpu visited Jianhua and invited him to be a star
reporter for Battlefield News. Fangpu looked different—he had put on
weight, was not so pale, and was trying to grow a beard. It was a
tempting offer from his friend, but something made Jianhua put him
off, and Fangpu did not like this, although he tried to disguise his
annoyance with a forced smile. Fangpu was beginning to frighten
Jianhua.
Students were now joining the East-Is-Red Corps en masse, but
within a few weeks a rival group, calling themselves the Red Rebels,
emerged on campus. Their leader was Mengzhe, a student whose
parents were peasants and who advocated revolution that was more
tolerant, based on reason and not violence, which he felt was the purer
form of Maoism. He gained some adherents, including Jianhua’s older
brother, Weihua, who was a student at YMS. Mengzhe’s growing
popularity infuriated Fangpu; he called him a royalist, a
sentimentalist, and secret counterrevolutionary. He and his followers
destroyed the Red Rebels’ office and threatened to do worse. It would
certainly cause a complete rift with Fangpu, but Jianhua contemplated
joining the Red Rebels. He was attracted to their idealism.
Just as the tension between the two sides was escalating into
outright war, a representative from the Chinese military arrived on
campus and announced that the army was now in charge. Mao had
dispatched army units throughout the country to take control of
schools. The increasing chaos and violence that was engulfing YMS
was going on all over China, not only in schools but in factories and
government offices as well; the Cultural Revolution was spinning out
of control. Soon thirty-six soldiers arrived on campus, part of an army
unit known as the 901; they ordered that all factions disband and that
classes resume. There would be military drilling and discipline would
be reestablished.
Too much had changed, however, in the eight months since this
had all begun. The students could not accept such a sudden return to
discipline. They sulked and did not turn up at classes. Fangpu took
charge of the campaign to get rid of the soldiers: he put up posters
accusing the 901 of being enemies of the Cultural Revolution. One day,
he and his followers attacked one of the army officers with a slingshot
and wounded him. Just as the students feared reprisals, the 901 unit
was suddenly recalled from campus without any explanation.
The students were now completely on their own, and it seemed a
frightening prospect. They quickly allied themselves with one of the
two groups. Some joined the East-Is-Red Corps because it was larger
and offered better positions; others joined the Red Rebels because
they hated Fangpu and Little Bawang; and others thought one group
or the other was more revolutionary. Jianhua joined the Red Rebels,
as did his friend Zongwei.
Each side felt certain it represented the true spirit of the Cultural
Revolution, and as they yelled at one another and argued, fistfights
broke out, and there was nobody to stop them. Soon students were
bringing bats and sticks to the fights, and the injuries mounted. One
day some members of the East-Is-Red Corps captured some Red
Rebels and held them prisoners. The Red Rebels could not find out
anything about their fate.
In the middle of this tense moment, the Red Rebels discovered that
one of their members, a female student named Yulan, was actually a
spy for the other side. Infuriated by such tactics, they tied Yulan up
and began to beat her, to find out if there were more spies. Much to
the dismay of Jianhua, who considered this a betrayal of their ideals,
they battered and bruised her, but she revealed nothing. Soon Yulan
was exchanged for the prisoners held by the East-Is-Red Corps, but
now the antipathy between the two sides had reached a breaking
point.
A few weeks later, the East-Is-Red Corps suddenly left school en
masse and established their headquarters in a building in town that
they seized. Mengzhe decided to form a team of guerrilla fighters who
would operate in Yizhen at night to keep an eye on the Corps and do
some sabotage work. Jianhua was assigned to them as a reporter. It
was an exciting job. As they encountered the enemy in town, battles
with slingshots erupted. Then the Corps captured one of the Rebel
guerrillas, named Heping. A few days later, he was discovered in a
hospital, dead. The Corps had taken him for a ride in a jeep in the
desert, with a sock in his mouth, and he had suffocated along the way.
Now even Mengzhe had had enough and vowed revenge for this
horrible deed. Jianhua could only agree with him.
As the skirmishes spread throughout the town, citizens fled and
entire buildings were abandoned, and looters scoured them for goods.
The Red Rebels were soon on the offensive. Working with local
craftsmen, they manufactured the highest-quality swords and spears.
Casualties mounted. Finally the Rebels encircled the Corps’s
stronghold in town and prepared for a final offensive. The Corps fled,
leaving behind a small band of student soldiers in the building. The
Rebels demanded their surrender, and suddenly, from a third-floor
window, there was the young student Yulan screaming out, “I’d rather
die than surrender to you!” With the Corps’s bright red flag in her
hand, she shouted, “Long live Chairman Mao!” and jumped. Jianhua
found her lifeless body wrapped up in the flag on the ground. Her
devotion to the cause astounded and impressed him.
Now in control, the Red Rebels established their headquarters at
the school and prepared their defenses for a counteroffensive from the
Corps. They built a makeshift munitions factory on campus. Some
students had learned how to make grenades and various powerful
explosive devices. An inadvertent explosion killed several of them, but
the work went on. Zongwei, the artist, had had enough; somehow the
noble origins of the Red Rebels had been lost, and he feared the
expanding violence; he fled Yizhen for good. Jianhua lost respect for
his friend. How could Zongwei forget those who had been injured or
died for their cause? To give up now would be to say it was all in vain.
He would not be a coward like his friend. Besides, the East-Is-Red
Corps was downright evil and was capable of doing anything to take
power. They had betrayed the revolution.
As life at the school settled down and the Red Rebels built up their
defenses, Jianhua visited his family, whom he had not seen for a while.
When he finally returned one night to school, however, he could not
believe his eyes: his Red Rebel comrades were nowhere in sight; their
flag was no longer flying above the school. Everywhere there were
armed soldiers. Finally he found a few comrades hiding in a school
building, and they told him what had happened: Mao was reasserting
his authority once and for all; he was picking sides in various local
conflicts to help create some order; and the military in the county had
come down on the side of the East-Is-Red Corps as the more truly
revolutionary group. The repercussions of this could be awful.
Jianhua and several other comrades decided they would try to
escape and regroup in the mountains, where Mengzhe had apparently
fled, but there was a blockade throughout the county and they were
forced back to school, which had become more of a prison, overseen by
the East-Is-Red Corps.
Now the Rebels could only expect the worst. To the Corps, they
were a bunch of counterrevolutionaries who had beaten and killed
their comrades. Then one day, as the Red Rebel members on campus
were huddled together in a room, the leaders of the East-Is-Red Corps,
including Fangpu and Little Bawang, entered with grenades tied to
their belts. Fangpu carried a blacklist of all those who were to be taken
from the room, clearly for some nefarious purpose. Fangpu appeared
friendly toward Jianhua and told him it was not too late to change
sides, but Jianhua could no longer see Fangpu in the same light. His
friendliness made him seem even more sinister.
That night they could hear the screams of their blacklisted
comrades from another building. Then news reached them that Corps
members had found Mengzhe, beaten him up, and marched him back
to school, where he was under arrest as well. In the room next to
where Jianhua and his friends now slept, they observed Little Bawang
and his team covering the windows with blankets. They were
transforming it into a torture chamber. Soon they noticed former Red
Rebels limping about on campus, afraid to talk to anyone. Then it was
Jianhua’s turn to be taken into the room. He was blindfolded and tied
to a chair in a most uncomfortable position. They wanted him to sign a
withdrawal statement, and as he hesitated to do so, they began to beat
him with a chair leg. Jianhua screamed, “You can’t do this to me.
We’re classmates. We’re all class brothers. . . .”
Little Bawang would have none of this. Jianhua had to confess his
crimes, the part he had played in the various battles in town, and
name names of other Red Rebels hiding somewhere on campus. The
blows on his legs became more intense, and then they began to hit him
over the head. Still blindfolded, he feared for his life and in a panic
suddenly spilled the name of a fellow Red Rebel, Dusu. Finally they
carried Jianhua, unable to walk, out of the room. He quickly felt
intense regret that he had named Dusu. What a coward he had been.
He tried to warn Dusu, but it was too late. The torturing of other Red
Rebels continued in the room next door, including his brother Weihua,
beaten to a bloody pulp. Mengzhe had his head shaved, and when they
saw him next, his face was covered in the most hideous bruises.
One day Jianhua was told his old friend and comrade Zongwei had
been captured, and when Jianhua went to see him he was
unconscious, his bare legs full of large punctures, blood oozing
everywhere. They had flailed him with steel hooks for refusing to
admit his crimes. How could the rather harmless Zongwei inspire such
savagery? Jianhua ran to get the doctor, but when they returned it was
too late: Zongwei died in his friend’s arms. The dead body was quickly
carted away, and a cover story was created for how he had died.
Jianhua was ordered to remain silent. A female teacher who refused to
affirm in an affidavit the official East-Is-Red Corps version of his
death was beaten and gang-raped by Little Bawang and his followers.
In the months to come, Fangpu extended his powers everywhere, as
he essentially ran the school and classes resumed. Battlefield News
was the only newspaper allowed. The school itself had been renamed
East-Is-Red Middle School. With the Corps’s power secure, the torture
chamber was dismantled. Classes largely consisted of reciting quotes
from Mao. Every morning they assembled before a giant poster of
Chairman Mao and, brandishing their little red books, chanted to his
long life.
The East-Is-Red members began a scrupulous rewriting of the past.
They held an exhibition to celebrate their victories, full of doctored
photographs and fake news reports, all to bolster their side of events.
An enormous statue of Chairman Mao, five times larger than life, was
now installed at the school gate, towering over everything else. The
former members of the Red Rebels had to wear white armbands that
described their various crimes. They were made to kowtow before the
Mao statue several times a day while classmates kicked them from
behind. The former Red Rebels had become like the reviled teachers,
cowed and obedient.
Jianhua was forced to do the most menial labor, and having had
enough of this, in early summer of 1968 he returned to his hometown.
His father sent him and his brother to a farm deep in the mountains
where they could be safe and work as laborers. In September,
determined to finish his studies, Jianhua returned to school. The few
months away had given him some perspective, and now when he
looked at the East-Is-Red Middle School, it appeared in a very
different light: everywhere he saw signs of unbelievable destruction—
classrooms completely torn up with no desks or chairs, the walls full of
peeling posters and crumbling plaster; the science labs devoid of all
equipment; piles of rubble around the campus; unmarked graves; the
music hall blown up by a bomb; and hardly a reputable teacher or
official left to resume their education.
All of this destruction in a few short years, and for what? What did
Heping and Yulan and Zongwei and so many others die for? What had
they been fighting over? What had they learned? He could no longer
figure it out, and the waste of their young lives filled him with disgust
and despair.
Soon Jianhua and his brother joined the army, to escape the school
and bury their memories. Over the following years, as he drove an
army truck delivering stone and cement, he and his comrades watched
the slow disassembling of the Cultural Revolution, all of its former
leaders falling into disgrace. After the death of Mao in 1976, the
Communist Party itself finally condemned the Cultural Revolution as a
national catastrophe.
•   •   •
Interpretation: The above story and characters come from the book
Born Red (1987) by Gao Yuan. (After the Cultural Revolution, the
author changed his name from Gao Jianhua to Gao Yuan.) It is his
nonfiction account of the events he participated in at his school during
the Cultural Revolution.
In essence, the Cultural Revolution was Mao’s attempt to try to
alter human nature itself. According to Mao, through millennia of
capitalism in various forms, humans had become individualistic and
conservative, bound to their social class. Mao wanted to wipe the slate
clean and start over. As he explained it, “A clean sheet of paper has no
blotches, and so the newest and most beautiful pictures can be painted
on it.” To get his blank canvas, Mao would have to shake things up on
a mass scale by uprooting old habits and ways of thinking and by
eradicating people’s mindless respect for those in authority. Once he
accomplished this, Mao could start to paint something bold and new
on the clean sheet. The result would be a fresh generation that could
begin to forge a classless society not weighed down by the past.
The events depicted in Born Red reveal in a microcosm the result of
Mao’s experiment—how human nature cannot be uprooted; try to alter
it and it merely reemerges in different shapes and forms. The results of
hundreds of thousands of years of evolution and development cannot
be radically reengineered by some scheme, particularly when it
involves the behavior of humans in groups, which inevitably conforms
to certain ancient patterns. (Although it might be tempting to see what
happened at YMS as mostly relevant to group adolescent behavior,
young people often represent human nature in a more naked and
purer form than adults, who are cleverer at disguising their
motivations. In any case, what happened at the school occurred
throughout China—in government offices, factories, within the army,
and among Chinese of all ages—in an eerily similar way.) Here’s
exactly how Mao’s experiment failed and what it shows about human
nature.
Mao had the following specific strategy to enact his bold idea:
Focus people’s attention on a legitimate enemy—in this case,
revisionists, those who consciously or unconsciously were clinging to
the past. Encourage people, particularly the young, to actively fight
against this reactionary force, but also against any entrenched forms of
authority. In struggling against these conservative enemies, the
Chinese would be able to free themselves from old patterns of thinking
and acting; they would finally get rid of elites and ranking systems;
and they would unify as a revolutionary class with utmost clarity as to
what they were fighting for.
His strategy, however, had a fatal flaw at its core: when people
operate in groups, they do not engage in nuanced thinking and deep
analysis. Only individuals with a degree of calmness and detachment
can do so. People in groups feel emotional and excited. Their primary
desire is to fit in to the group spirit. Their thinking tends to be
simplistic—good versus evil, with us or against us. They naturally look
for some type of authority to simplify matters for them. Deliberately
creating chaos, as Mao did, only makes the group more certain to fall
into these primitive patterns of thinking, since it is too frightening for
humans to live with too much confusion and uncertainty.
Look at how the students at YMS responded to Mao’s call for
action: When first confronted with the Cultural Revolution, they
merely transformed Mao himself into the new authority to guide them.
They swallowed his ideas with very little personal reflection. They
imitated the actions of others in Beijing in the most conventional way.
Looking for revisionists, they tended to base their judgments on
appearances—the clothes the teachers wore, the special food or wine
they drank, their manners, their family background. Such appearances
could be quite deceptive. Teacher Wen was radical in her beliefs but
was judged a revisionist based on her fondness for Western-style
fashion.
In the old order, the students were supposed to give total obedience
to their all-powerful teachers. Suddenly freed from all that, they
remained just as emotionally tied to the past. The teachers still seemed
all-powerful, but now as scheming counterrevolutionaries. The
students’ repressed resentment at having to be so obedient now boiled
over into anger and the desire to be the ones doing the punishing and
oppressing. When the teachers confessed to crimes they mostly had
never committed, to avoid the escalating punishments, that only
seemed to confirm the students in their paranoia. They had shifted
roles from obedient students to oppressors, but their thinking had
become even more simplistic and irrational, the opposite of Mao’s
intentions.
In the power vacuum that Mao had now created, another timeless
group dynamic emerged: those who were naturally more assertive,
aggressive, and even sadistic (in this case Fangpu and Little Bawang)
pushed their way forward and assumed power, while those who were
more passive (Jianhua, Zongwei) quietly receded into the background,
becoming followers. The aggressive types at YMS now formed a new
class of elites, doling out perks and privileges. Similarly, amid all the
confusion the Cultural Revolution had spawned, the students became
even more obsessed with status within the group. Who was in the red
category among them, and who in the black, they wondered? Was it
better now to come from the peasantry or the proletariat? How could
they finagle membership in the Red Guards and garner that beautiful
red armband that signified revolutionary elite status? Instead of
naturally inclining toward a new egalitarian order, the students kept
straining to occupy superior positions.
Once all forms of authority were removed and the students ran the
school, there was nothing to stop the next and most dangerous
development in group dynamics—the split into tribal factions. By
nature, we humans reject attempts by anyone to completely
monopolize power, as Fangpu tried to do. This cuts off opportunities
for other ambitious, aggressive people. It also creates large groupings
in which individual members can feel somewhat lost. Almost
automatically, groups will split into rival smaller factions and tribes.
In the rival tribe, a new, charismatic leader (Mengzhe in this case) can
assume power and members can identify more easily with the smaller
number of comrades. The bonds are tight and made even tighter by
the struggle against the tribal enemy. People may think they are
joining because of the different ideas or goals of this tribe or the other,
but what they want more than anything is the sense of belonging and a
clear tribal identity.
Look at the actual differences between the East-Is-Red Corps and
the Red Rebels. As the battle between them intensified, it was hard to
say what they were fighting for, except to assume power over the other
group. One strong or vicious act of one side called for a reprisal from
the other, and any type of violence seemed totally justified. There
could be no middle ground, nor any questioning of the rightness of
their cause. The tribe is always right, and to say otherwise is to betray
it, as Zongwei did.
Mao had wanted to forge a unified Chinese citizenry, clear as to its
goals, and instead the entire country descended into tribal battles
completely disconnected from the original purpose of the Cultural
Revolution. To make matters worse, the crime rate soared and the
economy had ground to a halt, as hardly anyone felt compelled to work
or manufacture anything. The masses had become even lazier and
more resentful than under the old order.
By the spring of 1968, Mao’s only recourse was to install a police
state. Hundreds of thousands were thrown into prisons. The army
virtually took over. To help restore order and respect for authority,
Mao converted himself into a cult figure, his image to be worshipped
and his words to be repeated like revolutionary prayers. It is
interesting to note how Fangpu’s form of repression at YMS—the
torture, the rewriting of history, the control of all media—mirrored
what Mao was doing throughout the country. The new revolutionary
society that Mao (and Fangpu) had wanted now actually resembled the
most repressive, superstitious regimes of feudal China. As Jianhua’s
father, a victim of the Cultural Revolution himself, kept telling his son,
“A thing turns into its opposite if pushed too far.”
Understand: We will tend to imagine that this story is an extreme
example that has little relevance to our own lives and the groups we
belong to. After all, we navigate through worlds full of sophisticated
people in high-tech offices, where everyone is seemingly so polite and
civilized. We see ourselves in a similar way: we have our progressive
ideals and our independent thinking. But much of this is an illusion. If
we looked at ourselves closely and honestly, we would have to admit
that the moment we enter our workspace or any group, we undergo a
change. We easily slip into more primitive modes of thinking and
behaving, without realizing it.
Around others, we naturally tend to feel insecure as to what they
think of us. We feel pressure to fit in, and to do so, we begin to shape
our thoughts and beliefs to the group orthodoxies. We unconsciously
imitate others in the group—in appearances, verbal expressions, and
ideas. We tend to worry a lot about our status and where we rank in
the hierarchy: “Am I getting as much respect as my colleagues?” This
is the primate part of our nature, as we share this obsession with
status with our chimpanzee relatives. Depending on patterns from
early childhood, in the group setting we become more passive or more
aggressive than usual, revealing the less developed sides of our
character.
When it comes to leaders, we generally don’t see them as ordinary
people. We tend to feel somewhat awed and intimidated in their
presence, as if they possessed some mythical extra powers. When we
contemplate our group’s main rival or enemy, we can’t help but get a
little heated and angry and exaggerate any negative qualities. If others
in the group are feeling anxious or outraged by something, we often
get swept up in the group mood. All of these are subtle indications that
we are under the influence of the group. If we are experiencing the
above transformations, we can be sure the same is going on with our
colleagues.
Now imagine some outside threat to our group’s well-being or
stability, a crisis of sorts. All of the above reactions would be
intensified by the stress, and our apparently civilized, sophisticated
group could become quite volatile. We would feel greater pressure to
prove our loyalty and go along with anything the group advocated. Our
thinking about the rival/enemy would become even more simplistic
and heated. We would be subject to more powerful waves of viral
emotions, including panic or hatred or grandiosity. Our group could
split up into factions with tribal dynamics. Charismatic leaders could
easily emerge to exploit this volatility. If pushed far enough, the
potential for aggression lies under the surface of almost any group. But
even if we hold back from overt violence, the primitive dynamic that
takes over can have grave consequences, as the group overreacts and
makes decisions based on exaggerated fears or uncontrollable
excitement.
To resist this downward pull that groups inevitably exert on us, we
must conduct a very different experiment in human nature from
Mao’s, with a simple goal in mind—to develop the ability to detach
ourselves from the group and create some mental space for true
independent thinking. We begin this experiment by accepting the
reality of the powerful effect that the group has on us. We are brutally
honest with ourselves, aware of how our need to fit in can shape and
warp our thinking. Does that anxiety or sense of outrage that we feel
come completely from within, or is it inspired by the group? We must
observe our tendency to demonize the enemy and control it. We must
train ourselves to not blindly venerate our leaders; we respect them for
their accomplishments without feeling the need to deify them. We
must be especially careful around those who have charismatic appeal,
and try to demystify and pull them down to earth. With such
awareness, we can begin to resist and detach.
As part of this experiment we must not only accept human nature
but work with what we have to make it productive. We inevitably feel
the need for status and recognition, so let’s not deny it. Instead, let’s
cultivate such status and recognition through our excellent work. We
must accept our need to belong to the group and prove our loyalty, but
let’s do it in more positive ways—by questioning group decisions that
will harm it in the long run, by supplying divergent opinions, by
steering the group in a more rational direction, gently and
strategically. Let’s use the viral nature of emotions in the group but
play on a different set of emotions: by staying calm and patient, by
focusing on results and cooperating with others to get practical things
done, we can begin to spread this spirit throughout the group. And by
slowly mastering the primitive part of our character within the heated
environment of the group, we can emerge as individuals who are truly
independent and rational—the end point of our experiment.
When people are free to do as they please, they usually imitate
each other.
—Eric Hoffer
Keys to Human Nature
At certain moments in life, we humans may experience an energy that
is powerful, with sensations unlike any other, but this energy is
something we rarely discuss or analyze. We can describe it as an
intense feeling of belonging to a group, and we often experience it in
the following situations.
Let us say we find ourselves in a large audience for a concert,
sporting event, or political rally. At a certain point, waves of
excitement, anger, or joy move through us, shared by thousands of
others. These emotions rise in us automatically. We cannot experience
this when alone or with just a few people. In this larger group setting,
we might be led to say or do things we would never have said or done
on our own.
In a similar vein, perhaps we have to give a talk before a group. If
we are not too nervous and the crowd is on our side, we experience a
swelling of emotion from deep within. We’re feeding off the audience.
Our voice changes to a pitch and tone we never have in daily life; our
gestures and body language become unusually animated. We might
also experience this from the other side, when we listen to a
charismatic speaker. That person seems to be invested with some sort
of special force that commands our respect and fills us with increasing
excitement.
Or perhaps we find ourselves working in a group with a critical goal
to reach within a short time frame. We feel compelled to do more than
we normally can, to work extra hard. We feel a charge of energy that
comes from feeling connected to others who are working with the
same urgent spirit. A point is reached at which members of the group
do not even have to talk—we’re all on the same page and can even
anticipate the thoughts of our colleagues.
The above feelings are not registered rationally; they come to us in
automatic bodily sensations—goose bumps, racing heartbeat, extra
vitality and power. Let us call us this energy the social force, a type of
invisible force field that affects and binds a group of people through
shared sensations and creates an intense feeling of connection.
If we confront this force field as outsiders, it tends to induce
anxiety. For instance, we find ourselves traveling to a place with a
culture very different from our own. Or we begin a job at a workplace
where people seem to have their own way of relating to one another,
with a secret language of sorts. Or we walk through a neighborhood of
a much different social class than what we’re used to—much wealthier
or poorer. In these moments, we are aware that we don’t belong, that
others are looking at us as outsiders, and from deep within we feel
uneasy and unusually alert, although in fact we may have nothing
really to fear.
We can observe several interesting elements to the social force:
First, it exists inside us and outside us at the same time. When we
experience the bodily sensations mentioned above, we are almost
certain that others on our side are feeling the same. We feel the force
within, but we think of it as outside ourselves as well. This is an
unusual sensation, perhaps equivalent to what we feel when we are in
love and experience a shared energy that passes between ourselves and
the love object.
We can also say this force differs, depending on the size and
chemistry of the particular group. In general, the larger the group, the
more intense is the effect. When we are among a very large group of
people who seem to share our ideas or values, we feel quite a rush of
increased strength and vitality, as well as a communal warmth or heat
that comes from feeling that we belong. There is something awesome
and sublime about this force multiplied in a large crowd. This increase
in energy and excitement can easily shift to anger and violence in the
presence of an enemy. The particular mix of people shapes the effect
as well. If the leader is charismatic and bursting with energy, it filters
through the group or gathered masses. If a large number of individuals
have a particular emotional tendency toward anger or joy, that will
alter the collective mood.
And finally, we are drawn to this force. We feel attracted to
numbers—a stadium full of partisan supporters of a team, choirs of
people singing, parades, carnivals, concerts, religious assemblies, and
political conventions. In these situations, we are reliving what our
ancestors invented and refined—the gathering of the clan, massed
soldiers parading in columns before the city walls, early theatrical and
gladiatorial spectacles. Subtracting the minority who feel frightened by
such gatherings, we generally have a love of partisan crowds for their
own sake. They make us feel alive and vital. This can become an
addiction—we feel compelled to expose ourselves to this energy again
and again. Music and dance epitomize this aspect of the social force.
The group experiences the rhythm and melody as one, and music and
dance are among the earliest forms we created to satisfy this urge, to
externalize the force.
We can observe one other aspect to the social force, in its reverse
form: when we experience a prolonged period of isolation. We know
from the accounts of prisoners in solitary confinement and explorers
isolated in remote regions (see Richard E. Byrd’s account of his
harrowing five months in isolation in Antarctica, in his book Alone)
that they begin to feel disconnected from reality and sense that their
personalities are disintegrating. They become prone to elaborate
hallucinations. What they miss most of all is not simply the presence
of people near them but the eyes of others looking back at them. We
formed our whole concept of ourselves in our first months as we
looked at our mothers; her return gaze gave us a sense that we existed;
she told us who we were by how she looked at us. As adults, we
experience the same kind of nonverbal validation and sense of self
through the eyes of others who look at us. We are never aware of this;
it would take prolonged isolation to understand the phenomenon.
This is the social force at its most basic level—only the eyes of other
people can reassure us that we are real and whole and that we belong.
The social force can make itself felt in our virtual worlds and virtual
crowds. It is less intense than being in an actual crowd, but we can feel
the presence of others in a phantom-like way through the screen
(inside us and outside us), and we continually consult our
smartphones as a kind of substitute pair of eyes upon us.
The social force among humans is merely a more complex version
of what all social animals experience. Social animals are continually
attuned to the emotions of others within the group, aware of their role
in the pack and anxious to fit in. (Among higher primates, this
includes imitating those higher up in the rank as a show of inferiority.)
They display elaborate physical cues that allow the group to
communicate and cooperate. They have grooming rituals to tighten
their bonds, and hunting in packs has a similar effect. They experience
a shared energy when simply assembled together.
We humans may seem much more sophisticated, but the same
dynamic occurs in us as well, on a completely subverbal level. We
sense and feel what others in the group are feeling. We have an urgent
need to fit in and play our role in the group. We are prone to
unconsciously imitate gestures and expressions, particularly from
leaders. We still like to hunt in packs, through social media or
wherever it is acceptable to vent our anger. We have our own rituals to
tighten group bonds—religious or political assemblies, spectacles,
warfare. And we most definitely experience a collective energy that
passes through any group of like-minded people.
What is most peculiar about this force as it exists within us is how
little we discuss or analyze something that is so obviously common to
our experience. Some of this may come from the fact that it is hard to
study these sensations in a rigorously scientific manner. But there is
also something willful about this ignorance; deep down, this
phenomenon troubles us. Our automatic reactions in a group, or our
propensity to imitate others, reminds us of the most primitive aspects
of our nature, our animal roots. We want to imagine ourselves not only
as civilized and sophisticated but also as individuals with conscious
control of much of what we do. Our group behavior tends to shatter
this myth, and historical examples such as the Cultural Revolution
frighten us with our own possibilities. We do not like to see ourselves
as social animals operating under particular compulsions. It offends
our self-opinion as a species.
Understand: The social force is neither positive nor negative. It is
simply a physiological part of our nature. Many aspects of this force
that evolved so long ago are quite dangerous in the modern world. For
instance, the deep suspicion we tend to feel toward outsiders to our
group, and our need to demonize them, evolved among our earliest
ancestors because of the tremendous dangers of infectious diseases
and the aggressive intentions of rival hunter-gatherers. But such group
reactions are no longer relevant in the twenty-first century. In fact,
with our technological prowess, they can be the source of our most
violent and genocidal behavior. In general, to the degree that the social
force tends to degrade our ability to think independently and
rationally, we can say it exerts a downward pull into more primitive
ways of behaving, unsuited to modern conditions.
The social force, however, can be used and shaped for positive
purposes, for high-level cooperation and empathy, for an upward pull,
which we experience when we create something together in a group.
The problem we face as social animals is not that we experience this
force, which occurs automatically, but that we are in denial of its
existence. We become influenced by others without realizing it.
Accustomed to unconsciously following what others say and do, we
lose the ability to think for ourselves. When faced with critical
decisions in life, we simply imitate what others have done or listen to
people who parrot conventional wisdom. This can lead to many
inappropriate decisions. We also lose contact with what makes us
unique, the source of our power as individuals (see chapter 13 for more
on this).
Some people, aware of these tendencies in our nature, may choose
to rebel and become nonconformists. But this can be equally mindless
and self-destructive. We are social creatures. We depend on our ability
to work with others. Rebelling for its own sake will simply marginalize
us.
What we need more than anything is group intelligence. This
intelligence includes a thorough understanding of the effect that
groups have on our thinking and emotions; with such awareness, we
can resist the downward pull. It also includes understanding how
human groups operate according to certain laws and dynamics, which
can make it easier to navigate through such spaces. With such
intelligence, we can do a delicate dance—we can become gifted social
actors and outwardly fit in, while inwardly maintaining some distance
and some mental space to think for ourselves. With this degree of
independence, we can make decisions in life that are appropriate to
who we are and our circumstances.
To acquire this intelligence, we must study and master the two
aspects of the social force outlined above—the individual effect of
groups on us and the patterns and dynamics that groups will almost
always tend to fall into.
The Individual Effect
The desire to fit in: Let us say that you enter a group, as part of a
new job for instance. As you try to adjust to the environment, you
become aware that people are scrutinizing and judging you as the
outsider. On a nonverbal level, you feel their eyes probing you for
clues. You begin to wonder: Do I fit in? Have I said the right things?
What do they think of me? The first and primary effect on you in any
group is the desire to fit in and cement your sense of belonging. The
more you fit in, the less you pose a challenge to the group and its
values. This will minimize the scrutiny you face and the anxiety that
comes with it.
The first way you do this is through appearances. You dress and
present yourself more or less as the others do in the group. There are
always a small percentage of people who like to stand out in their look
but manage to conform when it comes to ideas and values. Most of us,
however, are uncomfortable looking too different, and we do what we
can to blend in. We adopt the clothes and looks that say the right thing
—I’m serious, I work hard, I may have style but not so much of it that I
stand out.
The second and more important way you fit in is by adopting the
ideas, beliefs, and values of the group. You may begin to use similar
verbal expressions as others, a sign of what’s happening below the
surface. Your own ideas slowly shape themselves to those of the group.
Some people may outwardly rebel against such conformity, but they
are usually the types who are eventually fired or marginalized. You
may hold on to a few peculiar beliefs or opinions that you largely keep
to yourself, but not on issues important to the group. The longer you
are in the group, the stronger and more insidious this effect.
If you observed this group from the outside, you would notice an
overall uniformity of thinking that is quite surprising, considering that
as individuals we all differ quite a bit from one another in
temperament and background. This is a sign of the subtle molding and
conformity that takes place. You might have joined a group because
you share their ideas and values, but you will find over time that the
parts of your thinking that were a little different from others, reflecting
your uniqueness, are slowly trimmed way, like a shrub made to match
the others, so that on almost all issues you agree with the group.
You are not aware of all this as it is happening to you. It occurs
unconsciously. In fact, you will tend to vociferously deny such
conformity has ever taken place. You will imagine that you have come
upon these ideas on your own, that you have chosen to believe this and
think that. You don’t want to confront the social force operating on
you and causing you to blend in and enhance your sense of belonging.
In the long run, it is much better to confront your conformity to the
group ethos, so that you can become aware of it as it happens and
control the process to some degree.
The need to perform: Stemming from this first effect is the
second effect—in the group setting, we are always performing. It is
not just that we conform in appearances and thinking but that we
exaggerate our agreement and show others that we belong. In the
group, we become actors, molding what we say and do so that others
accept and like us and see us as loyal team members. Our
performances change depending on the size of the group and its
particular makeup—bosses or colleagues or friends. We might begin
with a degree of inner distance in these performances, aware, for
instance, that we are being unusually obsequious around the boss. But
over time, in acting the part we begin to feel what we are showing; the
inner distance melts away, and the mask we wear fuses into our
personality. Instead of thinking to smile in appropriate moments, we
automatically paste on the smile.
As part of this performance, we minimize our flaws and display
what we consider our strengths. We put on confidence. We act more
altruistic. Studies have shown that we are much more likely to give
money or help someone cross the road when others are looking at us.
In the group, we make sure that people see we support the right
causes; we post our progressive opinions prominently on social media.
We also make sure others see us working hard and putting in extra
hours. When we are alone, we often rehearse in our minds things we
will say or do for our next performance.
Do not imagine that it is better to simply be your natural self or to
rebel against this. There is nothing more unnatural than curbing this
need to perform, which even chimpanzees display to a high degree. If
you want to seem natural, as if you are comfortable with yourself, you
have to act the part; you have to train yourself to not feel nervous and
to shape your appearance so that in your naturalness you don’t offend
people or the group values. Those who sulk and refuse to perform end
up marginalized, as the group unconsciously expels such types.
In any event, you should feel no shame about this need; there is
nothing you can do about it anyway, since in the group we
unconsciously mold our behavior to fit in. Better to be aware, to retain
that inner distance, and to transform yourself into a conscious and
superior actor, capable of altering your expression to fit the subgroup
and impressing people with your positive qualities.
Emotional contagion: When we were babies, we were highly
sensitive to the moods and emotions of our mother; her smiles elicited
our own, her anxiety made us tense. We evolved this high degree of
empathy to the emotions of the mother as a survival mechanism long
ago. Like all social animals, we are primed from an early age to sense
and pick up the emotions of others, particularly those close to us. This
is the third effect of the group on us—the contagiousness of emotions.
When we are alone, we are aware of our shifting moods, but the
moment we enter the group and feel the eyes of others upon us, we
become aware on unconscious levels of their moods and emotions,
which, if strong enough, can displace our own. In addition, among
those whom we feel comfortable and sense that we belong, we are less
defensive and more vulnerable to the contagious effect.
Certain emotions are more contagious than others, anxiety and fear
being the strongest of all. Among our ancestors, if one person sensed a
danger, it was important that others feel this as well. But in our
present environment, where the threats are less immediate, it is more
like a low-grade anxiety that passes quickly through the group,
triggered by possible or imagined dangers. Other highly contagious
emotions are joy and excitement, tiredness and apathy, and intense
anger and hatred. Desire is also highly contagious. If we see that
others want to possess something or follow some new trend, we are
easily infected with the same impulse.
All of these effects have a self-fulfilling dynamic: If three people are
feeling anxious, there must be a good reason for it. Now we become
the fourth, and it gains a reality that others find compelling. The more
people who feel it, the more others will catch it and the more intense it
becomes within us as individuals.
You can observe this in yourself by looking at your own emotions in
the moment and trying to decipher the effect others might have had on
them. Is the fear you are feeling related to something confronting you
in an immediate sense, or is it more secondhand, derived from what
you have heard or sensed from others? Try to catch this as it occurs.
Discern which emotions are the most contagious for you, and how
your emotions shift with the various groups and subgroups you pass
through. Awareness of this gives you the power to control it.
Hypercertainty: When we are on our own and think about our
decisions and plans, we naturally feel doubts. Have we chosen the
right career path? Did we say the right thing to get the job? Are we
adopting the best strategy? But when we are in the group, this
doubting, reflective mechanism is neutralized. Let us say the group has
to decide on an important strategy. We feel the urgency to act. Arguing
and deliberating is tiring, and where will it end? We feel the pressure
to decide and get behind the decision. If we dissent, we might be
marginalized or excluded, and we recoil from such possibilities.
Furthermore, if everyone seems to agree that this is the right course of
action, we are compelled to feel confident about the decision. And so
the fourth effect on us is to make us feel more certain about what we
and our colleagues are doing, which makes us all the more prone to
taking risks.
This is what happens in financial crazes and bubbles—if everyone is
betting on the price of tulips or South Sea stock (see chapter 6) or
subprime mortgages, it must be a sure thing. Those who raise doubts
are simply being too cautious. As individuals, it is hard to resist what
others seem so certain about. We don’t want to miss out. Furthermore,
if we were among just a few who bought this stock, and it failed, we
would feel ridiculous and ashamed, sadly responsible for being such a
sucker. But covered by thousands doing the same, we are shielded
from feeling accountable, which increases the likelihood we will take
such risks in the group setting.
If as individuals we had some plan that was clearly ridiculous,
others would warn us and bring us back down to earth, but in a group
the opposite happens—everyone seems to validate the scheme, no
matter how delusional (such as invading Iraq and expecting to be
greeted as liberators), and there are no outsiders to splash some cold
water on us.
Whenever you feel unusually certain and excited about a plan or
idea, you must step back and gauge whether it is a viral group effect
operating on you. If you can detach yourself for a moment from your
excitement, you might notice how your thinking is used to rationalize
your emotions, to confirm the certainty you want to feel. Never
relinquish your ability to doubt, reflect, and consider other options—
your rationality as an individual is your only protection against the
madness that can overcome a group.
Group Dynamics
Since the beginning of recorded history, we can observe certain
patterns that human groups fall into almost automatically, as if they
were subject to particular mathematical or physical laws. The
following are the most common dynamics that you must study in the
groups that you belong to or pass through.
Group culture: When we travel to another country, we are aware
of the differences in culture from our own. Not only do the inhabitants
have their own language, but they also have customs, ways of looking
at the world and thinking, that are different from our own. This is
more pronounced among nations which have long traditions, but to a
subtler extent we can see the same thing happening with a company or
office. It is all part of the social force blending and knitting the group
together based on the particular chemistry of its members.
When looking at your own group and its culture, think in terms of
style and the overall mood that prevails. Is it loosely structured, with
an easygoing style? Or is it organized top down, its members afraid of
stepping out of line or breaking discipline? Do its members feel
superior and separate from the rest of the world, displaying an elitist
attitude, or does the group pride itself on its populism? Does it see
itself as cutting-edge or more traditionalist?
Does information flow easily throughout the group, giving it an
open feel, or does the leadership control and monopolize this flow?
Does it have a masculine feel to it—a hypercompetitive edge and a
more rigid chain of command—or does it have a more fluid, feminine
spirit that emphasizes cooperation over hierarchy? Does it seem
riddled with dysfunction and disunity, its members more concerned
with their egos than with getting actual results, or does it emphasize
productivity and the quality of the work? To answer these questions,
don’t pay much attention to what the group says about itself, but
rather examine its actions and the emotional tone that prevails within.
Its style can have degrees of the above qualities, or combinations of
them, but the group will always have some type of identifiable culture
and spirit. Two things to keep in mind: First, the culture will often
center on an ideal that the group imagines for itself—liberal, modern,
progressive, ruthlessly competitive, tasteful, et cetera. The group may
not live up to this ideal, but to the degree that it tries to, the ideal
operates as a myth that binds the group’s members. Second, this
culture will often reflect the founders of the group, particularly if they
have a strong personality. With their own rigid or loose style, they
have put their stamp on the group, even if it numbers in the
thousands. But leaders who enter a group or company that has its set
culture will often find themselves completely absorbed by this culture,
even though they might think of altering it.
The U.S. Department of Defense, housed in the Pentagon, emerged
from World War II with a very strong, hawkish spirit. Both presidents
Kennedy and Johnson had their own views on the Pentagon and
altering its culture; they both wanted to avoid entangling the U.S. in
the Vietnam War. But this aggressive culture ended up altering their
ideas and dragging them into the war. Many film directors in
Hollywood have thought of doing things their own way, only to find
themselves swallowed up by an entrenched culture that emphasizes
top-down control and micromanagement by producers, with their
interminable notes. This culture has existed for close to ninety years,
and no individual has been able to alter it.
Better to be aware and realize that the larger the group and the
more established the culture over time, the more likely it will control
you than the other way around.
One thing to keep in mind: no matter the type of culture, or how
disruptive it might have been in its origins, the longer a group exists
and the larger it grows, the more conservative it will become. This is
an inevitable result of the desire to hold on to what people have made
or built, and to rely on tried-and-true ways to maintain the status quo.
This creeping conservatism will often be the death of the group,
because it slowly loses the ability to adapt.
Group rules and codes: For any human group, disorder and
anarchy are too distressing. And so standards of conduct and rules for
how to do things quickly evolve and become set. These rules and codes
are never written down but are implicit. Violate them in some way and
you risk becoming a nonentity or even being fired, without necessarily
knowing the cause. In this way, the group imposes its own order
without the need for active policing. The codes will regulate acceptable
appearances, how much free talk is encouraged in meetings, the
quality of obedience in relation to bosses, the expected work ethic, et
cetera.
When you are new to a group, you must pay extra attention to these
tacit codes. Look at who’s rising and who’s falling within the group—
signs of the standards that govern success and failure. Does success
stem more from results or from political schmoozing? Look at how
hard people work when not being observed by bosses. You could work
too hard or do a job too well and find yourself fired for making others
look bad. There are inevitably sacred cows within the group—people or
beliefs never to be criticized. Consider all of these as trip wires you
must avoid at all costs. Sometimes a particular member of higher
standing serves as the de facto policeman or policewoman for these
rules and codes. Identify such individuals and avoid any friction with
them. It’s not worth it.
The group court: Observe any community of chimpanzees at the
zoo, and you will notice the existence of an alpha male and other
chimpanzees adapting their behavior to him, fawning, imitating, and
struggling to forge closer ties. This is the prehuman version of the
court. We humans created a more elaborate version in aristocratic
courts, dating from the earliest civilizations. In the aristocratic court,
the subordinate members depended on the king or queen’s favor to
survive and thrive; the object of the game was to get closer to the man
or woman on top without alienating the other courtiers, or to gang up
and depose the leader, always a risky venture.
Today the court will form around the film executive, the head of an
academic department, the CEO of a business venture, the political
boss, the owner of an art gallery, a critic or artist who has cultural
power. In a large group, there will be subcourts formed around
subleaders. The more powerful the leader, the more intense is the
gamesmanship. The courtiers may look different now, but their
behavior and strategies are pretty much the same. You must take note
of a few of these behavioral patterns.
First, courtiers have to gain the attention of leaders and ingratiate
themselves in some way. The most immediate way to do this is
through flattery, since leaders inevitably have large egos and a hunger
to have their high self-opinion validated. Flattery can do wonders, but
it comes with risks. If it is too obvious, the flatterer looks desperate,
and it is easy to see through the strategy. The best courtiers know how
to tailor their flattery to the particular insecurities of the leader and to
make it less direct. They focus on flattering qualities in the leader that
no one else has bothered to pay attention to but that need extra
validation. If everyone praises the leader’s business acumen but not
his or her cultural refinement, you will want to aim at the latter.
Mirroring the leader’s ideas and values, without using their exact
words, can be a highly effective form of indirect flattery.
Keep in mind that forms of acceptable flattery will differ in each
court. In Hollywood, it must be more effusive than in academia or in
Washington DC. Adapt your flattery to the group spirit, and make it as
indirect as possible.
Of course, it is always wise to impress bosses with your efficiency
and to make them dependent on your usefulness, but be careful of
taking this too far: if they feel you are too good at what you do, they
may come to fear their dependence on you and wonder about your
ambition. Make them feel comfortable in the superiority they believe
they possess.
Second, you must pay great attention to the other courtiers.
Standing out too much, being seen as too brilliant or charming, will
stir up envy, and you will die by a thousand bites. You want as many
courtiers on your side as possible. Learn to downplay your successes,
to listen (or seem to listen) deeply to the ideas of others, strategically
giving them credit and praise in meetings, paying attention to their
insecurities. If you must take action against particular courtiers, make
it as indirect as possible, working to slowly isolate them in the group,
never appearing too aggressive. Courts are always supposed to seem
civilized. Be aware that the best courtiers are consummate actors and
that their smiles and professions of loyalty mean very little. In the
court, it does not pay to be naive. Without being paranoid, try to
question people’s motives.
Third, you need to be aware of the types of courtiers you will find in
most courts and the particular dangers they can pose. One aggressive
but clever courtier with little conscience can quickly dominate the
group. (For more on the types of courtiers, see the next section.)
Keep in mind that there is no way to opt out of the court dynamic.
Trying to act superior to the political games or the need to flatter will
only make you look suspicious to others; nobody likes the holier-than-
thou attitude. All you’ll get for your “honesty” is to be marginalized.
Better to be the consummate courtier and find some pleasure in the
game of court strategy.
The group enemy: As mentioned above, our ancestors had a
reflexive fear at the sight of any outsiders to their group. This fear
easily slid into hatred. The basis for this fear may well have been real,
but the existence of rival tribes also had a positive side effect—it united
and tightened the group. It also fit in well with the way the human
brain processes information, through binary pairs of opposites—light
and dark, good and evil, us versus them. Today, in our modern
sophisticated world, you will notice this very ancient dynamic
continually at play: any group will reflexively focus on some hated
enemy, real or imagined, to help bring the tribe together. As Anton
Chekhov once noted, “Love, friendship, respect do not unite people as
much as common hatred for something.”
Since time immemorial, leaders have exploited this enemy reflex
for power, using the existence of the rival or enemy to justify almost
anything and to distract from their own shortcomings. The enemy will
be described as “amoral,” “irrational,” “untrustworthy,” or
“aggressive,” the implication being that “our” group is the opposite. No
side ever likes to admit it is not pure in its ethics, or has aggressive
intentions, or is governed by emotion—it is always the other side. In
the end, the need to feel a part of the tribe and against the other side is
more important than the actual differences, which tend to be greatly
exaggerated.
Look at the group you belong to, and you will inevitably see some
sort of enemy or bogeyman to push against. What you require is the
ability to detach yourself from this dynamic and to see the “enemy” as
it is, minus the distortions. You will not want to overtly display your
skepticism—you might be seen as disloyal. Instead, keep your mind
open so that you can resist the downward pull and overreactions that
come from such tribal emotions. Take this even a step further by
learning from the enemy, adapting some of its superior strategies.
Group factions: Over enough time, individuals in a group will
begin to split off into factions. The reason for this dynamic is simple:
In a group, we get a narcissistic boost from being around those who
share our values. But in a group over a certain size, this becomes too
abstract. The differences among the members become noticeable. Our
power to influence the group as individuals is reduced. We want
something more immediate, and so we form subgroups and cliques
with those who seem even more like us, giving us back that narcissistic
boost. In this subgrouping, we now have power to divvy up, which
increases its members’ sense of self-importance. Eventually the faction
will experience its own splits from within, on and on. This splitting
occurs unconsciously, almost as if it were responding to mechanical
laws of group fission.
If a faction gets strong enough, its members will start to give
precedence to its interests over that of the greater group. Some leaders
try to exploit this dynamic by playing one faction off the other, in the
form of divide and conquer: the more the factions fight, the weaker
they become, and the greater the power in the hands of the man or
woman on top. Mao Zedong was a master at this game, but it is a
dangerous one, because too much time tends to be wasted dealing with
petty internal squabbles, and it can be hard to keep them all down. If
left alone, factions can become so powerful they take over and depose
or control the leaders themselves. Better to tighten the whole group by
creating a positive culture that excites and unifies its members,
making factions less attractive. (For more on this, see the last section
of this chapter.)
One faction to pay particular attention to is the one that is formed
by those in the higher echelons, which we can identify as the elites in
the group. Although elites themselves sometimes split into rival
factions, more often than not, when push comes to shove, they will
unite and work to preserve their elite status. The clan tends to look
after its own, all the more so among the powerful. They will inevitably
manage to bend the group rules to ensure they tilt in their favor. In
these democratic times, they will try to cover this up by posturing that
what they are doing is for the greater good of the group. If the elites
prosper, so will everyone else, they say. But you will never actually see
the elite faction doing things that will lessen their power, or making
true sacrifices. Somehow it is always those not among the elites who
must make the sacrifices. Try not to fall for their rationalizations or
cover stories, and to see this faction for what it is.
—
Your task as a student of human nature is twofold: First, you must
become a consummate observer of yourself as you interact with groups
of any size. Begin with the assumption that you are not nearly as much
of an individual as you imagine. To a great extent, your thoughts and
belief system are heavily influenced by the people who raised you, your
colleagues at work, your friends, and the culture at large. Be ruthlessly
frank with yourself. Look at how your ideas and beliefs alter the longer
you stay at a job or within a particular group. You are under subtle
pressure to get along and to fit in, and you will respond to this without
being aware.
To see this clearly, think of how many times you have promoted an
idea that is contrary to what the group wants on some fundamental
issue and held on to this idea for a long period. It will probably be
quite rare. Look at the bad decisions the group has taken, and how
often you went along with them. If this conformity becomes too
ingrained in you, you will lose the ability to reason on your own, your
most prized possession as a human. As a thought experiment,
sometimes try entertaining an idea that is the very opposite of the
group you belong to or the conventional wisdom. See if there is any
value in deliberately going against the grain.
We are all permeable to the influence of the group. What makes us
more permeable is our insecurities. The less we are certain about our
self-worth as individuals, the more we are unconsciously drawn
toward fitting in and blending ourselves into the group spirit. Gaining
the superficial approval of group members by displaying our
conformity, we cover up our insecurities to ourselves and to others.
But this approval is fleeting; our insecurities gnaw at us, and we must
continually get people’s attention to feel validated. Your goal must be
to lower your permeability by raising your self-esteem. If you feel
strong and confident about what makes you unique—your tastes, your
values, your own experience—you can more easily resist the group
effect. Furthermore, by relying upon your work and accomplishments
to anchor your self-opinion, you won’t be so tied to constantly seeking
approval and attention.
It is not that you become self-absorbed or cut off from the group—
outwardly you do what you can to fit in, but inwardly you subject the
ideas and beliefs of the group to constant scrutiny, comparing them
with your own, adapting parts or all of those that have merit and
rejecting others that go against your experience. You are putting the
focus on the ideas themselves, not on where they come from.
Your second task is to become a consummate observer of the
groups you belong to or interact with. Consider yourself an
anthropologist studying the strange customs of an alien tribe. Look
deeply at the culture of your group, how it “feels” from within, the
feeling contrasted to other groups you have worked with or belonged
to. You are catching the social force as it molds the group into an
organism, the sum greater than its parts.
Most people intuitively sense the rules and codes of behavior in the
group. You want to take this further by observing these rules in action
and making your knowledge of them more conscious: Why do they
exist? What do they say about the group? Gaining a deeper
appreciation of the culture and codes will make it much easier to
navigate the social space and maintain a degree of detachment. You
will not try to change what cannot be changed. When it comes to the
inevitable factions that emerge, it is better to keep yourself unaligned
and let others fight over you. You do not need to belong to a faction to
derive a narcissistic boost. What you want within the group is strategic
options and room to maneuver, to have many allies and widen your
power base.
Your goal in this second task is to maintain as tight a grip on reality
as possible. Groups tend to share beliefs and ways of looking at the
world that are one-sided. They give greater weight to information that
fits into their preconceived notions. They exaggerate qualities of rivals
or enemies. They become overoptimistic about their plans. Taken far
enough, the group can hold beliefs that are quite delusionary, and its
actions can border on madness. Observing the group with a degree of
distance will help you be aware of the distorting effect on your
perception that can come from being so embedded within a group.
Your strategies and decisions will be all the more effective for this.
Just as groups tend to exert a downward pull on our emotions and
behavior, we can also experience or imagine the opposite—a group
that exerts an upward pull. We shall call this ideal the reality group. It
consists of members who feel free to contribute their diverse opinions,
whose minds are open, and whose focus is on getting work done and
cooperating on a high level. By maintaining your individual spirit and
your grip on reality, you will help create or enrich this ideal team of
people. (For more on this, see “The Reality Group” on this page.)
This ability to observe the group and detach ourselves is more
critical now than ever for several reasons. In the past, people’s sense of
belonging to certain groups was more stable and secure. To be a
Baptist or a Catholic or a communist or a French citizen provided one
with a strong sense of identity and pride. With the diminishing power
of these large-scale belief systems, we have lost this inner security, and
yet we retain the same profound human need to belong. So many of us
are searching for groups to join, hungry for the approval of others who
share our values. We are more permeable than ever. This makes us
eager to become a member of the latest cult or political movement. It
makes us highly susceptible to the influence of some unscrupulous
populist leader who preys upon this need.
Instead of forming large-scale groups, we now form tribes of
diminishing size, to get a greater narcissistic boost. We view larger
groups with suspicion. Social media abets this dynamic by making it
easier to spread the narrowly focused views and values of the tribe and
making them viral. But these tribes don’t last long; they are
continually disappearing or regrouping or splitting apart. And so the
ancient need to belong is never satisfied and drives us mad.
Tribalism has its roots in the deepest and most primitive parts of
our nature, but it is now coupled with much greater technological
prowess, which makes it all the more dangerous. What allowed us
thousands of years ago to bind our group tightly and survive could
now easily lead to our extinction as a species. The tribe feels its very
existence at stake by the presence of the enemy. There is little middle
ground. Battles can be more intense and violent between tribes.
The future of the human race will likely depend on our ability to
transcend this tribalism and to see our fate as interconnected with
everyone else’s. We are one species, all descendants of the same
original humans, all brothers and sisters. Our differences are mostly
an illusion. Imagining differences is part of the madness of groups. We
must see ourselves as one large reality group and experience a deep
sense of belonging to it. To solve the man-made problems threatening
us will require cooperation on a much higher level and a practical
spirit missing from the tribe. This does not mean the end of diverse
cultures and the richness that comes with them. In fact, the reality
group encourages inner diversity.
We must come to the conclusion that the primary group we belong
to is that of the human race. That is our inevitable future. Anything
else is regressive and far too dangerous.
The Court and Its Courtiers
Any type of court obviously revolves around the leader, the courtiers’
power depending on the relative closeness of their relationship with
this leader. Although leaders come in many varieties, one dynamic is
fairly universal: the courtiers (minus the cynical types, see below) will
tend to idealize those in power. They will see their leaders as smarter,
cleverer, more perfect than is the reality. This will make it easier for
them to justify their fawning behavior.
This dynamic is similar to what we all experienced in childhood: we
idealized our parents in order to feel more secure about the power they
had over us. It was too frightening to imagine our parents as weak or
incompetent. Dealing with authority figures in the court tends to
regress us to our childhood and the family dynamic. The way we
adapted to our parents’ power and the presence of our siblings will
play itself out again in adult form in the court. If we felt the deep need
to please our parents in every way in order to feel more secure, we will
become the pleaser type in the court. If we resented our siblings for
the parental attention they drew away from us, and tried to dominate
these siblings, we will be the envious type and resort to passive
aggression. We may want to monopolize the leaders’ attention as we
once tried to do with our mother or father.
And so we can say that courtiers tend to fall into certain types,
depending on deep patterns stemming from childhood. Some of these
types can become quite dangerous if they accumulate power within the
court, and they are usually adept at disguising their negative qualities
in order to rise from within. It is best to be able to identify them as
early as possible and take necessary defensive action. The following
are seven of the more common types you will find.
The Intriguer: These individuals can be particularly difficult to
recognize. They seem intensely loyal to the boss and to the group. No
one works harder or is more ruthlessly efficient. But this is a mask
they wear; behind the scenes they are continually intriguing to amass
more power. They generally have a disdain for the boss that they are
careful to conceal. They feel they could do the job better, and they
yearn to prove this. Perhaps they had competitive issues in childhood
with the father figure.
In the court of Richard Nixon, Alexander Haig (1924–2010)
epitomized this type. A graduate of West Point and a decorated war
hero in Vietnam, he was hired as one of several assistants to Henry
Kissinger, Nixon’s national security adviser. Kissinger’s own little
court was filled with men with brilliant academic backgrounds. Haig
could not compete on this level; he stayed away from policy
arguments. Instead, he so expertly tailored himself to the desires and
needs of Kissinger that he quickly rose from within. He organized
Kissinger’s desk, streamlined his schedule, and would do the lowliest
task, even helping his boss dress for an important evening. He silently
suffered Kissinger’s numerous and volcanic temper tantrums. But
what Kissinger did not realize was the depth of Haig’s ambitions and
his contempt for his boss. He was continually playing to the real boss
in the game, Nixon himself.
While Kissinger was out most evenings attending some party,
Nixon would see the light on in Haig’s office at all hours. Nixon, a
workaholic himself, could not help but admire this. Of course, Haig
made sure he worked evenings when Nixon was there and would
notice him. Soon Nixon was borrowing him for his own tasks. In 1973,
as the Watergate scandal blossomed, Nixon appointed Haig as his
chief of staff. This infuriated Kissinger—not only did he feel Haig had
used him for his own purposes, but he was now having to report to
Haig as a superior. To make matters worse, Haig had seen up close all
of Kissinger’s weaknesses and had a lot of dirt on him, and Kissinger
was certain he would be sharing this information with Nixon, who
loved such gossip. To colleagues Haig could be chummy and even
disarming. But behind the scenes he undercut almost everyone in his
path, wiretapping their phones, putting his name on their ideas and
memos.
As the Watergate crisis deepened and Nixon fell into a depression,
Haig slowly took over operations, with a zeal that surprised and
disgusted many. For several months, he became the de facto president.
This pattern repeated throughout his career. As Ronald Reagan’s
secretary of state, after the assassination attempt on the president in
1981, Haig told reporters, “I am in control here.”
In identifying this type, you must look behind the efficient and loyal
front and even the charm. Keep your eye instead on their maneuvers
and their impatience to rise from within. Look at their past record for
signs of intrigue. They are masters at making leaders, and others,
dependent on their efficiency as means of binding them and securing
their own position. Pay attention to that little extra zeal they display to
please the boss and make themselves useful. Realize that when they
are looking at you, they are thinking of how they can use you as a tool
or stepping-stone. Imagining themselves blessed with brilliance, they
have little compunction in doing whatever is necessary to advance
themselves. It is best to keep your distance and not become one of
their pawns, nor their enemy.
The Stirrer: This type is generally riddled with insecurities but
adept at disguising them from those in the court. They feel deep wells
of resentment and envy for what others seem to have that they don’t,
part of their childhood pattern. Their game is to infect the group with
doubts and anxieties, stirring up trouble, which puts them at the
center of action and may allow them to get closer to the leader. They
will often target another courtier who triggers their envy, and they will
spread rumors and innuendo about the courtier in question, playing
upon the latent envy of other courtiers. They will be full of secret
information for the leader about those who might be less than
perfectly loyal. The more turmoil and emotions they can stir up, the
better they can take advantage of the situation.
If a rebellion of some sort suddenly erupts within the court, you can
be sure they had a finger in it. All it takes is one good Stirrer in a court
to create endless drama and discord, making life intolerable for
everyone. They actually get a secret pleasure from doing so. They will
cover their tracks by being hyperrighteous and indignant about the
“betrayals” of others. They project such a front of loyalty and devotion
to the cause that it is hard to suspect them of being so manipulative.
If you notice courtiers who “innocently” share with you some
rumor, be wary—they could be of this type, and you may be the target
of such rumors at some point. If you feel the group succumbing to viral
anxiety about some vague threat, try to locate the source of this—you
might have a Stirrer in your midst. They can be tricky—they can
project an extra cheery and optimistic front to conceal the churning
negativity within. Always look behind the mask and notice the secret
delight they have when something bad happens. When dealing with a
known Stirrer, do not directly or indirectly insult or show disrespect.
Even though they are quite insensitive to the feelings of those they
malign, they are hypersensitive to any sign of disrespect to them, and
since they have fewer compunctions than you, they will make your life
miserable through their passive-aggressive campaigns.
The Gatekeeper: The goal of the game for these types is gaining
exclusive access to leaders, monopolizing the flow of information to
them. They may resemble the Intriguer in their willingness to use
people to get to this position, but unlike that type, their objective is not
to take over power. They are motivated not by a secret disdain for
others but by their intense adoration for the person on top. They often
rise to the position by fawning over the genius and perfection of the
leader, whom they idealize. (There might even be a slight sexual edge
to their attraction.) They ingratiate themselves with leaders by giving
them a great deal of narcissistic supply. As Gatekeepers, they keep
away irritating courtiers and buffer leaders from petty political
struggles, which seems to make them quite useful.
In gaining such proximity, they also get to see the leaders’ dark
sides and learn of their weaknesses; this unconsciously binds leaders
even more tightly to Gatekeepers, whom they might fear alienating.
Having such power over the admired leader is their endgame. This
type can also become the policeman or policewoman in the court,
making sure the group adheres to the ideas and beliefs of the leader.
Once such types are installed in power, they are extremely
dangerous—running afoul of them in any way will cut off key access to
the one player on the board who matters the most, and other perks.
Recognize them early on by their shameless sycophancy toward the
boss. These types obviously wear a very different face to other
courtiers from what they present to leaders, and you can try to gather
evidence to reveal their duplicity to the leader before it is too late. But
they generally are masters at understanding and playing to the
insecurities of bosses and come to know them better than you do. They
can easily turn your efforts around. In general, it is best to recognize
their power and remain on their good side. If you’re a leader, beware
of such types. They will tend to isolate you from the group, and
isolation is dangerous.
The Shadow Enabler: Leaders are often in a difficult position. They
have to bear the responsibility for what happens to the group and the
stress that goes with that. At the same time, they must maintain a
reputation that is above reproach. More than others, they have to keep
their Shadow side (see chapter 9) under wraps. This could be
extramarital desires they have had to repress, or paranoia about the
loyalty of everyone around them, or the craving to do some violence
against a hated enemy. Unconsciously their Shadow is yearning to
come out. In steps the Enabler, one of the cleverest and most
diabolical courtiers of all.
These types often are closer to their own Shadow, aware of their
own darkest yearnings. In childhood they probably felt these desires
deeply but had to repress them, which made such desires all the more
powerful and obsessive. As adults, they search for complicit partners
with whom they can bring the Shadow out into the open. They are
masters at detecting repressed desires in others, including leaders.
They may begin in conversation to broach somewhat taboo subjects,
but in a nonthreatening, jocular way. The leader falls into the spirit
and opens up a bit. Having established contact with the leader’s
Shadow, the Enabler then takes this further, with suggestions of
possible actions for leaders, ways to vent their frustrations, with the
Enabler handling it all and serving as protection.
Charles Colson, special counsel to President Nixon, carved out just
such a role for himself. He knew his boss to be quite paranoid about all
of the enemies supposedly surrounding him. Nixon was also quite
insecure about his own masculinity and yearned to punish his
purported enemies and display some swagger. He felt deeply
frustrated in not being able to act on these desires. Colson played on
his worst instincts, allowing Nixon to vent his feelings in meetings and
then insinuating ways to act on them, such as revenge schemes against
hated reporters. Nixon found this too tempting and too therapeutic to
resist. Colson shared some of these hidden sadistic desires himself,
and so this was the perfect way for him to live out his own Shadow.
In any court, there are inevitably those with a low character, who
live for scheming and knocking heads. They are not overtly violent or
evil but simply have fewer compunctions than others. If they are
Enablers and inveigle their way into a position close to the boss, there
is little you can do against them. It is too dangerous to cross such
types, unless what they are planning is so dark that it is worth risking
your own position to stop them. Take heart that their careers are
generally short. They often serve as the fall guy if what they advocated,
or acted on, becomes public. Be aware that they may try to play the
game with you. Do not take the first step into any dubious actions they
are trying to draw you into. Your clean reputation is the most
important thing you possess. Maintain a polite distance.
The Court Jester: Almost every court has its Jester. In the past they
wore a cap and bells, but today they come in different varieties and
looks. They can be the court cynic and scoffer, who has license to poke
fun at almost everyone and everything, including sometimes the
leaders themselves, who tolerate this because it shows their apparent
lack of insecurity and sense of humor. Another variety is the
domesticated rebel. Such types are allowed to go against the dress
code, display looser behavior, and espouse unconventional opinions.
They can be a bit flamboyant. In meetings, unlike anyone else, they are
allowed to come up with wild opinions contrary to the group. Such
nonconformists prove that the leaders encourage the free exchange of
opinions, at least in appearance.
These types fall into such roles because secretly they have a fear of
responsibility and a dread of failing. They know that as Jesters they
are not taken seriously and are given little actual power. Their humor
and antics give them a place in the court without the stress of actually
having to get things done. Their “rebelliousness” never really
represents a threat or challenge to the status quo. In fact, they make it
so others in the group can feel a bit superior to the in-house oddball,
more comfortable in conforming to the norm.
Never take their existence as a sign that you can freely imitate their
behavior. There is rarely more than one Jester per court for a reason.
If you feel the pull to rebel against the norms of the group, better to
keep it as subtle as possible. Often the modern court will tolerate
differences in appearances but not so much in ideas and political
correctness. Better to reserve your nonconformity for your private life,
or until you have amassed more power.
The Mirrorer: These types are often among the most successful
courtiers of all, because they are capable of playing the double game to
the hilt—they are adept at charming leaders and fellow courtiers,
maintaining a broad base of support. Their power is based on the idea
that everyone at heart is a narcissist. They are masters at reflecting
back to people their own moods and ideas, making them feel validated
without sensing the manipulation, as opposed to using overt flattery.
In the court of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, Frances Perkins, FDR’s
secretary of labor and longtime adviser, was the consummate player of
this game. She had high levels of empathy and could sense Roosevelt’s
moods. She would adapt to them. She knew he loved to hear stories, so
any idea she presented to him she would present with some type of
story line, and this would charm him. She listened to whatever he said
with much more attention than anyone else and could later refer
verbatim to something “brilliant” he had said, which proved how
deeply she had listened.
If she was going to recommend an action that might meet some
resistance, she would couch it as one of his own ideas from the past,
but with a slight modification of her own. She could decipher the
meaning of his various types of smiles, knowing when she could go
further with her idea and when to stop in her tracks. And she made
certain to confirm his idealized image of himself as the noble warrior
fighting on behalf of the disenfranchised. To other courtiers, she
presented herself in the most nonthreatening manner, never making a
show of her influence over her boss and applying the same type of
charm to everyone who crossed her path. In this way she made it hard
to feel threatened or envious of her powers.
This is a role you might want to consider playing in the court
because of the power it brings, but to pull it off you will have to be a
great reader of people, sensitive to their nonverbal cues. You want to
be able to mirror their moods, not just their ideas. This will cast a spell
over them and lower their resistance. With leaders, you must be aware
of their idealized opinion of themselves and always confirm it in some
way, or even encourage them to live up to it. Those on top are lonelier
and more insecure than you imagine, and they will lap this up. As
mentioned before, overt flattery can be dangerous because people can
see through it, but even if they see through your mirroring, they will
remain charmed and want more.
The Favorite and the Punching Bag: These two types occupy the
highest and lowest rungs of the court. Every king or queen must have
his or her Favorite within the court. As opposed to the other types,
whose power generally depends on efficiency and demonstrations of
abject loyalty, the Favorite’s rise in power is often based on cultivating
a more personal, friend-like relationship. Early on, they act relaxed
and chummy with the leader, without seeming disrespectful. Many
leaders are secretly dying to not have to be so formal and in control.
Sometimes leaders who are lonely will pick out one person to occupy
this position. With the Favorite, they will gladly share secrets and
bestow favors. This, of course, will stir up the envy of other courtiers.
This position is fraught with danger. First, it depends on the
friendly feelings of leaders, and such feelings are inevitably fickle.
People are more sensitive to the words or actions of friends, and if they
feel somehow disappointed or betrayed in any way, they can go from
liking to hating the former friend. Second, the Favorite receives so
much privileged treatment that they often become arrogant and
entitled. Leaders might tire of their spoiled behavior. Courtiers are
already envious of the Favorite, but their increased arrogance only
alienates them further. When Favorites fall from grace—and history is
littered with such stories—the fall is hard and painful. No one comes to
their defense, and because their rise did not depend on any special
skill, they often have nowhere else to go. Try to avoid being lured into
taking this position. Make your power dependent on your
accomplishments and your usefulness, not on the friendly feelings
people have for you.
Much as in any children’s playground, in the court there is almost
always a person who plays the role of the Punching Bag, whom
everyone feels encouraged to laugh at in some way and feel superior
to. People today are more politically correct and careful, and yet this
human need for a Punching Bag is too embedded in our nature. People
will base their feeling of superiority on the Punching Bag’s supposed
incompetence, or unorthodox opinions, or lack of sophistication,
whatever makes them seem different and somehow inferior. Much of
their ridicule will be behind the back of the targets, but they will sense
it. Do not engage in this dynamic. It will coarsen and debase you. See
everyone in the court as your potential ally. Within the ruthless
environment of the court, try to befriend the Punching Bag, showing a
different way of behaving and taking the fun out of this cruel game.
The Reality Group
When a group of people fails in some enterprise, we often see the
following dynamic play itself out: The first reaction is to look at the
actors involved and affix blame. Perhaps it was the overambitious
leader who led the group into failure, or the incompetent lieutenant, or
the very shrewd adversary. Perhaps some bad luck was involved as
well. The leader or lieutenant may be fired and a new team brought in.
Leadership learns a few lessons from the experience, and these are
shared. Everyone in the group feels satisfied and ready to move on.
Then, a few years down the line, nearly the same problem and the
same type of failure recurs, and the same tired solutions are recycled.
The reason for this common pattern is simple: what is really at fault
is the dysfunctional dynamic of the group, which tends to produce
incompetent lieutenants and grandiose leaders. And unless it is fixed,
the problems keep recurring with different faces.
In a dysfunctional culture, the members are often confused about
their roles and the overall direction of the group. Amid such confusion,
people start to think more of their own interests and agendas, and they
form factions. Worried more about their status than the health of the
group, their egos become touchy, and they obsess over who’s getting
more. In this contentious atmosphere, the bad apples—the Stirrers,
the men and women of low character—find numerous ways to stir
trouble and promote themselves. Those who excel at schmoozing and
playing politics but little else often thrive, rise to the top, and become
lieutenants. Mediocrity is preferred and rewarded.
Leaders find themselves dragged down by all the internal
dissension and gamesmanship. Feeling vulnerable, they surround
themselves with courtiers who tell them what they want to hear. Inside
this court cocoon, leaders hatch ill-conceived and grandiose plans,
which are encouraged by the spineless courtiers. Firing the leader or
lieutenants won’t change anything. The next ones will simply find
themselves infected and transformed by the dysfunctional culture.
What we must do to avoid this trap is to alter our perspective:
instead of instantly focusing on individuals and the drama of the failed
action, we must focus on the overall group dynamic. Fix the dynamic,
create a productive culture, and not only will we avoid all of the above
evils but we will trigger a much different, upward pull within the
group.
What creates a functional, healthy dynamic is the ability of the
group to maintain a tight relationship to reality. The reality for a group
is as follows: It exists in order to get things done, to make things, to
solve problems. It has certain resources it can draw upon—the labor
and strengths of its members, its finances. It operates in a particular
environment that is almost always highly competitive and constantly
changing. The healthy group puts primary emphasis on the work itself,
on getting the most out of its resources and adapting to all of the
inevitable changes. Not wasting time on endless political games, such
a group can accomplish ten times more than the dysfunctional variety.
It brings out the best in human nature—people’s empathy, their ability
to work with others on a high level. It remains the ideal for all of us.
We shall call this ideal the reality group.
Certainly, a true reality group is a rare occurrence in history—to
some degree we saw it in action with the famed battalions of Napoleon
Bonaparte, or the early years of IBM under Thomas Watson, or the
initial cabinet Franklin Roosevelt formed, or the film team assembled
by the great director John Ford that worked with him for decades, or
the Chicago Bulls under basketball coach Phil Jackson. From these
examples, and others, we can learn some valuable lessons about the
components of the reality group and how leaders can shape one.
The following are five key strategies for achieving this, all of which
should be put into practice. Keep in mind that if you inherit a culture
that is firmly set and dysfunctional, your job is harder and it will take
more time. You need to be resolute in the changes you want to effect
and have patience, being careful that the culture does not slowly
assimilate you. Think of it as war, and the enemy is not individuals but
the dysfunctional group dynamic.
Instill a collective sense of purpose. That social force that compels
people to want to belong and to fit in you want to capture and channel
for a higher purpose. You accomplish this by establishing an ideal—
your group has a definite purpose, a positive mission that unites its
members. This could be creating a product that is superior and
unique, that makes life easier or brings pleasure; or improving
conditions for those in need; or solving some seemingly intractable
problem. This is the ultimate reality of the group, why it was formed in
the first place. This purpose is not vague or implied but clearly stated
and publicized. No matter the type of work, you want to emphasize
excellence and creating something of the highest possible quality.
Making money or being successful should be a natural result of this
ideal and not the goal itself.
To make this work, the group must practice what you preach. Any
signs of hypocrisy or noticeable discrepancy between the ideal and the
reality will destroy your efforts. You want to establish a track record of
results that reflect the group’s ideal. Groups will tend to lose
connection to their original purpose, particularly with any success.
You want to keep reminding the group of its mission, adapting it if
necessary but never drifting from this core.
We often like to reduce the behavior of people to base motives—
greed, selfishness, the desire for attention. Certainly we all have a base
side. But we also possess a nobler, higher side that often is frustrated
and cannot find expression in the ruthless world today. Making people
feel an integral part of a group creating something important satisfies
a deep yet rarely met human need. Once members experience this,
they are motivated to keep the healthy dynamic alive and vital. With
its relatively high esprit de corps, the group will police itself. People
who are petty and all about ego will stand out and be isolated. With
clarity about what the group represents and the role they are to play,
members are less likely to form factions. Everything becomes easier
and smoother if you instill this collective purpose.
Assemble the right team of lieutenants. As the leader of a reality
group, you need the ability to focus on the larger picture and the
overall goals that matter. You have only so much mental energy, and
you must marshal it wisely. The greatest obstacle to this is your fear of
delegating authority. If you succumb to micromanaging, your mind
will become clouded by all the details you try to keep on top of and the
battles among the courtiers. Your own confusion then filters down
through the group, ruining the effect of the first strategy.
What you need to do from the outset is to cultivate a team of
lieutenants, imbued with your spirit and the collective sense of
purpose, whom you can trust to manage the execution of ideas. To
achieve this, you must have the right standards—you do not base your
selection on people’s charm, and never hire friends. You want the most
competent person for the job. You also give great consideration to
their character. Some people can be brilliant, but in the end their
poisonous personalities and egos make them a drain on the group’s
spirit. (For more on judging character, see chapter 4.)
You select for this team people who have skills that you lack, each
individual with their particular strengths. They know their roles. You
also want this team of lieutenants to be diverse in temperament,
background, and ideas. They show a willingness to speak up and take
initiative, all within the framework of the group’s purpose. They can
even challenge some rules that seem outdated. Feeling a part of a team
but able to bring their own creativity to the tasks will bring out the
best in them, and this spirit will spread throughout the group.
For this team of lieutenants, and for the group as a whole, you want
to make sure that members are treated more or less equally—no one
has special privileges; rewards and punishments are doled out fairly
and evenly. If particular individuals are not living up to the ideal, you
get rid of them. Now if you bring in new lieutenants, they naturally are
absorbed into the healthy dynamic. You are also leading from the
front. If there are sacrifices to be made, you share in them as much as
any member. In doing all of this, you will make it harder for people to
feel envious and resentful, which can sow divisions and make people
political.
Let information and ideas flow freely. As the group evolves, your
greatest danger is the slow formation of a bubble around you. The
lieutenants, trying to ease your burdens, may eventually isolate you
from what is happening throughout the group and filter the
information they provide you. Without realizing it, they tell you what
they believe will please you and keep out the noise that is important to
hear. Your perspective on reality slowly becomes distorted and your
decisions reflect this.
Without becoming overwhelmed by details, you need to establish a
very different dynamic. Consider the open communication of ideas
and information—about rivals, about what is happening on the streets
or among your audience—the lifeblood of the group. This was the
secret to the success of Napoleon Bonaparte on the battlefield. He
personally reviewed the concise reports sent to him by his field
marshals, lieutenants, and others all the way down the chain of
command, including even foot soldiers. This gave him several lines of
perspective as to the performance of the army and the actions of the
enemy. He wanted as much unfiltered information as possible before
deciding on a strategy. He kept such reports to a reasonably small
number, but their diversity is what gave him such a clear picture.
To achieve this, you want to encourage frank discussion up and
down the line, with members trusting that they can do so. You listen to
your foot soldiers. You want your meetings to be lively, with people not
overly concerned about bruising egos and causing offense; you want a
diversity of opinions. To allow for such openness, you must be careful
in these discussions to not signal your own preference for a particular
option or decision, as this will subtly tip the team into following your
lead. Even bring in experts and outsiders to broaden the group’s
perspective.
The more expansive the deliberation process, the greater the
connection to reality, and the better your decisions. Of course, you can
take too much time in this process, but most people sin in the opposite
direction, making hurried decisions on highly filtered information.
You also want to establish as much transparency as possible: when
decisions are made, you share with the team how they came about and
for what purpose.
Extend this open communication to the ability for the group to
criticize itself and its performance, particularly after any mistakes or
failures. Try to turn this into a positive and lively experience, with the
focus not on scapegoats but on the overall functioning of the group,
which was not up to par. You want the group to keep learning and
improving. Learning from mistakes will make the team that much
more confident moving forward.
Infect the group with productive emotions. In the group setting,
people are naturally more emotional and permeable to the moods of
others. You must work with human nature and turn this into a positive
by infecting the group with the proper set of emotions. People are
more susceptible to the moods and attitudes of the leader than of
anyone else. Productive emotions would include calmness. Phil
Jackson, the most successful basketball coach in history, noticed that a
lot of other coaches would try to rev up the team before a game, get
them excited and even angry. He found it much more productive to
instill a sense of calmness that helped the players execute the game
plan and not overreact to the ups and downs in the game. As part of
this strategy, always keep the group focused on completing concrete
tasks, which will naturally ground and calm them.
Infect the group with a sense of resolution that emanates from you.
You are not upset by setbacks; you keep advancing and working on
problems. You are persistent. The group senses this, and individuals
feel embarrassed for becoming hysterical over the slightest shift in
fortune. You can try to infect the group with confidence, but be careful
that this does not slip into grandiosity. Your confidence and that of the
group mostly stems from a successful track record. Periodically change
up routines, surprise the group with something new or challenging.
This will wake them up and stir them out of the complacency that can
settle into any group that achieves success.
Most important, showing a lack of fear and an overall openness to
new ideas will have the most therapeutic effect of all. The members
will become less defensive, which encourages them to think more on
their own, and not operate as automatons.
Forge a battle-tested group. It is essential that you know your group
well, its strengths and weaknesses and the maximum you can expect of
it. But appearances can be deceiving. In their day-to-day work, people
can seem motivated, connected, and productive. But add some stress
or pressure or even a crisis, and suddenly you see a whole other side of
them. Some begin to think more about themselves and disconnect
from the group spirit; others become far too anxious and infect the
group with their fears. Part of the reality you need to be on top of is the
actual strength of your team.
You want to be able to gauge the relative inner toughness of people
before you are thrust into a crisis. Give various members some
relatively challenging tasks or shorter deadlines than usual, and see
how they respond. Some people rise to the occasion and even do better
under such stress; consider such people a treasure to hoard. Lead the
team itself into an action that is novel and slightly riskier than usual.
Observe carefully how individuals react to the slight amount of chaos
and uncertainty that unfold from this. Of course, in the aftermath of
any crises or failures, use such moments as a way to review people’s
inner strength or lack of it. You can tolerate a few fearful types who
have other virtues, but not too many.
In the end, you want a group that has been through a few wars,
dealt with them reasonably well, and now is battle-tested. They do not
wilt at the sign of new obstacles and in fact welcome them. With such a
group, you can slowly expand the limits of what you can ask of them,
and the members feel a powerful upward pull to meet challenges and
prove themselves. Such a group can move mountains.
—
Finally, we like to focus on the psychological health of individuals, and
how perhaps a therapist could fix any problems they might have. What
we don’t consider, however, is that being in a dysfunctional group can
actually make individuals unstable and neurotic. The opposite is true
as well: by participating in a high-functioning reality group, we can
make ourselves healthy and whole. Such experiences are memorable
and life-changing. We learn the value of cooperating on a higher level,
of seeing our fate as intertwined with those around us. We develop
greater empathy. We gain confidence in our own abilities, which such
a group rewards. We feel connected to reality. We are brought into the
upward pull of the group, realizing our social nature on the high level
it was intended for. It is our duty as enlightened humans to create as
many such groups as possible, making society healthier in the process.
Madness is something rare in individuals—but in groups, parties,
peoples, and ages it is the rule.
—Friedrich Nietzsche
A
15
Make Them Want to Follow You
The Law of Fickleness
lthough styles of leadership change with the times, one constant
remains: people are always ambivalent about those in power.
They want to be led but also to feel free; they want to be protected
and enjoy prosperity without making sacrifices; they both worship
the king and want to kill him. When you are the leader of a group,
people are continually prepared to turn on you the moment you seem
weak or experience a setback. Do not succumb to the prejudices of the
times, imagining that what you need to do to gain their loyalty is to
seem to be their equal or their friend; people will doubt your
strength, become suspicious of your motives, and respond with
hidden contempt. Authority is the delicate art of creating the
appearance of power, legitimacy, and fairness while getting people
to identify with you as a leader who is in their service. If you want to
lead, you must master this art from early on in your life. Once you
have gained people’s trust, they will stand by you as their leader, no
matter the bad circumstances.
The Entitlement Curse
On the morning of Saturday, January 14, 1559, English people of all
ages and classes began gathering in the streets of London. It was the
day before the coronation of their new ruler, the twenty-five-year-old
Elizabeth Tudor, to be known as Queen Elizabeth I. By tradition, the
new monarch always led a ceremonial procession through the city. For
most, it would be the first time they had ever seen Elizabeth.
Some in the crowd were anxious—England was in bad financial
shape, the government heavily in debt; beggars were everywhere in the
streets of large cities, and thieves roamed the countryside. Worst of all,
the country had just been through a virtual civil war between Catholics
and Protestants. Elizabeth’s father, Henry VIII (1491–1547), had
created the Church of England and had moved to transform England
into a Protestant country. The daughter from Henry’s first marriage
became Queen Mary I in 1553, and she tried to return England to the
Catholic fold, initiating a kind of English inquisition and earning the
nickname “Bloody Mary.” After Mary’s death in late 1558, Elizabeth
was next in line to succeed her, but was this the time for England to be
ruled by a woman who was so young and inexperienced?
Others were cautiously hopeful: like the majority of the English,
Elizabeth was a solid Protestant and would return the country to the
Church of England. But optimistic or pessimistic, no one on either side
really knew much about her. After Henry VIII had Elizabeth’s mother
and his second wife, Anne Boleyn, executed on trumped-up charges
when Elizabeth was not yet three, Elizabeth had been shunted from
stepmother to stepmother, and her presence within the court had been
minimal. The English people knew that her childhood had been
difficult and that Queen Mary had detested her, even throwing
Elizabeth into the Tower of London in 1554. (She had wanted to have
Elizabeth executed on charges of conspiring against the Crown but
could not gather enough evidence.) How had these experiences
affected the young Elizabeth? Was she as impetuous as her father or as
arrogant as her half-sister, Mary? With so much at stake, they were
beyond curious to know more about her.
For the English, the procession was a day for celebration and
merriment, and Elizabeth did not disappoint on that score. It was
quite a spectacle—colorful tapestries on the exterior walls of houses,
banners and streamers from every window, musicians and jesters
roaming the streets entertaining the crowd.
As a light snow fell, the queen-to-be herself now appeared on the
streets, and wherever she passed the crowd grew hushed. Carried in an
open litter, she wore the most beautiful golden royal robe and the most
magnificent jewels. She had a charming face and the liveliest dark
eyes. But as the procession moved along and various pageants were
performed for her benefit, the English saw something they had never
witnessed before or could even begin to imagine: the queen seemed to
enjoy mingling with the crowds, tears filling her eyes as she listened
attentively to the poorest of Londoners with their petitions and
blessings for her reign.
When she talked, her manner of speaking was natural and even a
bit folksy. She fed off the growing excitement in the crowd, and her
affection for the people in the streets was all too apparent. One older
and quite poor woman handed her a withered sprig of rosemary for
good luck, and Elizabeth clutched it the entire day.
One witness wrote of Elizabeth, “If ever any person had either the
gift or the style to win the hearts of people, it was this Queen. . . . All
her faculties were in motion, and every motion seemed a well-guided
action: her eye was set upon one, her ear listened to another, her
judgment ran upon a third, to a fourth she addressed her speech; her
spirit seemed to be everywhere, and yet so entire in herself as it
seemed to be nowhere else. Some she pitied, some she commended,
some she thanked, at others she pleasantly and wittily jested . . . and
distributing her smiles, looks, and graces . . . that thereupon the
people again redoubled the testimony of their joys, and afterwards,
raising everything to the highest strain, filled the ears of all men with
immoderate extolling of their Prince.”
That night the city of London was abuzz with stories of the day. In
taverns and homes, people commented on Elizabeth’s strange and
electrifying presence. Kings and queens would often appear before the
public, but they were surrounded with such pomp and eager to
maintain their distance. They expected the people to obey and worship
them. But Elizabeth seemed eager to win the people’s love, and it had
charmed everyone who had seen her that day. As word spread of this
throughout the country, affection for their new queen began to swell
among the English, and they entertained some hope for the new reign.
—
Before her coronation, Elizabeth had made it known to Sir William
Cecil that she would choose him as her most trusted minister. Cecil,
thirteen years older than the queen, had served as an important
councillor under Edward VI, Elizabeth’s half-brother, who had ruled
after the death of Henry VIII in 1547 from age nine until his death at
age fifteen. Cecil had known Elizabeth since she was fourteen; they
shared similar intellectual interests and were both solid Protestants;
they had many lively conversations and a friendly rapport. For his
part, Cecil understood her well. She was extremely intelligent, was
very well read, and spoke many languages fluently. They would often
play chess, and he was impressed with her patient style and how she
often laid elaborate traps for his pieces.
He knew that Elizabeth had been schooled in hardship. She had lost
not only her mother when she was so young but also her most beloved
stepmother, Catherine Howard, when she was eight. Catherine was
Henry’s fifth wife and a cousin of Anne Boleyn. Henry had had her
beheaded on trumped-up charges of adultery. Cecil also knew that the
few months Elizabeth had spent in the Tower of London had had a
traumatic effect on her, since she had expected to be executed at any
moment. She had emerged from all of these experiences as a
remarkably affable young woman, but Cecil knew that behind the
exterior she was willful, temperamental, and even devious.
Cecil was also certain about one more thing: ruling was not for
women. Queen Mary I had been England’s first true female ruler, and
she had proven to be a disaster. All the government ministers and
administrators were men, and a woman could not stand up to the
rough-and-tumble of dealing with them, and with male foreign
diplomats. Women were too emotional and unsteady. Elizabeth might
have a very capable mind, but she did not have the resilience for the
job. And so Cecil had formed a plan: Slowly he and his cohorts would
take over the reins, the queen advising but mostly following her
ministers’ guidance. And as quickly as possible they would get her
married, preferably to a Protestant, and her husband would take over
and rule as the king.
Almost from the beginning of her reign, however, Cecil realized that
his plan would not be so easy to enact. The queen was headstrong and
had plans of her own. In one way, he could not help but be impressed.
Her first day on the job, she held a meeting and made it clear to her
future councillors that she knew more than they did about the
financial state of the country; she was determined to make the
government solvent. She appointed Cecil as her secretary of state, and
she began meeting with him several times a day, giving him no spare
hour to rest.
Unlike her father, who had let his ministers run things so he could
devote himself to hunting and pursuing young women, Elizabeth was
completely hands-on; Cecil was astounded at how many hours she put
into the job, working well past midnight. She was exacting in what she
expected from him and the other ministers, and occasionally she could
be quite intimidating. If he pleased her with what he said or did, the
queen was all smiles and a touch coquettish. But if something turned
out wrong or if he disagreed too vociferously, she would shut him out
for days, and he would return home to stew in his anxiety. Had he lost
her trust? On occasion, she looked at him harshly or even upbraided
him in the thunderous style of her father. No, the queen would not be
easy to manage, and slowly he found himself working harder than ever
to impress her.
As part of his plan for the men to slowly take over power, he made
sure that all correspondence from foreign governments would be first
routed to his desk. He would keep the queen in the dark on several
important matters. Then he discovered that the queen had learned of
this and behind his back had ordered all diplomatic correspondence to
go through her. It was like a chess game, and she was playing several
moves ahead. He got angry and accused her of undermining him in his
work, but she stood her ground and had a very logical response: unlike
Cecil, she spoke and read all of the major European languages and
understood their nuances, and it would be better for all if she
personally conducted diplomacy and brought the ministers up to date
on foreign affairs. It was useless to argue, and he soon realized that
when it came to handling such correspondence and meetings with
diplomats, Elizabeth was a master negotiator.
Slowly his resistance wore down. Elizabeth would remain in charge,
at least for the first few years of her reign. But then she would marry
and produce the necessary heir for England, and her husband would
take over. It was unnatural for her to continue in this role as an unwed
ruler. It was rumored that she had confided in several friends that she
would never marry, and that she had an overwhelming fear of
marriage based on what she had seen with her father. But Cecil could
not take this seriously. She kept telling everyone that all that mattered
was the greater good of England, but to keep England without an heir
apparent was to risk a future civil war. Surely she could see the logic in
this.
His goal was simple: to get the queen to agree to marry a foreign
prince in order to forge an alliance that would benefit England in its
weakened state. Preferably this would be a Protestant prince, but as
long as he was not a Catholic fanatic, Cecil would approve the choice.
The French were dangling before her a marriage with their fourteen-
year-old king, Charles IX, and the Habsburgs were promoting a
marriage with Archduke Charles of Austria. Cecil’s great fear was that
she would marry the one man whom she had actually fallen in love
with, Robert Dudley, the Earl of Leicester, a man beneath her in
station who would stir up all kinds of dissension and intrigue within
the English court.
As representatives of different countries pressed their cases,
Elizabeth would seem to favor one, then grow cold. If the Spanish were
suddenly creating trouble on the Continent, she would begin marriage
negotiations with the French to make King Philip II of Spain suddenly
fear a French-English alliance and back off, or with Archduke Charles
of Austria to strike fear in both the French and Spanish. Year after year
she played this game. She confessed to Cecil she had no desire to be a
wife, but when Parliament threatened to cut off funds if she did not
promise to marry, Elizabeth would soften and negotiate with one of
her suitors. Then, once the funds from Parliament had been secured,
she would find some other excuse to break off the marriage talk—the
prince or king or archduke was too young, too fervently Catholic, not
her type, too effeminate, on and on. Not even Dudley could break her
resolve and get her to marry him.
After a few years of this, his frustration mounting, Cecil finally saw
through the game. There was nothing he could do, but at the same
time he had come to realize that Queen Elizabeth I was almost
certainly a more capable ruler than any of the foreign matches. She
was so frugal with expenses that the government was no longer in
debt. As Spain and France ruined themselves with endless wars,
Elizabeth prudently kept England out of the conflicts, and soon the
country was prospering. Although she was Protestant, she treated the
English Catholics well, and the bitter feelings from the religious wars a
decade before were now mostly gone. “There was never so wise a
woman born as Queen Elizabeth,” he would later write, and so he
eventually dropped the marriage issue, and the country itself slowly
became used to the idea of the Virgin Queen, married to her subjects.
Over the years, however, one issue would continue to eat away at
the people’s affection for the queen, and even made Cecil begin to
doubt her competence: the fate of Mary, Queen of Scots, cousin to
Elizabeth. Mary was a staunch Catholic, while Scotland had become
largely Protestant. Mary was next in line to be Queen of England, and
many Catholics asserted that Mary was in fact the rightful queen. The
Scots themselves came to despise Mary for her religious sentiments,
for her adulterous affairs, and for her apparent implication in the
murder of her husband, Lord Darnley. In 1567 she was forced to
abdicate the Scottish throne in favor of her infant son, James VI. The
following year she escaped imprisonment in Scotland and fled to
England, putting herself in the hands of her cousin.
Elizabeth had every reason to despise Mary and return her to
Scotland. She was the polar opposite of Elizabeth—selfish, flighty, and
immoral. She was a fervent Catholic, and around her she would attract
all those in England and abroad who wanted to depose Elizabeth and
put a Catholic on the throne. She could not be trusted. But to the
dismay of Cecil, her councillors, and the English people, Elizabeth
allowed Mary to stay in the country under a mild form of house arrest.
Politically this seemed to make no sense. It infuriated the Scots and
threatened relations between the two countries.
As Mary began to secretly conspire against Elizabeth, and calls
arose from all sides to have her executed for treason, inexplicably
Elizabeth refused to take what appeared to be the rational step. Was it
simply a case of one Tudor protecting another? Did she fear the
precedent of executing a queen, and what it might mean for her own
fate? In any event, it made her look weak and selfish, as if what
mattered were protecting a fellow queen.
Then, in 1586, Mary became involved with the most audacious plot
to have Elizabeth murdered, upon which Mary would have become
Queen of England. She had secret backing from the pope and the
Spanish, and there was now incontrovertible proof of her involvement
in the plot. This outraged the public, who could well imagine the
bloody civil war that would have ensued if the plot had gone forward.
This time the pressure on Elizabeth was too great—no matter if Mary
had been a queen, she had to be executed. But yet again Elizabeth
hesitated.
A trial convicted Mary, but Elizabeth could not bring herself to sign
the death warrant. To Cecil and those in the court who saw her daily,
the queen had never appeared so distraught. Finally, in February of
the next year, she caved to the pressure and signed the death warrant.
Mary was beheaded the next day. The country erupted in celebration;
Cecil and his fellow ministers breathed a sigh of relief. There would be
no more conspiracies against Elizabeth, which would make the lack of
an heir easier to bear. Despite her apparent mishandling of the
situation, the English people quickly forgave her. She had proven that
she could put the welfare of the country over personal considerations,
and her reluctance only made the final decision seem all the more
heroic.
—
King Philip II of Spain had known Elizabeth for many years, having
been married to her half-sister, Queen Mary I. When Mary had
imprisoned Elizabeth in the Tower of London, Philip had managed to
soften her stance and get Elizabeth released. He found the young
Elizabeth quite charming, and he admired her intelligence. But over
the years he began to dread and despise her. She was the main
obstacle to his goal of reestablishing the dominance of Catholicism,
and he would have to humble her. In his mind, she was not the
legitimate Queen of England. He began sneaking Jesuit priests into
England to spread the Catholic faith and secretly foment rebellion. He
built up his navy and stealthily prepared for what was known as the
Enterprise of England, a massive invasion that would overwhelm the
island and restore it to Catholicism. The execution of Mary, Queen of
Scots, was the final straw—it was time for the invasion.
Philip felt supremely confident in the success of the Enterprise.
Over the years, he had taken the measure of his great rival. She was
crafty and clever, but she had one overwhelming disadvantage—she
was a woman. As such, she was unsuited to lead a war. In fact, she
seemed to be afraid of armed conflict, always negotiating and finding
ways to avoid it. She had never paid much attention to her military.
The English navy was relatively small, its ships not nearly as large and
powerful as the great Spanish galleons. England’s army was quite
pitiful compared with Spain’s. And Philip had the gold from the New
World to help finance the effort.
He planned for the invasion to take place in the summer of 1587,
but that year Sir Francis Drake raided the Spanish coast and destroyed
many of its ships in the harbor of Cádiz, while seizing great treasures
of gold. Philip postponed the invasion to the following year, the costs
slowly mounting for maintaining his army and building more galleons.
Philip had overseen every detail of the invasion. He would launch
an invincible armada of some 130 ships, manned by over thirty
thousand men. They would easily destroy the English navy, link up
with a large Spanish force in the Netherlands, cross the Channel, and
sweep their way to London, where they would capture the Queen and
put her on trial for the execution of Mary Queen of Scots; he would
then put his own daughter on the throne of England.
Finally, the armada was launched in May of 1588, and by July the
Spanish fleet was maneuvering around the southwestern coast of
England. The Spanish galleons had perfected a certain form of
warfare: they were so large they would maneuver close to the enemy
ships, grapple, and board them with a virtual army. But they had never
done battle with the much smaller and faster English ships, with their
long-range cannons, and in waters much rougher than the
Mediterranean. They did not do well.
On July 27, the armada anchored at Calais, just a few miles from
where the Spanish army awaited them. In the middle of the night, the
English sent five unmanned “fireships”—loaded with flaming wood
and pitch—toward the anchored galleons. With the high winds that
evening, the fire spread quickly from ship to ship. The Spanish
galleons tried to regroup farther out to sea, but their formation was
loose and scattered, and the fast English ships fired at them like ducks
in the water. As the winds changed again, the Spanish were forced to
retreat northward, into the stormiest parts of the North Sea. Trying to
round England and retreat to Spain, they lost most of their ships and
over twenty thousand Spanish soldiers died. The English had lost no
ships and had only around a hundred casualties. It was one of the
most lopsided victories in military history.
For Philip, it was the most humiliating moment in his life. He
retired into his palace, where he holed himself up for months
contemplating the disaster. The armada had left Spain utterly
bankrupt, and in the years to come England would prosper while
Spain became the second-rate power. Somehow Elizabeth had
outwitted him. To the other leaders in Europe who hated her, she now
seemed invincible and a ruler to be feared. Pope Sixtus V, who had
excommunicated her and had given his blessing to the armada, now
exclaimed, “Just look how well she governs! She is only a woman, only
mistress of half an island, and yet she makes herself feared by Spain,
by France, by the Empire, by all!”
—
Now in England there arose a veritable cult around the Virgin Queen.
She was now referred to as “Her Sacred Majesty.” To catch a glimpse
of her riding through London or passing on her barge on the Thames
seemed like a religious experience.
One group, however, proved less susceptible to this powerful aura—
the new generation of young men now filling the royal court. To them,
the queen was showing her age. They respected her accomplishments,
but they saw her more as a domineering mother figure. England was a
rising power. These young men yearned to make a name for
themselves on the battlefield and so earn public acclaim. Yet Elizabeth
continually thwarted this desire. She refused to finance a large-scale
campaign to finish off Philip, or to aid the French in their fight against
the Spanish. They saw her as tired and felt it was time for their
spirited, masculine generation to lead England. And the young man
who came to epitomize this new spirit was Robert Devereux, 2nd Earl
of Essex.
Born in 1566, Essex was handsome and high-strung. He knew the
queen had a weakness for young men, and he quickly charmed her,
becoming her new favorite. He genuinely liked and admired her, but at
the same time he resented the power she possessed over his fate. He
began to test her: he asked for favors, mostly money. She gave these to
him. She seemed to enjoy spoiling him. And as the relationship
progressed, Essex began to see her as a woman he could manipulate.
He started to criticize her rather boldly in front of other courtiers, and
the queen let him get away with it. She drew a line, however, when he
asked for high political positions for himself and his friends, and then
he would fly into a rage. It was humiliating to depend on the whims of
a woman! But days later he would calm down and return to his charm
offensive.
Kept away from political power, he saw that his only chance for
fame and glory was to lead an English army to victory. Elizabeth
allowed him to lead some smaller military expeditions on the
Continent. His record was mixed—he was brave but not very good at
strategy. Then, in 1596, he persuaded her to let him lead a Drake-like
raid on the Spanish coast. This time his boldness paid off, and the
campaign was a success. To the English people, now somewhat drunk
on their new status as a European power, Essex represented their new
swagger, and he became their darling. Essex wanted more of this and
kept asking the queen for another chance in battle. He attributed her
reluctance to the many enemies he had made in the court, men who
envied him.
In 1598 news reached the court that a band of Irish rebels under
Hugh O’Neill, 2nd Earl of Tyrone, was moving through English-
controlled territory in Ireland and wreaking havoc. Now Essex offered
his services to lead a force to crush Tyrone. He pleaded and persisted,
and Elizabeth finally relented. Feeling confident of his powers over the
queen, he requested for the campaign the largest army yet assembled
by the English. Elizabeth granted his wish. For the first time, he felt
truly appreciated by her. She did have a strange ability to make him
want to please her. He expressed his gratitude and promised to finish
the job quickly. Ireland would be the means for him to rise to the top.
Once he was there, however, the troubles mounted. It was the
winter of 1599; the weather was awful and the terrain hopelessly
boggy. He could not advance his enormous force. The Irish were
elusive and masters at guerrilla warfare. While the English remained
hobbled in their camps, thousands of soldiers died from disease and
just as many began to desert. Essex could only imagine his many
enemies at court talking behind his back. He felt certain the queen and
several ministers were somehow plotting his downfall.
He had to test her again—he asked for reinforcements. The queen
agreed, but she ordered him to finally find and fight Tyrone. Suddenly
the pressure was too much, and he blamed the queen and her envious
courtiers for trying to rush him. He felt humiliated by the position he
was in, and by the end of the summer he had decided upon a plan that
would put an end once and for all to his misery—he would secretly
negotiate a truce with Tyrone, then return to England and march on
London with his troops. He would force the queen to get rid of his
enemies within the court and secure his position as her lead
councillor. He would be forceful but respectful of her position; seeing
him in person and with his troops, the queen would certainly relent.
After a swift march through England, he suddenly showed up one
morning in her bedchamber, his uniform caked in mud. The queen,
caught by surprise and not knowing if he had come to arrest her and
launch a coup, retained her composure. She offered him her hand to
kiss and told him they would talk of Ireland later that day. Her
calmness discomfited him; it was not what he had expected. She
possessed a strange kind of power over him. Somehow the tables had
been turned, and now he agreed to postpone their talk to the
afternoon. Within hours, he found himself taken by her soldiers and
placed under house arrest.
Counting on his influence over the queen and how often she had
forgiven him, he wrote her letter after letter, apologizing for his
actions. She did not respond. This had never happened before, and it
frightened him. Finally, in August of 1600, she freed him. Grateful for
this and plotting his comeback, he asked just one favor—to restore to
him the monopoly he had possessed over the sale of sweet wines in
England; he was hopelessly in debt and this was his principal source of
income. Much to his chagrin, she refused to honor his request. She
was playing some game, trying to teach him a lesson or tame him, but
that would never happen. She had pushed him too far.
He retired to his house in London and gathered around him all of
the disgruntled noblemen in England. Together he would lead them on
a march to the queen’s residence and take over the country. He
predicted that thousands of Englishmen, who still adored him, would
rally to his cause and swell the ranks of his troops. In early February
1601, he finally put his plan into action. To his utter dismay,
Londoners stayed in their houses and ignored him. Sensing the
foolhardiness of the venture, his fellow soldiers quickly deserted.
Virtually alone, he retreated to his house. He knew this was the end for
him, but at least he would remain defiant.
That afternoon, soldiers came to arrest Essex. Elizabeth arranged
for a quick trial, and Essex was found guilty of treason. This time
Elizabeth did not hesitate to sign the death warrant. During his trial,
Essex maintained the most insolent air. He would go to his death
denying his guilt and refusing to ask forgiveness.
The night before he was to be beheaded, the queen sent her own
chaplain to prepare him for the end. Confronted with this
representative of Elizabeth, who relayed her last words to him, Essex
broke down. All those moments in which he had sensed her authority
but had tried to resist its power, including that morning in her
bedchamber when she had stood before him so regal and self-
possessed, suddenly overwhelmed him. He confessed his crimes to the
chaplain. In his mind, he mixed the image of his imminent judgment
before God with the majesty of the queen, and he felt the full weight of
his betrayal. He could see her face before him, and it frightened him.
He told the chaplain, “I must confess to you that I am the greatest,
the vilest, and most unthankful traitor that ever has been in the land.”
The queen was right to execute him, he said. He requested a private
execution so as not to inflame the public. In his last words, he asked
God to preserve the queen. He went to his death with a submissiveness
and quiet dignity that no one had seen or suspected in him before.
•   •   •
Interpretation: When Elizabeth Tudor became queen, she
understood her supremely fragile position. Unlike her father or almost
any other English monarch, she had zero credibility as a ruler, and no
respect or authority to draw upon. The country was in a weakened
state. She was too young, with no political experience or prior
proximity to power to learn from. Yes, by merely occupying the throne
she could expect some obedience, but such loyalty was thin and could
change with the slightest mistake or crisis. And within months or years
she would be forced to marry, and as she knew, being married could
lead to all sorts of problems if she did not quickly produce a male heir.
What made this even more troubling was that Elizabeth was
ambitious and highly intelligent; she felt more than capable of ruling
England. She had a vision of how she could solve its many problems
and transform it into a European power. Marriage would not only be
bad for her but for the country as well. Most likely she would have to
marry a foreign prince, whose allegiance would be to his country of
origin. He would use England as a pawn in the Continent’s power
games and drain its resources even further. But given all the odds
against her, how could she hope to rule England on her own? She
decided the only way forward was to turn her weak position into an
advantage, forging her own type of credibility and authority, one that
in the end would give her powers far greater than any previous king.
Her plan was based on the following logic: Kings and queens of her
time ruled with a tremendous sense of entitlement due to their
bloodline and semidivine status. They expected complete obedience
and loyalty. They did not have to do anything to earn this; it came with
the position. But this sense of entitlement had its consequences. Their
subjects would pay homage, but the emotional connection to such
rulers was in most cases not very deep. The English people could feel
the distance separating themselves from the monarch, and how little
their rulers really considered them.
This feeling of entitlement also blunted their political effectiveness.
The government ministers were cowed and intimidated by someone
like Henry VIII, and so their energy went into appeasing the king
rather than using their own intelligence and creative powers. With this
sense of entitlement, rulers paid less attention to the details of
governing, which were too boring; wars of conquest became their chief
means of getting glory and providing riches for the aristocracy, even
though such wars drained a country’s resources. These rulers could be
incredibly selfish—Henry VIII had Elizabeth’s mother executed so he
could marry his latest mistress, not caring how tyrannical this made
him seem to the English. Mary, Queen of Scots, had her husband
murdered so she could marry her lover.
It would be easy for Elizabeth to delude herself and simply expect
the loyalty that came with her august position. But she was too smart
to fall into that trap. She would deliberately go in the opposite
direction. She would feel no sense of entitlement. She would keep in
mind the weakness of her actual position. She would not passively
expect loyalty; she would turn active. She would earn the trust and
credibility she required through her actions over time. She would
demonstrate that she was not selfish, that everything she did was
motivated by what was for the greater good of the country. She would
be alert and relentless in this task. She would alter the way people (her
subjects, her ministers, her foreign rivals) perceived her—from an
inexperienced and weak woman to a figure of authority and great
power. By forging much deeper ties with her ministers and the
commoners, she would overcome people’s natural fickleness and
channel their energies for the purpose of rebuilding England.
Her first appearances before the English people were cleverly
crafted to set the stage for a new type of leadership. Surrounded by all
the usual royal pomp, she mixed in a common touch, making her seem
both comforting and regal. She was not faking this. Having felt
powerless in her youth, she could identify with the poorest charwoman
of England. She indicated through her attitude that she was on their
side, sensitive to their opinions of her. She wanted to earn their
approval. She would build on this empathy throughout her reign, and
the bonds between her and subjects became much more intense than
with any previous ruler.
With her ministers, the task was more delicate and difficult. It was
a group of power-hungry men, with their egos and need to feel smarter
than and superior to a woman. She depended on their help and
goodwill to run the country, but if she revealed too much dependence
on them, they would walk all over her. And so, from the first days of
her rule, she made the following clear: she was all business; she would
work harder than all of them; she would reduce expenditures for the
court, sacrificing her own income in the process; and all activity was to
be directed toward lifting England out of the hole it had fallen into.
She showed early on her superior knowledge of the finances of the
country and the tough side of herself in any negotiation. Upon
occasion, she would flash her anger if a minister seemed to be
furthering a personal agenda, and such outbursts could be quite
intimidating.
Mostly, though, she was warm and empathetic, attuned to the
various moods of these men. Soon they wanted to please her and win
her approval. To not work hard or smart enough could mean isolation
and some coldness, and unconsciously they wanted to avoid this. They
respected the fact that she lived up to her own high standards. In this
way, she slowly placed these ministers into the same position that she
had found herself in: needing to gain her trust and respect through
their actions. Now, instead of a cabal of conspiring, selfish ministers,
the queen had a team working to further her agenda, and the results
soon spoke for themselves.
By these methods, Elizabeth acquired the credibility she needed,
but she made one major mistake—her handling of Mary, Queen of
Scots. Elizabeth had become somewhat entitled herself, feeling in this
case that she knew better than her ministers and that her personal
qualms about executing a fellow queen trumped everything else. She
paid a price for this policy, as she felt the people’s respect for her
draining away, and it pained her. Her sense of the greater good was
what guided her, but in this case the greater good would be served by
having Mary executed. She was violating her own principles.
It took some time, but she realized her mistake. She tasked the
head of her secret service to lure Mary into her most far-reaching
conspiracy to get rid of Elizabeth. Now with solid evidence of Mary’s
complicity, Elizabeth could take the dreaded step. In the end, going
against her own feelings for the sake of the country, in essence
admitting her mistake, gained her even more trust from the English. It
was the kind of response to public opinion that almost no rulers of the
time were capable of.
When it came to her foreign rivals, particularly Philip II, Elizabeth
was not naive and understood the situation: Nothing she had done had
earned her any respect or respite from their endless conspiracies to get
rid of her. They disrespected her as an unmarried queen and as a
woman who seemed to fear conflict and warfare. She largely ignored
all of this and kept to her mission of securing England’s finances. But
when the invasion of England seemed imminent, she knew it was time
to finally prove herself as the great strategist that she was. She would
play on Philip’s underestimating of her craftiness and her toughness as
a leader.
If war was necessary, she would do it as economically and
efficiently as possible. She invested large sums in creating the most
elaborate spy system in Europe, which allowed her to know in advance
Spain’s plans for the invasion, including the date of the launch. With
such knowledge, she could commission and pay for an army at the last
minute, saving huge sums of money. She financed Sir Frances Drake’s
raids on the coast of Spain and its galleons at sea. This allowed her to
enrich England’s coffers and delay the launching of the armada, which
made it all the more expensive for Philip.
When it seemed certain the launch would occur within a few
months, she quickly built up the English navy, commissioning smaller
and faster ships, cheaper to build in bulk and well suited to the English
seas. Unlike Philip, she left battle strategy in the hands of her
admirals, but she overruled them on one score—she wanted them to
fight the armada as close to England as possible. This would play into
English hands, as the Spanish galleons were not suited for the stormy
northern seas, and the English soldiers, fighting with their backs to
their country, would fight all the harder. In the end, Spain was
bankrupted and never to return to her former glory, while England
under Elizabeth was now the rising power. But after this great victory,
she resisted the calls to take the battle to Spain and deal the country a
fatal blow. She was not interested in war for glory or conquest but only
to safeguard the country’s interests.
After the defeat of the armada, her authority and credibility seemed
invulnerable, but Elizabeth would never let her guard down. She knew
that with age and success would naturally come that dreaded sense of
entitlement and the insensitivity that went with it. As a woman ruling
the country by herself, she could not afford such a letdown. She
retained her receptiveness to the moods of those around her, and she
could sense that the younger men now filling the court had a much
different attitude toward her. Their respect was for her position as
queen, but it did not run much deeper than that. Once again she would
have to struggle against masculine egos, but this time without her own
youthful charms and coquetry to fall back on.
Her goal with Essex was to tame and channel his spirit for the good
of the country, as she had done with her ministers. She indulged him
in his endless desires for money and perks, trying to calm his
insecurities, but when it came to giving him any political power, she
set limits. He had to prove himself, to rise to her level, before she
would grant him such powers. When he threw tantrums, she remained
calm and steady, unconsciously proving to him her superiority and the
need for self-control. When it became clear he could not be tamed, she
let him go far enough with his conspiring to ruin his reputation and
allow her to get rid of this cancer. And when he faced death for his
crime, it was not simply the image of God that terrified him but that of
the queen, whose aura of authority finally overwhelmed this most
insolent and self-entitled of men.
Understand: Although there are no longer powerful kings and
queens in our midst, more of us than ever operate as if we consider
ourselves royalty. We feel entitled to respect for our work, no matter
how little we have actually accomplished. We feel people should take
our ideas and projects seriously, no matter how little thought went
into them or how meager our track record. We expect people to help
us in our careers, because we are sincere and have the best intentions.
Some of this modern form of entitlement might come from being
especially spoiled by our parents, who made us feel that anything we
did was golden. Some of it might come from the technology that so
dominates our lives and spoils us as well. It gives us immense powers
without our having to exert any real effort. We have come to take such
powers for granted and expect everything in life to be so fast and easy.
Whatever the cause, it infects all of us, and we must see this sense
of entitlement as a curse. It makes us ignore the reality—people have
no inherent reason to trust or respect us just because of who we are. It
makes us lazy and contented with the slightest idea or the first draft of
our work. Why do we have to raise our game or strain to improve
ourselves when we feel we are already so great? It makes us insensitive
and self-absorbed. By feeling that others owe us trust and respect, we
negate their willpower, their ability to judge for themselves, and this is
infuriating. We may not see it, but we inspire resentment.
And if we become leaders or subleaders, the effect of this curse only
gets worse. Unconsciously, we tend to sit back and expect people to
come to us with their loyalty and respect for the high position we
occupy. We grow defensive and prickly if our ideas are challenged,
putting our intelligence and wisdom into question, even on the
smallest of matters. We expect certain perks and privileges, and if
there are sacrifices to be made, we somehow feel we should be
exempted. If we make a mistake, it is always the fault of someone else,
or circumstances, or some momentary inner demon beyond our
control. We are never really to blame.
We are not aware of how this affects those whom we lead, because
we notice only people’s smiles and nods of approval at what we say.
But they see through us. They feel the entitlement we project, and over
time it diminishes their respect and disconnects them from our
influence. At a certain tipping point, they may turn against us with a
suddenness that is shocking.
Like Elizabeth, we must realize that we are actually in a weak
position, and we must struggle to adopt the opposite attitude: We
expect nothing from the people around us, from those whom we lead.
We are not defensive or sitting back but completely active—everything
we get from others, and most definitely their respect, must be earned.
We have to continually prove ourselves. We have to show that our
primary consideration is not ourselves and our sensitive egos but the
welfare of the group. We must be responsive and truly empathetic to
people’s moods, but with limits—to those who show themselves to be
mostly self-promoting, we are tough and merciless. We practice what
we preach, working harder than others, sacrificing our own interests if
necessary, and being accountable for any mistakes. We expect the
members of the group to follow our lead and prove themselves in
return.
With such an attitude, we will notice a very different effect. People
will open themselves to our influence; as we move toward them, they
move toward us. They want to win our approval and respect. With
such an emotional connection, we are more easily forgiven for
mistakes. The group energy is not squandered on endless infighting
and the clashing of egos but is directed toward reaching goals and
accomplishing great things. And in achieving such results, we can
forge an aura of authority and power that only grows with time. What
we say and do seems to carry extra weight, and our reputation
precedes us.
That . . . is the road to the obedience of compulsion. But there is a
shorter way to a nobler goal, the obedience of the will. When the
interests of mankind are at stake, they will obey with joy the man
whom they believe to be wiser than themselves. You may prove
this on all sides: you may see how the sick man will beg the doctor
to tell him what he ought to do, how a whole ship’s company will
listen to the pilot.
—Xenophon
Keys to Human Nature
We humans like to believe that the emotions we experience are simple
and pure: we love certain people and hate others, we respect and
admire this individual and have nothing but disdain for another. The
truth is that this is almost never the case. It is a fundamental fact of
human nature that our emotions are almost always ambivalent,
rarely pure and simple. We can feel love and hostility at the same
time, or admiration and envy.
This ambivalence began in our childhood and set the pattern for the
rest of our lives. If our parents were relatively attentive and loving, we
remember our childhood fondly, as a golden period. What we
conveniently forget is that even with such parents we tended to feel
resentful of our dependence on their love and care. In some cases, we
felt smothered. We yearned to assert our willpower, to show we could
stand on our own. Feeling too dependent on their attention could open
up tremendous anxieties about our vulnerability if they were gone.
And so we inevitably felt some hostility and desire to disobey, along
with our affection.
If they were not kind and caring, later in life we resent them and
can remember only their coldness and our present antipathy. But we
forget that in our childhood we tended to gloss over their negative
traits and find ways to love them despite their treatment, and to
somehow blame ourselves for not deserving their affection. Given the
fact that we depended on them for our survival, to feel they truly did
not care would have stirred up far too much anxiety. Mixed with
moments of anger and frustration were feelings of need and love.
And so as children, when one emotion dominated us, the other lay
underneath, a continual ambivalent undertone. As adults, we
experience similar ambivalence with our friends and intimate
partners, particularly if we feel dependent on them and vulnerable.
Part of the reason for this essential ambivalence is that strong, pure
emotions are frightening. They represent a momentary loss of control.
They seem to negate our willpower. We unconsciously balance them
with contrary or conflicting emotions. And part of it stems from the
fact that our moods are continually shifting and overlapping.
Whatever the cause, we are not aware of our own ambivalence because
contemplating the complexity of our emotions is baffling, and we
prefer to rely on simple explanations for who we are and what we are
feeling. We do the same with the people around us, reducing our
interpretations of their feelings to something simple and digestible. It
would take effort, and much honesty on our part, to catch our own
underlying ambivalence in action.
Nowhere is this fundamental aspect of human nature more evident
than in our relationship toward leaders, whom we unconsciously
associate with parental figures. This ambivalence toward leaders
operates in the following way.
On the one hand, we intuitively recognize the need for leaders. In
any group, people have their narrow agendas and competing interests.
The members feel insecure about their own position and work to
secure it. Without leaders who stand above these competing interests
and who see the larger picture, the group would be in trouble. Hard
decisions would never be made. No one would be guiding the ship.
Therefore, we crave leadership and unconsciously feel disoriented,
even hysterical, without someone fulfilling this role.
On the other hand, we also tend to fear and even despise those who
are above us. We fear that those in power will be tempted to use the
privileges of their position to accumulate more power and enrich
themselves, a common enough occurrence. We are also willful
creatures. We don’t feel comfortable with the inferiority and
dependence that comes with serving under a leader. We want to
exercise our own will and feel our autonomy. We secretly envy the
recognition and privileges that leaders possess. This essential
ambivalence tips toward the negative when leaders show signs of
abuse, insensitivity, or incompetence. No matter how powerful the
leaders, no matter how much we might admire them, below the
surface sits this ambivalence, and it makes people’s loyalties
notoriously fickle and volatile.
Those in power will tend to notice only the smiles of their
employees and the applause they receive at meetings, and they will
mistake such support for reality. They do not realize that people
almost always show such deference to those above them, because their
personal fate is in the hands of such leaders and they cannot afford to
show their true feelings. And so leaders are rarely aware of the
underlying ambivalence that is there even when things are going well.
If leaders make some mistakes, or if their power seems shaky,
suddenly they will see the mistrust and loss of respect that had been
invisibly building up, as the members of the group or the public turn
on them with an intensity that is surprising and shocking. Look at the
news to see how quickly leaders in any field can lose support and
respect, and how quickly they are judged by their latest success or
failure.
We might be tempted to believe that such fickleness is more of a
modern phenomenon, a product of the fiercely democratic times we
live in. After all, our ancestors were much more obedient than we
moderns, or so we think. But this was hardly the case. Far back in
time, among indigenous cultures and early civilizations, once-revered
chiefs and kings were routinely put to death if they showed signs of
aging or weakness; or if they lost a battle; or if a sudden drought
occurred, meaning the gods no longer blessed them; or if they were
seen as favoring their own clan at the expense of the group. These
executions were moments of great celebration, a time to release all of
the pent-up hostility toward leaders. (See The Golden Bough, by
James Frazer, for innumerable examples of this.)
Perhaps unconsciously our ancestors feared any one individual
lasting long in power, because they sensed the corrupting aspect of
power; and with someone new and fresh, they could control him
better. In any case, underneath their obedience lay tremendous
wariness. We may not execute our chiefs anymore, but we do so
symbolically in our elections and in the media, taking joy in witnessing
the ritualistic fall of the powerful. We may not blame them for a lack of
rainfall, but we will blame them for any downturn in the economy,
even though most of what happens in the economy is beyond their
control. As with the rainfall, they seem to have lost the blessings of
good fortune, of the gods. When it comes to our ambivalence and
mistrust, we have not changed as much as we think.
Throughout history, however, certain notable leaders have been
able to erect a bulwark against this volatility, to earn a type of solid
respect and support that allowed them to accomplish great things over
time. We think of Moses, or the ancient Indian emperor Asoka, or
Pericles (see chapter 1), or the Roman general Scipio Africanus, or
Queen Elizabeth I. In more modern times we can think of Abraham
Lincoln, or Martin Luther King Jr., or Warren Buffett, or Angela
Merkel, or Steve Jobs. We shall call such power authority, reverting to
the original significance of the word, which comes from the Latin
auctoritas, the root meaning “to increase or augment.”
To the ancient Romans, those who had founded their republic
possessed tremendous wisdom. Their ancestors had demonstrated this
wisdom by how strong and long-lasting were the institutions they had
established, and how they had transformed their provincial town into
the preeminent power in the known world. To the extent that Roman
senators and leaders returned to this basic wisdom and embodied the
ideals of the founders, they had authority—an augmented presence, an
increased prestige and credibility. Such leaders did not have to resort
to speeches or to force. Roman citizens willingly followed their lead
and accepted their ideas or advice. Their every word and deed seemed
to carry extra weight. This gave them greater leeway in making hard
decisions; they were not judged merely by their latest success.
The Romans were notoriously fractious and mistrustful of those in
power. Their politics could easily descend into civil war, which in fact
happened on several occasions. Having leaders who exuded authority
was a way to control this combativeness, to get things done, to
maintain a degree of unity. And it required that such leaders embody
the highest of ideals, ones that transcended the pettiness of daily
political life.
This Roman model, which represents an adherence to a higher
purpose, remains the essential ingredient for all true forms of
authority. And this is how we must operate if we wish to establish such
authority in the world today.
First and foremost, we must understand the fundamental task of
any leader—to provide a far-reaching vision, to see the global picture,
to work for the greater good of the group and maintain its unity. That
is what people crave in their leaders. We have to avoid ever seeming
petty, self-serving, or indecisive. Showing signs of that will stir up the
ambivalence. Focusing on the future and the larger picture should
consume much of our thinking. Based on this vision, we must set
practical goals and guide the group toward them. We need to become
masters of this visionary process through practice and experience.
Attaining such mastery will give us tremendous confidence in
ourselves, as opposed to the fake confidence of those who are merely
grandiose. And when we exude this confidence, people will be drawn
to us and want to follow our lead.
At the same time, however, we must see leadership as a dynamic
relationship we have with those being led. We have to understand that
our slightest gesture has an unconscious effect on individuals. And so
we must pay great attention to our attitude, to the tone that we set. We
need to attune ourselves to the shifting moods of the members of the
group. We must never assume we have their support. Our empathy
must be visceral—we can feel when members are losing respect for us.
As part of the dynamic, we need to realize that when we show our
respect and trust toward those below us, such feelings will flow back to
us. The members will open up to our influence. We must try as much
as possible to engage people’s willpower, to make them identify with
the group’s mission, to want to actively participate in realizing our
higher purpose.
This empathy, however, must never mean becoming needlessly soft
and pliant to the group’s will. That will only signal weakness. When it
comes to our primary task—that of providing a vision for the group
and leading it toward the appropriate goals—we must be stern and
immovable. Yes, we can listen to the ideas of others and incorporate
the good ones. But we must keep in mind that we have a greater
command of the overall details and global picture. We must not
succumb to political pressures to seem fairer, and so dilute our vision.
This vision of ours is beyond politics. It represents truth and reality.
We have to be resilient and tough when it comes to realizing it, and
merciless with those who try to sabotage this vision or work against
the greater good. Toughness and empathy are not incompatible, as
Queen Elizabeth I demonstrated.
When leaders fail to establish these twin pillars of authority—vision
and empathy—what often happens is the following: Those in the group
feel the disconnect and distance between them and leadership. They
know that deep down they are viewed as replaceable pawns. They
sense the overall lack of direction and the constant tactical reactions to
events. And so, in subtle ways, they begin to feel resentful and to lose
respect. They listen less attentively to what such leaders say. They
spend more hours in the day thinking of their own interests and
future. They join or form factions. They work at half or three-quarter
speed.
If such leaders, sensing all of this, become more forceful and
demanding, the members become more passive-aggressive. If the
leaders become pliant and plead for more support, the members feel
even less respect, as if the group were now leading the leader. In this
way, the members create endless forms of friction for leaders, who
might now feel like they have to drag the group up a hill. This friction,
caused by their own inattentiveness, is why so many leaders get so
little done and are so mediocre.
On the other hand, if we intuitively or consciously follow the path of
establishing authority, as described above, we have a much different
effect on the group dynamic. The ambivalence of the members or the
public does not go away—that would violate human nature—but it
becomes manageable. People will still waver and have moments of
doubt or envy, but they will more quickly forgive us for any mistakes
and move past their suspicions. We have established enough trust for
that to happen. Besides, the members have come to dread what could
occur if we no longer were the leaders—the disunity, the lack of clarity,
the bad decisions. Their need for us is too strong.
Now we are no longer dealing with the invisible friction from the
group but the opposite. The members feel engaged in the larger
mission. We are able to channel their creative energy, instead of
having to drag them along. With this loyalty in place, it is easier to
reach goals and realize our vision. This gives us the augmented
presence of authority, in which everything we say and do has added
weight.
It is always within our capacity to reach this ideal, and if the
members lose respect and trust in us, we must see this as our own
fault.
—
Your task as a student of human nature is threefold: First, you must
make yourself a consummate observer of the phenomenon of
authority, using as a measuring device the degree of influence people
wield without the use of force or motivational speeches. You begin this
process by looking at your own family and gauging which parent, if
any, exercised greater authority over you and your siblings. You look
at the teachers and mentors in your life, some of whom distinguished
themselves by the powerful effect they had on you. Their words and
the example they set still reverberate in your mind. You observe your
own bosses in action, looking at their effect not only on you and other
individuals but also on the group as a whole. Lastly, you look at the
various leaders in the news. In all these cases, you want to determine
the source of their authority or lack of it. You want to discern moments
when their authority waxes or wanes, and figure out why.
Second, you want to develop some of the habits and strategies (see
the next section) that will serve you well in projecting authority. If you
are an apprentice who aspires to a position of leadership, developing
these strategies early on will give you an impressive and appealing
aura in the present, making it seem as if you were destined to be
powerful. If you are already in a leadership position, these strategies
will strengthen your authority and connectedness to the group.
As part of this process, you need to reflect on the effect you have on
people: Are you constantly arguing, trying to impose your will, finding
much more resistance than you expect to your ideas and projects? Do
people nod as they listen to your advice and then do the opposite? If
you are just starting out, sometimes this cannot be helped—people
generally don’t respect the ideas of those lower down in the hierarchy;
the same ideas promulgated by a boss would have a different effect.
But sometimes it could stem from your own actions, as you violate
many of the principles described above.
Do not take people’s smiles and expressions of assent for reality.
Notice their tension as they do so; pay particular attention to their
actions. Take any grumbling as a reflection on your authority. In
general, you want to heighten your sensitivity to others, looking in
particular at those moments when you can feel people’s disrespect, or
your authority on the wane. But keep in mind that there are always
bad apples within any group, people who will grumble and not be won
over by you no matter what you do. They live to be passive-aggressive
and undermine anyone in a leadership position. Don’t bother with
empathy; nothing will work on them. The art is to recognize them as
quickly as possible and either fire or marginalize them. Having a group
that is tight and committed will also make it much easier to control
such malevolent types.
Third and most important, you must not fall for the
counterproductive prejudices of the times we live in, in which the very
concept of authority is often misunderstood and despised. Today we
confuse authority with leaders in general, and since so many of them
in the world seem more interested in preserving their power and
enriching themselves, naturally we have doubts about the very concept
itself. We also live in fiercely democratic times. “Why should we ever
have to follow a person of authority, and assume such an inferior
role?” we might ask ourselves. “People in power should simply get the
job done; authority is a relic of kings and queens. We have progressed
far beyond that.”
This disdain for authority and leadership has filtered its way
throughout our culture. We no longer recognize authority in the arts.
Everyone is a legitimate critic, and standards should be personal—
nobody’s taste or judgment should be seen as superior. In the past,
parenting was considered the model of authority, but parents no
longer want to see themselves as authority figures whose role is to
inculcate children with particular values and culture. Instead, parents
like to see themselves more as equals, with a bit more knowledge and
experience, whose role is really to validate their children’s feelings and
make sure they are continually entertained and occupied. They are
more like older friends. This same leveling dynamic applies to teachers
and students, where learning must be fun.
In this atmosphere, leaders begin to believe that they are more like
caretakers, there to stand back and enable the group to make the right
decisions, doing everything by consensus. Or they entertain the idea
that what matters more than anything else is crunching numbers,
absorbing the mass of information available today. Data and
algorithms will determine the direction to take and are the real
authority.
All of these ideas and values have unintended consequences.
Without authority in the arts, there is nothing to rebel against, no
prior movement to overturn, no deep thinking to assimilate and later
even reject. There is only an amorphous world of trends that flicker
away with increasing speed. Without parents as authority figures, we
cannot go through the critical stage of rebellion in adolescence, in
which we reject their ideas and discover our own identity. We grow up
lost, constantly searching outside ourselves for that identity. Without
teachers and masters whom we acknowledge as superior and worthy of
respect, we cannot learn from their experience and wisdom, perhaps
even seeking later on to surpass them with new and better ideas.
Without leaders who dedicate much mental energy to foreseeing
trends and guiding us to long-term solutions, we are lost. And as this
situation becomes the norm, because we humans have always needed
some form of authority as a guide, we tend to fall for certain fake
forms of authority that proliferate in times of chaos and uncertainty.
This could be the strongman, who gives the illusion of leadership
and direction but has no real vision of where to go, just ideas and
actions that serve his ego and enhance his sense of control. This could
be the panderer, the leader who cleverly mimics what the public wants
to hear, creating the illusion of being sensitive to the group and giving
it what it wants. This could be the chummy leader, who affects the
style and mannerisms of everyone else, offering what seems to be the
ultimate in fairness, fun, and consensus. This could also be the
authority of the group, which becomes that much more powerful in the
age of social media: what other people are saying and doing must be
true and respected, by dint of sheer numbers. But all of these false
forms only lead to more turmoil, chaos, and bad decisions.
As students of human nature, we must recognize the myriad
dangers of our prejudice against authority figures. To acknowledge
people of authority in the world is not an admission of our own
inferiority but rather an acceptance of human nature and the need for
such figures. People of authority should not be seen as self-serving or
tyrannical—in fact, those are the qualities that diminish their
authority. They are not relics of the past but people who fulfill a
necessary function and whose style adapts with the times. Authority
can be an eminently democratic phenomenon. We must realize that
much of what is behind progressive ideas of consensus, the minimal
leader, and the parent as friend, is actually a great fear of
responsibility, of the tough choices that must be made, of standing out
and taking the heat. We must move in the opposite direction,
embracing the risks and dangers that come with leadership and
authority.
In the world today, we humans have become more self-absorbed,
more tribal and tenacious in holding on to our narrow agendas; we
have become consumed by the barrage of information inundating us;
we are even more fickle when it comes to leaders. And so the need for
true figures of authority—with an elevated perspective, a high
attunement to the group, and a feel for what unifies it—has never been
greater. And because of that, we are tasked with establishing our
authority and assuming such a necessary role.
Strategies for Establishing Authority
Remember that the essence of authority is that people willingly follow
your lead. They choose to adhere to your words and advice. They want
your wisdom. Certainly at times you may have to use force, rewards
and punishments, and inspiring speeches. It is only a matter of degree.
The less your need of such devices, the greater your authority. And so
you must think of continually striving to engage people’s willpower
and overcome their natural resistances and ambivalence. That is what
the following strategies are designed to do. Put them all into practice.
Find your authority style: Authenticity. The authority you establish
must emerge naturally from your character, from the particular
strengths you possess. Think of certain archetypes of authority: one of
them suits you best. A notable archetype is the Deliverer, such as
Moses or Martin Luther King Jr., an individual determined to deliver
people from evil. Deliverers have an acute dislike of any kind of
injustice, particularly those that affect the group they identify with.
They have so much conviction, and most often such a way with words,
that people are drawn to them.
Another archetype would be the Founder. These are the ones who
establish a new order in politics or business. They generally have a
keen sense of trends and a great aversion to the status quo. They are
unconventional and independent minded. Their greatest joy is to
tinker and invent something new. Many people naturally rally to the
side of Founders, because they represent some form of progress.
Related to this archetype would be the Visionary Artist, such as Pablo
Picasso or the jazz artist John Coltrane or the film director David
Lynch. These artists learn the conventions in their field and then turn
them upside down. They crave some new style and they create it. With
their skill, they always find an audience and followers.
Other archetypes could include the Truth Seeker (people who have
no tolerance for lies and politicking); the Quiet Pragmatist (they want
nothing more than to fix things that are broken, and have infinite
patience); the Healer (they have a knack for finding what will fulfill
and unify people); the Teacher (they have a way of getting people to
initiate action and learn from their mistakes). You must identify with
one of these archetypes, or any others that are noticeable in culture.
By bringing out a style that is natural to you, you give the
impression that it is something beyond you, as if your sense of justice
or nose for trends came from your DNA or were a gift from the gods.
You cannot help but fight for your cause or create a new order.
Without this naturalness, it might seem that your attempt at authority
is too opportunistic and manipulative, that your support for some
cause or trend is a mere ploy for power. The earlier you recognize this
style the better; you will have more time to hone it, to adapt it to
changes in yourself and in the culture, to bring out new facets to
impress and fascinate people. And having left signs of this style from
the beginning of your career, it will seem all the more like a higher
power that you cannot help but follow.
Focus outwardly: the Attitude. We humans are self-absorbed by
nature and spend most of our time focusing inwardly on our emotions,
on our wounds, on our fantasies. You want to develop the habit of
reversing this as much as possible. You do this in three ways. First, you
hone your listening skills, absorbing yourself in the words and
nonverbal cues of others. You train yourself to read between the lines
of what people are saying. You attune yourself to their moods and their
needs, and sense what they are missing. You do not take people’s
smiles and approving looks for reality but rather sense the underlying
tension or fascination.
Second, you dedicate yourself to earning people’s respect. You do
not feel entitled to it; your focus is not on your feelings and what
people owe you because of your position and greatness (an inward
turn). You earn their respect by respecting their individual needs and
by proving that you are working for the greater good. Third, you
consider being a leader a tremendous responsibility, the welfare of the
group hanging on your every decision. What drives you is not getting
attention but bringing about the best results possible for the most
people. You absorb yourself in the work, not your ego. You feel a deep
and visceral connection to the group, seeing your fate and theirs as
deeply intertwined.
If you exude this attitude, people will feel it, and it will open them
up to your influence. They will be drawn to you by the simple fact that
it is rare to encounter a person so sensitive to people’s moods and
focused so supremely on results. This will make you stand out from
the crowd, and in the end you will gain far more attention this way
than by signaling your desperate need to be popular and liked.
Cultivate the third eye: the Vision. In 401 BC, ten thousand Greek
mercenary soldiers, fighting on behalf of the Persian prince Darius in
his attempt to take over the empire from the king, his brother,
suddenly found themselves on the losing side of the battle, and now
trapped deep in the heart of Persia. When the victorious Persians
tricked the leaders of the mercenaries into coming to a meeting to
discuss their fate and then executed them all, it became clear to the
surviving soldiers that they would be either executed as well or sold
into slavery by the next day. That night they wandered through their
camp bemoaning their fate.
Among them was the writer Xenophon, who had gone along with
the soldiers as a kind of roving reporter. Xenophon had studied
philosophy as a student of Socrates. He believed in the supremacy of
rational thinking, of seeing the entire picture, the general idea behind
the fleeting appearances of daily life. He had practiced such thinking
skills over several years.
That night he had a vision of how the Greeks could escape their trap
and return home. He saw them moving swiftly and stealthily through
Persia, sacrificing everything for speed. He saw them leaving right
away, using the element of surprise to gain some distance. He thought
ahead—of the terrain, the route to take, the many enemies they would
face, how they could help and use citizens who revolted against the
Persians. He saw them getting rid of their wagons, living off the land
and moving quickly, even in winter. In the space of a few hours, he had
conjured up the details of the retreat, all inspired by his overall vision
of their fast zigzag route to the Mediterranean and home.
Although he had no military experience, his vision was so complete,
and he communicated it with such confidence, that the soldiers
nominated him as their de facto leader. It took several years and
involved many ensuing challenges, each time Xenophon applying his
global vision to determine a strategy, but in the end, he proved the
power of such rational thinking by leading them to safety despite the
immense odds against them.
This story embodies the essence of all authority and the most
essential element in establishing it. Most people are locked in the
moment. They are prone to overreacting and panicking, to seeing only
a narrow part of the reality facing the group. They cannot entertain
alternative ideas or prioritize. Those who maintain their presence of
mind and elevate their perspective above the moment tap into the
visionary powers of the human mind and cultivate that third eye for
unseen forces and trends. They stand out from the group, fulfill the
true function of leadership, and create the aura of authority by
seeming to possess the godlike ability to read the future. And this is a
power that can be practiced and developed and applied to any
situation.
As early in life as possible, you train yourself to disconnect from the
emotions roiling the group. You force yourself to raise your vision, to
imagine the larger picture. You strain to see events in themselves,
uncolored by people’s partisan opinions. You entertain the perspective
of the enemy; you listen to the ideas of outsiders; you open your mind
to various possibilities. In this way, you gain a feel for the gestalt, or
overall shape of the situation. You game out the possible trends, how
things might play out in the future, and in particular how things could
go wrong. You have infinite patience for this exercise. The more deeply
you go into it, the more you can acquire the power to discern the
future in some form.
Those who faced Napoleon Bonaparte on the battlefield often had
the impression he read their minds and knew of their plans, but he
had merely thought forward more thoroughly than the other side. The
great German thinker and writer Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
seemed to have the uncanny ability to predict future trends, but it
came from years of study and global thinking.
Once you have your vision, you then slowly work backward to the
present, creating a reasonable and flexible way to reach your goal. The
more thinking that goes into this process, the more confident you will
feel about your plan, and this confidence will infect and convince
others. If people doubt your vision, you stay inwardly firm. Time will
prove you right. If you fall short of your goals, take this as a sign you
have not gone far enough with your thinking.
Lead from the front: the Tone. As the leader, you must be seen
working as hard as or even harder than everyone else. You set the
highest standards for yourself. You are consistent and accountable. If
there are sacrifices that need to be made, you are the first to make
them for the good of the group. This sets the proper tone. The
members will feel compelled to raise themselves up to your level and
gain your approval, much like Elizabeth’s ministers. They will
internalize your values and subtly imitate you. You will not have to yell
and lecture them to make them work harder. They will want to.
It is important that you set this tone from the beginning. First
impressions are critical. If you try later on to show you want to lead
from the front, it will look forced and lack credibility. Equally
important is to show some initial toughness; if people get the
impression early on that they can maneuver you, they will do so
mercilessly. You set limits that are fair. If members don’t rise to the
high levels you uphold, you punish them. Your tone in speaking or
writing is peremptory and bold. People always respect strength in the
leader, as long as it does not stir up fears of the abuse of power. If such
toughness is not natural to you, develop it, or you will not last very
long in the position. You will always have plenty of time to reveal that
softer, kinder side that is really you, but if you start soft, you signal
that you are a pushover.
Begin this early on in your career by developing the highest
possible standards for your own work (see the next section for more on
this) and by training yourself to be constantly aware of how your
manner and tone affect people in the subtlest of ways.
Stir conflicting emotions: the Aura. Most people are too predictable.
To mix well in social situations, they assume a persona that is
consistent—jovial, pleasing, bold, sensitive. They try to hide other
qualities that they are afraid to show. As the leader, you want to be
more mysterious, to establish a presence that fascinates people. By
sending mixed signals, by showing qualities that are ever so slightly
contrary, you cause people to pause in their instant categorizations
and to think about who you really are. The more they think about you,
the larger and more authoritative your presence.
So, for instance, you are generally kind and sensitive, but you show
an undertone of harshness, of intolerance toward certain types of
behavior. This is the pose of parents, who demonstrate their love while
indicating limits and boundaries. The child is trapped between
affection and a touch of fear, and from that tension comes respect. In
general, try to keep your bursts of anger or recriminations as
infrequent as possible. Because you are mostly quiet and empathetic,
when your anger flares, it really stands out and has the power to make
people truly intimidated and contrite.
You can mix prudence with an undertone of boldness that you
occasionally display. You deliberate long on problems, but once a
decision is made, you act with great energy and audacity. Such
boldness comes out of nowhere and creates a strong impression. Or
you can blend the spiritual with an undertone of earthy pragmatism.
Those were the paradoxical qualities of Martin Luther King Jr. that
fascinated people. Or you can be folksy and regal, like Queen Elizabeth
I. Or you can blend the masculine and the feminine. (See chapter 12
for more on this.)
Related to this, you must learn to balance presence and absence. If
you are too present and familiar, always available and visible, you
seem too banal. You give people no room to idealize you. But if you are
too aloof, people cannot identify with you. In general, it is best to lean
slightly more in the direction of absence, so that when you do appear
before the group, you generate excitement and drama. If done right, in
those moments when you are not available, people will be thinking of
you. Today people have lost this art. They are far too present and
familiar, their every move displayed on social media. That might make
you relatable, but it also makes you seem just like everyone else, and it
is impossible to project authority with such an ordinary presence.
Keep in mind that talking too much is a type of overpresence that
grates and reveals weakness. Silence is a form of absence and
withdrawal that draws attention; it spells self-control and power;
when you do talk, it has a greater effect. In a similar fashion, if you
commit a mistake, do not overexplain and overapologize. You make it
clear you accept responsibility and are accountable for any failures,
and then you move on. Your contrition should be relatively quiet; your
subsequent actions will show you have learned the lesson. Avoid
appearing defensive and whiny if attacked. You are above that.
Develop this aura early on, as a way to enthrall people. Do not make
the mix too strong, or you will seem insane. It is an undertone that
makes people wonder in a good way. It is a matter not of faking
qualities you do not have, but rather of bringing out more of your
natural complexity.
Never appear to take, always to give: the Taboo. Taking something
from people they have assumed they possessed—money, rights or
privileges, time that is their own—creates a basic insecurity and will
call into question your authority and all the credit you have amassed.
You make the members of the group feel uncertain about the future in
a most visceral manner. You stir up doubts about your legitimacy as a
leader: “What more will you take? Are you abusing the power that you
have? Have you been fooling us all along?” Even the hint of this will
harm your reputation. If sacrifices are necessary, you are the first to
make them, and they are not simply symbolic. Try to frame any loss of
resources or privileges as temporary, and make it clear how quickly
you will restore them. Follow the path of Queen Elizabeth I and make
the husbanding of resources your primary concern, so that you never
end up in this position. Make it so that you can afford to be generous.
Related to this, you must avoid overpromising to people. In the
moment, it might feel good to let them hear of the great things you will
do for them, but people generally have an acute memory for promises,
and if you fail to deliver, it will stick in their mind, even if you try to
blame others or circumstances. If this happens a second time, your
authority begins to sharply erode. Not giving what you promised to
deliver will feel like something you have taken away. Everyone can talk
a good game and promise, and so you seem like just anyone else we
encounter, and the disappointment can be profound.
Rejuvenate your authority: Adaptability. Your authority will grow
with each action that inspires trust and respect. It gives you the luxury
to remain in power long enough to realize great projects. But as you
get older, the authority you established can become rigid and stodgy.
You become the father figure who starts to seem oppressive by how
long he has monopolized power, no matter how deeply people admired
him in the past. A new generation inevitably emerges that is immune
to your charm, to the aura you have created. They see you as a relic.
You also have the tendency as you get older to become ever so slightly
intolerant and tyrannical, as you cannot help but expect people to
follow you. Without being aware, you start to feel entitled, and people
sense this. Besides, the public wants newness and fresh faces.
The first step in avoiding this danger is to maintain the kind of
sensitivity that Elizabeth displayed throughout her life, noting the
moods behind people’s words, gauging the effect you have on
newcomers and young people. Losing that empathy should be your
greatest fear, as you will begin to cocoon yourself in your great
reputation.
The second step is to look for new markets and audiences to appeal
to, which will force you to adapt. If possible, expand the reach of your
authority. Without making a fool of yourself by attempting to appeal to
a younger crowd that you cannot really understand, try to alter your
style somewhat with the passing years. In the arts, this has been the
secret to success of people like Pablo Picasso, or Alfred Hitchcock, or
Coco Chanel. Such flexibility in those who are in their fifties and
beyond will give you a touch of the divine and immortal—your spirit
remains alive and open, and your authority is renewed.
The Inner Authority
We all have a higher and a lower self. At certain moments in life, we
can definitely feel one part or the other as the stronger. When we
accomplish things, when we finish what we start, we can sense the
outlines of this higher self. We feel it as well when we think of others
before ourselves, when we let go of our ego, when instead of merely
reacting to events, we step back and think and strategize the best way
forward. But equally we know all too well the stirrings of the lower
self, when we take everything personally and become petty, or when
we want to escape reality through some addictive pleasure, or when we
waste time, or when we feel confused and unmotivated.
Although we most often float between these two sides, if we look at
ourselves closely, we have to admit that the lower half is the stronger
one. It is the more primitive and animal part of our nature. If nothing
impels us to do otherwise, we naturally become indolent, crave quick
pleasures, turn inward, and brood over petty matters. It often takes
great effort and awareness to tame this lower half and bring out the
higher side; it is not our first impulse.
The key to making the struggle between the two sides more even
and to perhaps tip the scales toward the higher is to cultivate what we
shall call the inner authority. It serves as the voice, the conscience of
our higher self. This voice is already there; we hear it at times, but it is
weak. We need to increase the frequency with which we hear it and its
volume. Think of this voice as dictating a code of behavior, and every
day we must make ourselves listen to it. It tells us the following.
You have a responsibility to contribute to the culture and times you
live in. Right now, you are living off the fruits of millions of people in
the past who have made your life incomparably easier through their
struggles and inventions. You have benefited from an education that
embodies the wisdom of thousands of years of experience. It is so easy
to take this all for granted, to imagine that it all just came about
naturally and that you are entitled to have all of these powers. That is
the view of spoiled children, and you must see any signs of such an
attitude within you as shameful. This world needs constant
improvement and renewal. You are here not merely to gratify your
impulses and consume what others have made but to make and
contribute as well, to serve a higher purpose.
To serve this higher purpose, you must cultivate what is unique
about you. Stop listening so much to the words and opinions of others,
telling you who you are and what you should like and dislike. Judge
things and people for yourself. Question what you think and why you
feel a certain way. Know yourself thoroughly—your innate tastes and
inclinations, the fields that naturally attract you. Work every day on
improving those skills that mesh with your unique spirit and purpose.
Add to the needed diversity of culture by creating something that
reflects your uniqueness. Embrace what makes you different. Not
following this course is the real reason you feel depressed at times.
Moments of depression are a call to listen again to your inner
authority.
In a world full of endless distractions, you must focus and prioritize.
Certain activities are a waste of time. Certain people of a low nature
will drag you down, and you must avoid them. Keep your eye on your
long- and short-term goals, and remain concentrated and alert. Allow
yourself the luxury of exploring and wandering creatively, but always
with an underlying purpose.
You must adhere to the highest standards in your work. You strive
for excellence, to make something that will resonate with the public
and last. To fall short of this is to disappoint people and to let down
your audience, and that makes you feel ashamed. To maintain such
standards, you must develop self-discipline and the proper work
habits. You must pay great attention to the details in your work and
place a premium value on effort. The first thought or idea that comes
to you is most often incomplete and inadequate. Think more
thoroughly and deeply about your ideas, some of which you must
discard. Do not become attached to your initial ideas, but rather treat
them roughly. Keep in mind that your life is short, that it could end
any day. You must have a sense of urgency to make the most of this
limited time. You don’t need deadlines or people telling you what to do
and when to finish. Any motivation you need comes from within. You
are complete and self-reliant.
When it comes to operating with this inner authority, we can
consider Leonardo da Vinci our model. His motto in life was ostinato
rigore, “relentless rigor.” Whenever Leonardo was given a
commission, he went well beyond the task, poring over every detail to
make the work more lifelike or effective. No one had to tell him to do
this. He was ferociously diligent and hard on himself. Although his
interests ranged far and wide, when he attacked a particular problem,
it was with complete focus. He had a sense of a personal mission—to
serve mankind, to contribute toward its progress. Impelled by this
inner authority, he pushed beyond all of the limits that he had
inherited—being an illegitimate son with little direction or education
early on in his life. Such a voice will likewise help us push beyond the
obstacles that life places in our path.
It might seem at first glance that having such a voice from within
could lead to a rather harsh and unpleasant life, but in fact it is the
opposite. There is nothing more disorienting and depressing than to
see the years pass by without a sense of direction, grasping to reach
goals that keep changing, and squandering our youthful energies.
Much as the outer authority helps keep the group unified, its energy
channeled toward productive and higher ends, the inner authority
brings you a sense of cohesion and force. You are not gnawed by the
anxiety that comes with living below your potential.
Feeling the higher self in ascendance, you can afford to indulge that
lower self, to let it out at moments to release tension and not become a
prisoner of your Shadow. And most important, you no longer need the
comfort and guidance of a parent or leader. You have become your
own mother and father, your own leader, truly independent and
operating according to your inner authority.
The select man, the excellent man is urged, by interior necessity,
to appeal from himself to some standard beyond himself, superior
to himself, whose service he freely accepts. . . . We distinguished
the excellent man from the common man by saying that the
former is one who makes great demands on himself, and the latter
the one who makes no demands on himself, but contents himself
with what he is, and is delighted with himself. Contrary to what is
usually thought, it is the man of excellence . . . who lives in
essential servitude. Life has no savor for him unless he makes it
consist in service to something transcendental. Hence he does not
look upon the necessity of serving as an oppression. When, by
chance, such necessity is lacking, he grows restless and invents
some new standard, more difficult, more exigent, with which to
coerce himself. This is life lived as a discipline—the noble life.
—José Ortega y Gasset
O
16
See the Hostility Behind the
Friendly Façade
The Law of Aggression
n the surface, the people around you appear so polite and
civilized. But beneath the mask, they are all inevitably dealing
with frustrations. They have a need to influence people and gain
power over circumstances. Feeling blocked in their endeavors, they
often try to assert themselves in manipulative ways that catch you by
surprise. And then there are those whose need for power and
impatience to obtain it are greater than others. They turn
particularly aggressive, getting their way by intimidating people,
being relentless and willing to do almost anything. You must
transform yourself into a superior observer of people’s unsatisfied
aggressive desires, paying extra attention to the chronic aggressors
and passive aggressors in our midst. You must recognize the signs—
the past patterns of behavior, the obsessive need to control
everything in their environment—that indicate the dangerous types.
They depend on making you emotional—afraid, angry—and unable
to think straight. Do not give them this power. When it comes to your
own aggressive energy, learn to tame and channel it for productive
purposes—standing up for yourself, attacking problems with
relentless energy, realizing great ambitions.
The Sophisticated Aggressor
In late 1857, Maurice B. Clark, a twenty-eight-year-old Englishman
living in Cleveland, Ohio, made the most important decision yet in his
young life: he would quit his comfortable job as a high-level buyer and
seller for a produce firm and start his own business in the same line.
He had the ambition of becoming yet another new millionaire in this
bustling city, and he had nothing but confidence in his powers to get
there: he was a born hustler with a nose for making money.
Clark had fled England some ten years earlier, fearing imminent
arrest for having struck his employer and knocked him unconscious.
(He always had a bit of a temper.) He had emigrated to the United
States, traveled west from New York, landed all kinds of odd jobs, and
then ended up in Cleveland, where he quickly rose through the ranks
of merchants. Cleveland was something of a boomtown, located on a
river and Lake Erie and serving as a key transportation hub connecting
the East to the West. There would never be a better time for Clark to
push his way forward and make a fortune.
There was only one problem—he did not have enough money to
start the business. He would need a collaborator with some capital,
and as he thought about this, he came up with a possible business
partner, a young man named John D. Rockefeller whom Clark had
befriended at a commercial college both had attended a few years
before.
At first glance, it seemed an odd choice. Rockefeller was only
eighteen years old. He was working as a bookkeeper at a fairly large
produce-shipping firm named Hewitt and Tuttle, and he was in so
many ways the polar opposite of Clark: Clark loved to live well, with a
taste for fine things, gambling, and the ladies; he was feisty and
combative. Rockefeller was fiercely religious, unusually sober and
mild-mannered for his age. How could they possibly get along? And
Clark had calculated that his partner would have to put up at least
$2,000 to get the company under way. How would a bookkeeper from
a family of limited means have such savings? On the other hand, in his
two years at Hewitt and Tuttle, Rockefeller had earned a reputation as
one of the most fiercely efficient and honest clerks in town, a man who
could be relied upon to account for every penny spent and keep the
company in the black. More important, as Rockefeller was so young,
Clark could dominate the relationship. It was worth asking him.
To Clark’s surprise, when he suggested the partnership, Rockefeller
not only jumped at the opportunity with uncharacteristic zeal but
quickly came up with the $2,000, somehow borrowing the funds.
Rockefeller quit his job and the new company, called Clark and
Rockefeller, opened for business in April 1858.
In its first years Clark and Rockefeller was a thriving enterprise.
The two men balanced each other out, and there was much business to
be had in Cleveland. But as time went on, Clark began to feel
increasingly irritated by the young man, and even a bit contemptuous
of him. He was more straitlaced than Clark had imagined; he had no
discernible vices. His main pleasure seemed to come from the
accounting books that he kept so well and finding ways to save money.
Although still so young, he already had a slumped posture from poring
over his ledgers day and night. He dressed like a middle-aged banker,
and acted that way as well. Clark’s brother James, who worked in the
office, dubbed him “the Sunday-school superintendent.”
Slowly Clark began to see Rockefeller as too dull and dreary to be
one of the faces of the company. Clark brought in a new partner from
an elite Cleveland family and dropped Rockefeller’s name from the
company title, hoping that would draw even more business.
Surprisingly, Rockefeller did not seem to object to this; he was all in
favor of making more money and cared little about titles.
Their produce business was booming, but soon word spread
through Cleveland of a new commodity that could spark the region’s
equivalent of a gold rush—the recent discovery of rich veins of oil in
nearby western Pennsylvania. In 1862 a young Englishman named
Samuel Andrews—an inventor/entrepreneur who had known Clark in
England—visited their offices and pleaded with Clark to become
partners in the oil business. He bragged of the limitless potential in oil
—the lucrative series of products that could be made out of the
material and the cheapness of producing them. With just a little
capital they could start their own refinery and make a fortune.
Clark’s response was lukewarm—it was a business that experienced
tremendous ups and downs, prices continually rising and falling, and
with the Civil War now raging, it seemed a bad time to commit so fully.
It would be better to get involved on some lower level. But then
Andrews gave his pitch to Rockefeller, and something seemed to spark
to life in the young man’s eyes. Rockefeller convinced Clark that they
should fund the refinery—he would personally ensure its success.
Clark had never seen Rockefeller so enthusiastic about anything. It
must mean something, he thought, and so he relented to the pressure
from the two men. In 1863 they formed a new refining business called
Andrews, Clark and Company.
That same year, twenty other refineries sprouted up in Cleveland,
and the competition was fierce. To Clark, it was quite amusing to
watch Rockefeller in action. He spent hours in the refinery, sweeping
the floors, polishing the metal, rolling out barrels, stacking hoops. It
was like a love affair. He worked well into the night trying to figure out
ways to streamline the refinery and squeeze more money out of it. It
had become the principal generator of profit for their firm, and Clark
could not help but be pleased that he had agreed to fund it. Oil,
however, had become Rockefeller’s obsession, and he constantly
bombarded Clark with new ideas for expansion, all at a time when the
price of oil was fluctuating more than ever. Clark told him to go more
slowly; he found the chaos in the oil business unnerving.
Increasingly, Clark found it hard to hide his irritation: Rockefeller
was getting a bit puffed up with the success of the refinery. Clark had
to remind the former bookkeeper of whose idea it had been all along to
start their business. Like a refrain, he kept telling Rockefeller, “What
in the world would you have done without me?” Then he discovered
that Rockefeller had borrowed $100,000 for the refinery without
consulting him, and he angrily ordered Rockefeller to never go behind
his back again and to stop looking to expand the business. But nothing
he said or did seemed to stop him. For someone so quiet and
unassuming, Rockefeller could be annoyingly relentless, like a child. A
few months after Clark had berated him, Rockefeller hit him with
another request to sign for a big loan, and Clark finally exploded: “If
that’s the way you want to do business, we’d better dissolve, and let
you run your own affairs to suit yourself.”
Clark had no desire to break up the partnership at this point—it was
too profitable, and despite the qualities that grated on his nerves, he
needed Rockefeller as the man to look after the dull details of their
growing enterprise. He simply wanted to intimidate Rockefeller with
this threat, which seemed to be the only way to get him to back off on
his tireless quest to quickly grow the refinery business. As usual,
Rockefeller said little and seemed to defer.
Then, the following month, Rockefeller invited Clark and Andrews
to his house to discuss future plans. And despite all of Clark’s previous
admonitions, Rockefeller outlined even bolder ideas for expanding the
refinery, and once again Clark could not control himself. “We’d better
split up!” he yelled. Then something odd happened—Rockefeller
agreed to this and got Clark and Andrews to affirm that they were all
in favor of dissolving the partnership. He did this without the slightest
trace of anger or resentment.
Clark had played a lot of poker, and he felt certain Rockefeller was
bluffing, trying to force his hand. If he refused to budge on the young
man’s desire to expand the business, Rockefeller would have to back
down. He could not afford to be on his own; he needed Clark more
than the other way around. He would be forced to realize his rashness
and ask to resume the partnership. In doing so, Rockefeller would be
humbled. Clark could set the terms and demand that Rockefeller
follow his lead.
To his amazement, however, the next day Clark read in the local
newspaper the announcement of the dissolution of their business, the
notice obviously placed there by Rockefeller himself. When Clark
confronted him later that day, Rockefeller calmly replied he was
merely putting into action what they had agreed upon the day before,
that it had been Clark’s idea to start with, and that he thought Clark
was right. He suggested they hold an auction and sell the company to
the highest bidder. Something about his dull, businesslike manner was
infuriating. At this point, agreeing to the auction was not the worst
option. Clark would outbid him and be rid of this insufferable upstart
once and for all.
On the day of the auction in February 1865, Clark used a lawyer to
represent his side, while Rockefeller represented himself, yet another
sign of his arrogance and lack of sophistication. The price kept ticking
upward, and finally Rockefeller bid $72,500, a rather ridiculous and
shocking price to pay, a sum that Clark could not possibly afford. How
would Rockefeller have so much money, and how could he possibly
run this business without Clark? He clearly had lost any business
sense that he had had. If that was what he was willing to pay, and he
had the funds, let him have it and good riddance. As part of the sale,
Rockefeller got the refinery but had to let go of the produce business
with no compensation. Clark was more than satisfied, although it
bothered him that Andrews had decided to go along with Rockefeller
and remain his partner.
In the months to come, however, Maurice Clark began to reassess
what had happened: he started to have the uneasy feeling that
Rockefeller had been planning this for months, perhaps more than a
year. Rockefeller must have courted bankers and secured bank loans
well before the auction, to be able to afford the high price. He must
have also secured Andrews to his side in advance. He could detect a
gloating look in Rockefeller’s eye the day the refinery became his,
something he had never seen before in the sober young man. Was that
quiet and dull appearance of his merely an act? As the years revealed
the immense wealth Rockefeller would accumulate through this first
move, Clark could not help but entertain the thought he had somehow
been played.
—
Colonel Oliver H. Payne was the equivalent of Cleveland aristocracy.
He came from an illustrious family that included one of the founders
of the city itself. He had attended Yale University and had become a
decorated Civil War hero. And after the war he had started several
successful business enterprises. He had one of the finest mansions in
town on Euclid Avenue, nicknamed Millionaire’s Row. But he had
larger ambitions, perhaps politics; he thought of himself as
presidential material.
One of his thriving businesses was a refinery, which was the second
biggest in town. But toward the end of 1871, Payne began to hear
strange rumors of some kind of agreement between a few refinery
owners and the largest railroads: the railroads would lower their rates
for the particular refineries that had joined this secret organization, in
exchange for a guaranteed volume of traffic. Those outside this
organization would find their rates rising, making business difficult if
not impossible. And the chief refinery owner, and the only one in
Cleveland, behind this agreement was apparently none other than
John D. Rockefeller.
Rockefeller had expanded to two refineries in Cleveland and had
renamed the company Standard Oil. Standard Oil was now the
country’s largest refining business, but the competition remained stiff,
even within Cleveland and its now twenty-eight refineries, including
those of Standard Oil. Because of this booming business, more and
more millionaires had built their mansions on Euclid Avenue. But if
Rockefeller controlled entrée into this new organization, he could do
great damage to his competitors. It was in the midst of these rumors
that Rockefeller arranged for a very private meeting between him and
Payne at a Cleveland bank.
Payne knew Rockefeller well. They had been born two weeks apart,
had gone to the same high school, and lived near each other on Euclid
Avenue. He admired Rockefeller’s business savvy but also feared him.
Rockefeller was the kind of man who could not stand to lose in
anything. If someone passed him by in a horse-drawn carriage,
Rockefeller would have to whip his horses and overtake it. They
worshipped in the same church; Payne knew he was a man of high
principle, but he was also quite mysterious and secretive.
In their meeting, Rockefeller confided in Payne: he was the first
outsider to be told of the existence of this secret organization, to be
called the Southern Improvement Company (SIC). Rockefeller claimed
it was the railroads that had come up with the idea of the SIC to
increase their profits, and that he had really had no choice but to enter
into the agreement. He did not invite Payne to join the SIC. Instead he
offered to buy out Payne’s refinery at a very nice price, to give Payne a
hefty amount of Standard Oil stock that would certainly mint him a
fortune, and to bring him in as a high-level executive with an
illustrious title. He would make far more money this way than by
trying to compete with Standard Oil.
Rockefeller said all of this in the politest tone. He was going to keep
expanding and bring some much-needed order to the anarchic oil
industry. It was a crusade of his, and he was inviting Payne to be a
fellow crusader from within Standard Oil. It was a compelling way to
present his case, but Payne hesitated. He had moments of
exasperation in dealing with this unpredictable business, but he had
not thought of selling the refinery. It was all so sudden. Sensing his
indecision, Rockefeller gave him a look of great sympathy and offered
Payne the chance to examine Standard Oil’s ledgers, to convince him
of the futility of resistance. Payne could hardly turn that down, and
what he saw in a few short hours astounded him: Standard Oil had
considerably higher profit margins than his own. Nobody had
suspected to what extent Standard Oil was outpacing its rivals. For
Payne, it was enough, and he accepted Rockefeller’s offer.
News of the sale of Payne’s refinery, as well as the growing rumors
of the existence of the SIC, completely rattled the other refinery
owners in town. With Payne’s refinery in his pocket, Rockefeller was in
a very strong position.
Within weeks, J. W. Fawcett of Fawcett and Critchley, another
major refinery in town, received a visit from Rockefeller. His pitch was
ever so slightly more ominous than what he had delivered to Payne:
the business was too unpredictable; Cleveland was farther away from
the oil-producing towns, and the refiners had to pay more for crude oil
to be shipped there; they were at a continual disadvantage; with the
prices of oil continuing to fluctuate, many of them would go bust;
Rockefeller was going to consolidate them and give Cleveland some
leverage with the railroads; he was doing them all a favor, relieving
them of the tremendous burdens of the business and giving them
money before they went broke, which with the SIC was certain to
happen.
The price he offered for Fawcett’s refinery was certainly less
generous than what he had paid Payne, as were the shares and the
position within Standard Oil that went along with the proposition, and
Fawcett was quite reluctant to sell, but a glance at Standard Oil’s
books overwhelmed him, and he surrendered to Rockefeller’s terms.
Now more and more refinery owners received a visit from
Rockefeller, and one after another succumbed to the pressure, since
holding out put them in a weaker negotiating position, as the price
Rockefeller offered for their refineries kept getting lower. One holdout
owner was Isaac Hewitt, Rockefeller’s former boss when he was a
fledgling bookkeeper. Selling the refinery at such a low price could
ruin Hewitt. He begged Rockefeller for mercy and to be left alone with
his business. Rockefeller, ever gentle and polite, told him that he could
not possibly compete with Standard Oil moving forward. “I have ways
of making money you know nothing about,” he explained. Hewitt sold
his refinery for more than half the price he had wanted.
By the middle of March, the existence of the SIC had become public
and the pressure had mounted for such an organization to be
disbanded or suffer legal consequences. The railroads relented, and so
did Rockefeller, who did not seem all that upset at this news. The
matter was settled, the SIC disappeared, but in the months to come
some people in Cleveland began to wonder if all was not what it had
appeared to be. The SIC had never really taken effect; it had remained
just a rumor, and Standard Oil, it seemed, was the principal source of
that rumor. In the meantime, Rockefeller had effected what had
become known as the Cleveland Massacre—in just a few months, he
had bought out twenty of the twenty-six refineries outside his control.
Many elegant mansions of former millionaires on Euclid Avenue were
now being sold or boarded up, as Rockefeller had carefully knocked
them out of the business. He had acted as if the railroads were calling
all the shots with the SIC, but perhaps it had been the other way
around.
—
In the years to come, those in the railroad business began to greatly
fear the growing power of Standard Oil. After the Cleveland Massacre,
Rockefeller applied the same tactics to refineries in Pittsburgh,
Philadelphia, and New York. His method was always the same: aiming
first for the biggest refineries in the respective town, showing them his
books, which were now even more impressive, getting a few big fish to
surrender, and instilling panic in the others. Those who held out he
would ruthlessly undersell and drive out of the market. By 1875,
Rockefeller controlled all of the major refining centers in the United
States and virtually monopolized the worldwide market for kerosene,
the principal product used for lighting.
Such power gave him far too much leverage over railroad rates, but
to make matters worse, Rockefeller had begun to dominate the
pipeline business, the other way of transporting oil. He built up a
whole series of pipelines throughout Pennsylvania and had gained
control of several railroads that helped ship the oil the rest of the way
to the East Coast, giving him his own transportation networks. If he
continued unimpeded in this campaign, his position would be
impregnable. And nobody was more afraid of this prospect than Tom
Scott, president of the Pennsylvania Railroad, at the time the largest
and most powerful corporation in America.
Scott had led a most distinguished life. During the Civil War, he
had served as Lincoln’s assistant secretary of war, in charge of
ensuring the smooth functioning of the railroads in aiding the North’s
effort. As head of the Pennsylvania Railroad, he had ambitions of
endlessly expanding the company’s reach, but Rockefeller stood in the
way, and it was time to do battle with Standard Oil.
Scott had all the necessary resources to take on Rockefeller, and he
had a plan. For the past few years, anticipating Rockefeller’s
maneuvers, he had built up his own enormous network of pipelines
that would work in conjunction with his railroad to move oil to
refineries. He would ramp up the construction of new pipelines and
purchase new refineries that sprang up, creating his own rival
network, ensuring his railroad enough business to check Rockefeller’s
progress, then work to weaken him further. But as it became clear
what he was up to, Rockefeller’s response was totally unexpected and
rather shocking: Standard Oil shut down almost all its Pennsylvania
refineries, giving Scott’s pipelines and railroads virtually no oil to ship.
If they managed to get their hands on some oil, Rockefeller rigorously
undersold them to any refineries outside his system, and he seemed to
not care how low the price would go. He also made it hard for Scott to
get his hands on the oil the company needed to lubricate train engines
and wheels.
Pennsylvania Railroad had overextended itself in this campaign
and was losing money at a rapid rate, but Rockefeller had to be losing
just as much. He seemed to be aiming for mutual suicide. Scott was in
too deep to back out of this war, and so he was forced to cut costs by
firing hundreds of railroad workers and reducing wages for those who
remained. Scott’s workers retaliated with a general railroad strike that
quickly turned violent and bloody, as workers spread throughout the
state destroying thousands of Pennsylvania Railroad freight cars. Scott
retaliated brutally, but the strike persisted and the shareholders in the
Pennsylvania Railroad were growing quite nervous. All the while,
Rockefeller seemed unperturbed and continued with his pressure
campaign, as if he had nothing to lose.
Scott had had enough. Somehow Rockefeller could absorb these
huge losses, but he could not. He had literally run out of money. Not
only did he agree to put a stop to his campaign, but he had to sell to
Rockefeller the lion’s share of his refineries, storage tanks, steamships,
and pipelines. Scott would never recover from this humiliating and
rather sudden defeat: a year later he suffered a stroke, and within a
few years he died at the age of fifty-eight.
—
Although it appeared that Rockefeller’s control of the oil business was
now complete, a businessman and engineer named Byron Benson had
an idea about how to poke a hole in his expanding empire. Rockefeller
could call the shots with his immense resources, but he could not
compete with technological progress. What gave Rockefeller an
advantage was that pipelines were relatively short, at most thirty miles
long. He could dominate by creating pipeline networks all across
Pennsylvania and by controlling many of the railroads operating
between the refineries and the pipelines. Even if someone had an
independent pipeline, at some point he would depend on Standard Oil
to transport the oil the rest of the way.
What if, however, Benson could design something new—one long,
continuous pipeline that would run from the oil fields of western
Pennsylvania to the Eastern Seaboard? In that way he could deliver oil
directly to the few independent East Coast refineries that remained
and guarantee low prices for them, bypassing Rockefeller’s network.
This would halt Rockefeller’s momentum, and with more of these
long-range pipelines, rivals to Standard Oil could begin to compete on
fairer terms.
It would not be easy. The pipeline would require some novel
engineering to make the oil flow upward over the hills and mountains
that would inevitably be in the way, but Benson had been working on
this. And because Rockefeller had made so many enemies and so many
feared his growing monopoly, Benson was able to raise very large
sums of money from investors, more than enough to cover the high
cost of building such a pipeline.
Benson named his enterprise the Tidewater Pipeline Company, and
in 1878 construction began. But almost immediately he had to deal
with an insidious campaign to halt the work on the pipeline. Benson
depended on railroad tank cars to transport the heavy materials to the
construction site, but it seemed that over the years Rockefeller had
bought up the lion’s share of such cars and had virtually cornered the
market. Wherever he turned to find tank cars, Benson ran into
Standard Oil subsidiaries that controlled them. Benson had to find
other means of moving the material, and this added to his costs and
wasted valuable time. All of this only made him more determined to
finish the job and outwit Rockefeller.
This, however, was only the beginning. Benson needed to make his
route to the sea as easy as possible, to save money, and that would
mean running it through Maryland. But now word reached him that,
through lots of generous bribes, Rockefeller had gotten the Maryland
legislature to give an exclusive pipeline charter to Standard Oil. This
meant Tidewater would have to pass through the hillier and even
mountainous areas farther north in Pennsylvania, making the route
more circuitous and the job more expensive.
Then, however, came the most threatening blow of all: Rockefeller
suddenly went on a real estate buying spree, purchasing large tracts of
farmland in Pennsylvania, right in the way of Tidewater’s advance to
the sea. No price seemed too high for Standard Oil to pay. Benson did
what he could to fight back and buy his own land, but rumors began to
spread among the farmers in the area of the danger if they sold parts
of their land to Tidewater—being so long, the pipeline would be
subject to leaks that could ruin their crops. Clearly, Standard Oil was
the source of the rumors, and they had an effect.
To Benson, Rockefeller was like a relentless, invisible demon
attacking him from all directions, ratcheting up the costs and the
pressure. But Benson could be just as relentless. If Rockefeller bought
out an entire valley, Benson made the pipeline change course, even if it
meant going over more hills. The route became a ridiculous zigzag, but
the pipeline kept inching its way east and finally reached the coast in
May of 1879.
Once the pipeline went into operation, however, no one could
predict if its elaborate pumping system could move the oil up steep
climbs. Slowly the first flow of crude oil made its way through the
pipeline, ascending even the highest mountain, and after seven days
the first drops reached the end point. The Tidewater Pipeline was
considered one of the great engineering feats of the day, and Benson
became an overnight hero. Finally someone had outwitted and
outfought Standard Oil.
To Benson’s amazement, however, Rockefeller now only ratcheted
up the pressure. Tidewater had bled money and had little left in
reserve, but here was Rockefeller drastically reducing rates on
Standard Oil’s own pipelines and railroads, transporting oil virtually
for free. Tidewater could not find a drop of oil to ship, and this was
bringing the company to its knees. By March of 1880 Benson had had
enough, and he struck a deal with Standard Oil on the most favorable
terms he could get, joining the two companies. But this was only a
preliminary move. In the months to come, Rockefeller bought up more
and more shares in Tidewater, bringing it completely under his
control. Like so many others before him, in trying to fight against
Rockefeller, Benson had only made him stronger and more invincible.
How could anyone hope to fight against such an indomitable force?
—
In the 1880s the demand for kerosene to light houses and offices
exploded, and Rockefeller controlled the market. And in cities and
towns across America, local grocers and retailers began to notice a
revolutionary new system introduced by Standard Oil. The company
had set up storage tanks in all corners of the country and financed
tank wagons to transport the kerosene to almost every town. Not only
would Standard Oil salesmen personally sell the company’s kerosene
to stores, but they would also go from house to house, selling heaters
and stoves directly to homeowners, at the lowest prices.
This threatened the business of many local retailers, and when they
protested, Standard Oil representatives would tell them that they
would stop the practice if the retailers sold exclusively Standard Oil
products. For those who refused, Standard Oil would start its own
grocery store in the area and, with cheap prices, drive the rebellious
store owners out of business. In some areas, furious retailers would
turn to a rival company, such as Republic Oil, which specialized in
selling to retailers who hated Rockefeller. Little did they know that
Standard Oil had secretly set up and owned Republic Oil.
With all of these practices Rockefeller had created a growing
number of enemies, but none of them was as dogged and fanatical as
George Rice, a man who had managed to maintain a small,
independent refinery in Ohio. He tried to get lawmakers to investigate
the company’s practices. He published a newsletter called Black
Death, which compiled all the muckraking articles on Rockefeller. And
to somehow find a way to make a profit and snub his nose at
Rockefeller, he decided he would personally travel and sell his own oil
in several towns, bypassing the new system that had cornered the
market.
It was hard to imagine that Standard Oil could possibly care about
him; the amount of oil he was trying to sell was miniscule and his
success was quite limited. But when he managed to sell a mere seventy
barrels of kerosene to a retailer in Louisville, suddenly he learned that
the railroad that had agreed, while he was on the road, to ship his oil
to him now refused to carry his product. He knew who was behind
this, but he managed to find other, more expensive means to get
shipments of oil.
He moved to another town near Louisville, only to find Standard
Oil salesmen there who had anticipated his presence and carefully
kept underselling him. He found himself pushed to ever-smaller towns
farther south, but once again there were the Standard Oil men
blocking his way, and soon he could not sell a drop of oil. It was as if
they had spies everywhere and were tracking his progress. But more
than anything, he felt the ubiquitous presence of Rockefeller himself,
who clearly knew of his little campaign and was out to crush this
tiniest of competitors at all costs. Finally realizing what he was truly
up against, Rice gave up the fight and returned home.
—
In the early 1900s, after Rockefeller had resigned as head of Standard
Oil, he began to fascinate the American public. He was by far the
wealthiest man in the world, the first billionaire on the planet, but the
stories of the way he had conducted his battles and the monopoly he
had forged made them wonder about his character. He was a notorious
recluse, and few knew anything concrete about him. Then some among
his many enemies initiated a series of court cases to break up the
Standard Oil monopoly. Rockefeller was forced to testify, and to the
public’s amazement, he was not at all like the devil they had imagined.
As one newspaper writer reported: “He seems the embodiment of
sweetness and light. His serenity could not be disturbed. . . . At times
his manner was mildly reproachful, at others tenderly persuasive, but
never did he betray an ill temper or vexation.”
As he emerged as the world’s most generous philanthropist, and as
the public came to appreciate the cheap oil he provided, they changed
their opinion of him. After all, as the major shareholder in Standard
Oil he had immense influence, and he had agreed to the breakup of the
Standard Oil monopoly. Little did they know that behind the scenes he
operated as he always had done: finding loopholes in the law, keeping
the monopoly together through secret agreements, and maintaining
his control. He would not allow anyone to block his path, and certainly
not the government.
•   •   •
Interpretation: The story of the rise to power of John D. Rockefeller
has to be considered one of the most remarkable in history. In a
relatively short period of time (some twenty years), he rose from the
bottom of society (his family had suffered periods of poverty) to
become the founder and owner of the largest corporation in America,
and shortly after that to emerge as the wealthiest man in the world. In
the process, as so often happens in such cases, his story became
shrouded in all kinds of myths. He was either a demon or a god of
capitalism. But lost in all of these emotional responses is the answer to
a simple question: how did one man—with little help—accumulate so
much power in so little time?
If we examine him closely, we must conclude that it wasn’t through
supreme intelligence or some particular talent or creative vision. He
had some of those qualities, but nothing strong enough to account for
his outrageous success. In truth, what we can attribute it to more than
anything is the sheer relentless force of will that he possessed to
utterly dominate every situation and rival he encountered, and to
exploit every opportunity that crossed his path. We shall call this
aggressive energy. Such energy can have productive purposes (see the
last section in the chapter for more on this), and certainly Rockefeller
had some achievements that benefited the society of his time. But as so
often happens with highly aggressive people, this energy pushed him
to monopolize virtually all power in a complex industry. It made him
wipe out all rivals and any possible competition, bend laws to his
benefit, standardize all practices according to his desires, and in the
end, depress innovation in the field.
Let us divorce Rockefeller’s story from the usual emotional
responses and simply look at him dispassionately, as a kind of
specimen to help us understand the nature of highly aggressive
individuals and what makes large numbers of people submit to their
will. In this way we can also learn some valuable lessons about human
nature and how we can begin to counter those who continually work to
monopolize power, often to the detriment of the rest of us.
Rockefeller grew up in peculiar circumstances. His father, William,
was a notorious con artist. And from the very beginning, the father set
a rather unpleasant pattern for the family: He would leave his wife,
Eliza, and four children (John being the eldest) for months on end in
their flimsy cabin in western New York and travel the region plying his
various con games. During this time, the family would have barely
enough money to survive. Eliza had to find a way to make every penny
count. Then the father would reappear with wads of cash and gifts for
the family. He was amusing (a great storyteller) but at times rather
cruel and even violent. Then he would leave again, and the pattern
would reset. It was impossible to predict when he would return, and
the members of the family were continually on edge when he was there
and when he was not.
As a teenager, John had to go to work to help bring some stability
to the family’s finances. And as he advanced in his career, he could not
escape the anxieties that had plagued him in his childhood. He had a
desperate need to make everything orderly and predictable in his
environment. He immersed himself deeply in his accounting books—
nothing was more predictable than the pluses and minuses on a ledger
sheet. At the same time, he had great ambitions for making a fortune;
his father had instilled in him an almost visceral love of money.
And so, when he first learned of what could be accomplished with
an oil refinery, he saw his great opportunity. But his attraction to the
oil business may seem at first glance rather strange. It was a Wild
West environment, totally anarchic; fortunes could be made or lost in
a matter of months. In many ways, the oil business was like his father
—exciting, promising sudden riches, but treacherously unpredictable.
Unconsciously he was drawn to it for those very reasons—he could
relive his worst fears from childhood and surmount them by
establishing rigorous control over the oil industry. It would be like
conquering the father himself. The chaos would only spur him to
greater heights, as he would have to work doubly hard to tame its
wildness.
And so, in these first years of business, we can see the motivating
factor that would drive all his subsequent actions—the overwhelming
need for control. The more complicated and difficult this task, the
more relentless the energy he would summon to achieve such a goal.
And out of this need came a second one, almost as important—to
justify his aggressive actions to the world and to himself. Rockefeller
was a deeply religious man. He could not live with the thought that
what drove his actions was a desire to control people and acquire the
vast sums of money necessary for such a purpose. That would have
been to see himself in too ugly and soulless a light.
To repress such a thought, he constructed what we shall call the
aggressor’s narrative. He had to convince himself that his quest for
power served some higher purpose. There was a belief at the time
among Protestants that to make a lot of money was a sign of grace
from God. With wealth, the religious individual could give back to the
community and help support the local parish. But Rockefeller took this
further. He believed that establishing order in the oil business was a
divine mission, like ordering the cosmos. He was on a crusade to bring
cheap prices and predictability to American households. Turning
Standard Oil into a monopoly blended seamlessly with his deep
religious convictions.
Sincerely believing in this crusade, it did not bother his conscience
to ruthlessly manipulate and ruin his rivals, to bribe legislators, to run
roughshod over laws, to form fake rival enterprises to Standard Oil, to
spark and use the violence of a strike (with Pennsylvania Railroad)
that would help him in the long run. Belief in this narrative made him
all the more energetic and aggressive, and for those who faced him, it
could be confusing—perhaps there was some good in what he was
doing; perhaps he was not a demon after all.
Finally, to realize his dream of control, Rockefeller transformed
himself into a superior reader of men and their psychology. And the
most important quality for him to gauge in the various rivals he faced
was their relative willpower and resiliency. He could sense this in
people’s body language and in the patterns of their actions. Most
people, he determined, are rather weak. They are mostly led by their
emotions, which change by the day. They want things to be rather easy
in life and tend to take the path of least resistance. They don’t have a
stomach for protracted battles. They want money for the pleasures and
comforts it can bring, for their yachts and mansions. They want to look
powerful, to satisfy their ego. Make them afraid or confused or
frustrated, or offer them an easy way out, and they would surrender to
his stronger will. If they got angry, all the better. Anger burns itself out
quickly, and Rockefeller always played for the long term.
Look at how he played each of the antagonists in his path. With
Clark, he carefully fed his arrogance and deliberately made him
irritable, so that he would quickly agree to the auction just to get rid of
Rockefeller, without thinking too deeply about the consequences.
Colonel Payne was a vain and greedy man. Give him plenty of
money and a nice title, and he would be satisfied and surrender to
Rockefeller his refinery. For the other refinery owners, instill fears
about the uncertain future, using the SIC as a convenient bogeyman.
Make them feel isolated and weak, and sow some panic. Yes, his
refineries were more profitable, as shown by his books, but the other
owners failed to reason that Rockefeller himself was just as vulnerable
as they were to the ups and downs of the business. If only they had
united in opposition to his campaign, they could have countered him,
but they were made too emotional to think straight, and they
surrendered their refineries with ease.
When it came to Scott, Rockefeller saw him as a hothead, enraged
by Standard Oil’s threat to his preeminent position in business.
Rockefeller welcomed the war with Scott and prepared for it by
amassing vast amounts of cash. He would simply outlast him. And the
angrier he made Scott with his unorthodox tactics, the more
imprudent and rash Scott became, going so far as to try to crush the
railroad strike, which only made his position weaker. With Benson,
Rockefeller recognized the type—the man enamored with his own
brilliance and wanting attention as the first one to defeat Standard Oil.
Putting up obstacles in his path would only make him try harder, while
weakening his finances. It would be simple to buy him off in the end,
when he had grown tired of Rockefeller’s relentless pressure.
As an extra measure, Rockefeller would always strategize to make
his opponents feel rushed and impatient. Clark had only one day to
plan for the auction. The refinery owners faced imminent doom in a
few months unless they sold to him. Scott and Benson had to hurry up
in their battles or face running out of money. This made them more
emotional and less able to strategize.
Understand: Rockefeller represents a type of individual that you
will likely come across in your field. We shall call this type the
sophisticated aggressor, as opposed to the primitive aggressor.
Primitive aggressors have very short fuses. If someone triggers in them
feelings of inferiority or weakness, they explode. They lack any self-
control, and so they tend to not get very far in life, inevitably bullying
and hurting too many people. Sophisticated aggressors are much
trickier. They rise to top positions and can stay there because they
know how to cloak their maneuvers, to present a distracting façade,
and to play upon people’s emotions. They know that most people do
not like confrontation or long struggles, and so they can intimidate or
wear people down. They depend on our docility as much as on their
own aggression.
The sophisticated aggressors that you encounter do not have to be
as spectacularly successful as a Rockefeller. They can be your boss, a
rival, or even a scheming colleague on the way up. You can recognize
them by one simple sign: they get to where they’re going primarily
through their aggressive energy, not through their particular talents.
They value amassing power more than the quality of their work. They
do whatever is necessary to secure their position and crush any kind of
competition or challenge. They do not like to share power.
In dealing with this type, you will tend to become angry or fearful,
enlarging their presence and playing into their hands. You obsess over
their evil character and fail to pay close attention to what they are
actually up to. What you often end up surrendering to is the
appearance or illusion of strength that they project, their aggressive
reputation. The way to handle them is to lower the emotional
temperature. Start by looking at the individual, not the myth or
legend. Understand their primary motivation—to gain control over the
environment and the people around them. As with Rockefeller, this
need for control covers up vast layers of anxieties and insecurities. You
must see the frightened child within, terrified by anything
unpredictable. In this way you can cut them down to size, diminishing
their ability to intimidate you.
They want to control your thoughts and reactions. Deny them this
power by focusing on their actions and your strategies, not your
feelings. Analyze and anticipate their real goals. They want to instill in
you the idea that you have no options, that surrender is inevitable and
the best way out. But you always have options. Even if they are your
boss and you must surrender in the present, you can maintain your
inner independence and plot for the day in which they make a mistake
and are weakened, using your knowledge of their vulnerable points to
help take them down.
See through their narrative and their shrewd attempts at
distraction. They will often present themselves as holier-than-thou or
as the victim of other people’s malice. The louder they proclaim their
convictions, the more certain you can be they’re hiding something. Be
aware that they can sometimes seem charming and charismatic. Do
not be mesmerized by such appearances. Look at their patterns of
behavior. If they have taken from people in the past, they will continue
to do so in the present. Never bring on such types as partners, no
matter how friendly and charming they might seem. They like to
piggyback on your hard work, then wrest control. Your realistic
appraisal of their actual strength and their aggressive intentions is
your best defense.
When it comes to taking action against aggressors, you must be as
sophisticated and crafty as they are. Do not try to fight with them
directly. They are too relentless, and they usually have enough power
to overwhelm you in direct confrontation. You must outwit them,
finding unexpected angles of attack. Threaten to expose the hypocrisy
in their narrative or the past dirty deeds they have tried to keep hidden
from the public. Make it seem that a battle with you will be costlier
than they had imagined, that you are also willing to play a little dirty,
but only in defense. If you are particularly clever, appear relatively
weak and exposed, baiting them into a rash attack that you have
prepared for. Often the wisest strategy is to band together with others
who have suffered at their hands, creating strength and leverage in
numbers.
Keep in mind that aggressors often get their way because you fear
that in fighting them, you have too much to lose in the present. But
you must calculate instead what you have to lose in the long term—
decreasing options for power and expansion in your own field, once
they assume a dominating position; your own dignity and sense of
self-worth by not standing up to them. Surrender and docility can
become a habit with devastating consequences for your well-being.
Use the existence of aggressors as a spur to your own fighting spirit
and to build your own confidence. Standing up to and outwitting
aggressors can be one of the most satisfying and ennobling
experiences we humans can have.
Men are not gentle, friendly creatures wishing for love, who
simply defend themselves if attacked. . . . A powerful desire for
aggression has to be reckoned as part of their . . . endowment.
—Sigmund Freud
Keys to Human Nature
We like to think of ourselves as relatively peaceful and agreeable
members of society. We are social animals to the core, and we need to
convince ourselves that we are loyal to and cooperative with the
communities we belong to. But on occasion, all of us have acted in
ways that go against this self-opinion. Perhaps it came in a moment
when we felt that our job security was threatened, or that someone was
blocking our career advancement. Or perhaps we believed we were not
getting the attention and recognition that we deserved for our work.
Or maybe it came in a moment of financial insecurity. Or perhaps it
occurred in an intimate relationship in which we felt particularly
frustrated in our attempt to get the other to change his or her
behavior, or we sensed that he or she was going to abandon us.
Out of frustration, anger, insecurity, fear, or impatience we
suddenly found ourselves becoming unusually assertive. We did
something a bit extreme to hold on to our job; we tried to push a
colleague out of our way; we reached for some dubious scheme to
secure easy and fast money; we went too far in trying to get attention;
we turned belligerent and controlling with our partner; we became
vindictive and attacked someone on social media. In such moments,
we crossed a line and became aggressive. Most often, when we act this
way, we rationalize our behavior to ourselves and to others: we had no
choice; we felt threatened; we were being treated unfairly; people were
being unresponsive and harming us; we did not start it. In this way we
are able to maintain our self-opinion as the peaceful creatures we
imagine ourselves to be.
Although we will rarely notice this, we can also observe a subtler
example of our aggressive tendencies coming to the fore. When we
face intimidating types who are more aggressive than we are, we often
find ourselves acting more submissive than usual, and maybe a bit
sycophantic if they have power. But when we face people clearly
weaker and meeker than us, often the lion in us unconsciously
emerges. Perhaps we decide to help them, but mixed in with this is a
feeling of contempt and superiority. We become rather aggressive in
trying to help them, ordering their life, being forceful with our advice.
Or if we have little sympathy for them, we might feel compelled to use
them in some way for our own purposes, and maybe push them
around. All of this occurs unconsciously; we generally do not
experience this as aggressiveness, but nonetheless, as we compare our
inner strength with others’, we cannot help but lower and raise our
aggression level.
We can notice this split—between what we think of ourselves and
how we actually act at times—in the behavior of our friends,
colleagues, and those in the news. In our workplace, inevitably certain
people push their way forward and grab more power. Perhaps they
take credit for our work, or steal our ideas, or push us off a project, or
ally themselves rather vigorously with those in power. We can see on
social media the delight people take in feeling outraged, in attacking
and bringing down others. We can see the energy with which the press
exposes the slightest flaw in those in power, and the feeding frenzy
that ensues. We can observe the rampant violence in our films and
games, all masquerading as entertainment. And all the while nobody
admits to being aggressive. In fact, more than ever people seem so
modest and progressive. The split is profound.
What this means is the following: All of us understand that humans
have been capable of much violence and aggression in the past and in
the present. We know that out there in the world there are sinister
criminals, greedy and unscrupulous businesspeople, belligerent
negotiators, and sexual aggressors. But we create a sharp dividing line
between those examples and us. We have a powerful block against
imagining any kind of continuum or spectrum when it comes to our
own aggressive moments and those of the more extreme variety in
others. We in fact define the word to describe the stronger
manifestations of aggression, excluding ourselves. It is always the
other who is belligerent, who starts things, who is aggressive.
This is a profound misconception of human nature. Aggression is a
tendency that is latent in every single human individual. It is a
tendency wired into our species. We became the preeminent animal on
this planet precisely because of our aggressive energy, supplemented
by our intelligence and cunning. We cannot separate this
aggressiveness from the way we attack problems, alter the
environment to make our lives easier, fight injustice, or create
anything on a large scale. The Latin root of the word aggression
means “to step forward,” and when we assert ourselves in this world
and try to create or change anything, we are tapping into this energy.
Aggression can serve positive purposes. At the same time, under
certain circumstances, this energy can push us into antisocial
behavior, into grabbing too much or pushing people around. These
positive and negative aspects are two sides of the same coin. And
although some individuals are clearly more aggressive than others, all
of us are capable of slipping into that negative side. There is a
continuum of human aggression, and we are all on the spectrum.
Being unaware of our true nature causes us many problems. We
can turn aggressive in the negative sense without realizing what is
happening, and then pay the consequences for going too far. Or,
feeling uncomfortable with our own assertive impulses and knowing
the trouble they can stir, we might try to repress our aggressiveness
and appear to be paragons of humility and goodness, only to become
more passive-aggressive in our behavior. This energy cannot be denied
or repressed; it will emerge in some way. But with awareness, we can
begin to control and channel it for productive and positive purposes.
To do so, we must understand the source of all human aggression, how
it turns negative, and why some people become more aggressive than
others.
The Source of Human Aggression
Unlike any other animal, we humans are aware of our own mortality,
and that we could die at any moment. Consciously and unconsciously
this thought haunts us throughout our lives. We are aware that our
position in life is never secure—we can lose our job, our social status,
and our money, often for reasons beyond our control. The people
around us are equally unpredictable—we can never read their
thoughts, anticipate their actions, or totally rely on their support. We
are dependent on others, who often don’t come through. We have
certain innate desires for love, excitement, and stimulation, and it is
often beyond our control to satisfy these desires in the way we would
like. In addition, we all have certain insecurities that stem from
wounds in our childhood. If events or people trigger these insecurities
and reopen old wounds, we feel particularly vulnerable and weak.
What this means is that we humans are continually plagued by
feelings of helplessness that come from many sources. If this feeling is
strong enough or lasts for too long, it can become unbearable. We are
willful creatures who crave power. This desire for power is not evil or
antisocial; it is a natural response to the awareness of our essential
weakness and vulnerability. In essence, what drives much of our
behavior is to have control over circumstances, to feel the connection
between what we do and what we get—to feel that we can influence
people and events to some extent. This mitigates our sense of
helplessness and makes the unpredictability of life tolerable.
We satisfy this need by developing solid work skills that help us
secure our career status and give us a feeling of control over the future.
We also try to develop social skills that allow us to work with other
people, earn their affection, and have a degree of influence over them.
When it comes to our needs for excitement and stimulation, we
generally choose to satisfy them through various activities—sports,
entertainment, seduction—that our culture provides or accepts.
All of these activities help us to have the control that we crave, but
they require that we recognize certain limits. To gain such power in
our work and relationships, we must be patient. We cannot force
things. It takes time to secure our career position, to develop genuine
creative powers, to learn how to influence people and charm them. It
also requires abiding by certain social codes and even laws. We cannot
do just anything to get ahead in our careers; we cannot force people to
do our bidding. We can call these codes and laws guardrails that we
carefully stay within in order to gain power while remaining liked and
respected.
In certain moments, however, we find it hard to accept these limits.
We cannot advance in our careers or make a lot of money as quickly as
we would like. We cannot get people to work with us to the degree that
we want them to, so we feel frustrated. Or perhaps an old wound from
childhood is suddenly reopened. If we anticipate that a partner could
be ending the relationship, and we have a great fear of being
abandoned stemming from parental coldness, we could easily
overreact and try to control him or her, using all of our manipulative
powers and turning quite aggressive. (Feelings of love often turn to
hostility and aggression in people, because it is in love that we feel
most dependent, vulnerable, and helpless.)
In these cases, our hunger for more money, power, love, or
attention overwhelms any patience we might have had. We might then
be tempted to go outside the guardrails, to seek power and control in a
way that violates tacit codes and even laws. But for most of us, when
we cross the line, we feel uncomfortable and perhaps remorseful. We
scurry back to within the guardrails, to our normal ways of trying for
power and control. Such aggressive acts can occur at moments in our
lives, but they do not become a pattern.
This is not the case, however, with more chronically aggressive
types. The sense of helplessness or frustration that we may feel upon
occasion plagues them more deeply and more often. They feel
chronically insecure and fragile and must cover this with an inordinate
amount of power and control. Their need for power is too immediate
and strong for them to accept the limits, and overrides any sense of
compunction or social responsibility.
It is possible that there is a genetic component to this. The
psychoanalyst Melanie Klein, who specialized in the study of infants,
noticed that some babies were decidedly more anxious and greedier
than others. From their very first days, they would suckle on the
mother’s breast as if they were attacking it and wanting to suck it dry.
They needed more coddling and attention than others. Their crying
and tantrums were almost impossible to stop. They felt a higher
degree of helplessness that verged on continual hysteria.
Such babies were in the minority, but she noticed them often
enough. She speculated that those who are chronically aggressive
could be adult versions of the greedy baby. They are simply born with
a greater need to control everything around them. They brood more
over feelings of hurt or envy—“Why should other people have more
than me?” When they feel like they are losing control to any degree,
their tendency is to exaggerate the threat, to overreact and grab for
much more than is necessary.
It is also true that early family life can play a decisive role.
According to the psychoanalyst and writer Erich Fromm, if parents are
too domineering, if they repress their children’s need for power and
independence, such children are often the types who later like to
dominate and tyrannize others. If they were beaten as children, they
often resort to beating and physical abuse as adults. In this way, they
turn the enforced passivity in their childhood into something active as
adults, giving them the feeling of control they sorely lacked in their
earliest years, through aggressive behavior.
Whatever the cause of their tendencies, these types do not scurry
back within the guardrails but rather continually resort to aggressive
behavior. They have an unusually strong will and little patience to
satisfy their desires through the socially acceptable channels. They
find the normal ways of gaining stimulation too dull. They need
something stronger and more immediate. If they are the primitive
type, they may turn to criminal behavior or simply become the overt
bully; if they are more sophisticated, they will learn to control this
behavior to some extent and use it when necessary.
What this means is that human aggression stems from an
underlying insecurity, as opposed to simply an impulse to hurt or take
from others. Before any impulse to take aggressive action, aggressors
are unconsciously processing feelings of helplessness and anxiety.
They often perceive threats that are not really there, or exaggerate
them. They take action to preempt the perceived attack of another, or
to grab for things in order to dominate a situation they feel may elude
their control. (Such feelings also provoke the positive type of
aggression as well. Feeling the need to fight an injustice or create
something important is preceded by feelings of anxiety and insecurity.
It remains an attempt at control for positive purposes.) When we look
at any chronic aggressor around us, we must search for the underlying
insecurity, the deep wound, the reverberating feelings of helplessness
from their earliest years.
We can notice the following interesting phenomenon: people who
are domineering often are extremely intolerant of any kind of dissent.
They need to be surrounded by sycophants and constantly be
reminded of their greatness and superiority. If such types have
political power, they work to tamp down any negative publicity and
control what people say about them. We must see this hypersensitivity
to criticism as a sign of great inner weakness. A person who is truly
strong from within can endure criticism and open discussion without
feeling personally threatened. Generally, aggressors and authoritarian
types are expert at concealing this profound inner weakness by
constantly projecting toughness and conviction. But we must train
ourselves to look past their façade and see the inner fragility. This can
greatly help us control any feelings of fear or intimidation, which
aggressors love to stimulate.
There are other qualities of the chronically aggressive that we must
understand. First, aggressors have less tolerance for feelings of
helplessness and anxiety than the rest of us. What might cause us to
feel frustrated or insecure will often trigger in them a much more
powerful reaction, and rage. This is perhaps why chronic aggression is
much more common among men than women. Men find it harder to
manage feelings of dependency and helplessness, something
psychologists have noted in male infants. Men are generally more
insecure about their status in the work world and elsewhere. They
have a greater need to continually assert themselves and gauge their
effect on others. Their self-esteem is tied to feelings of power, control,
and respect for their opinions. And so it often takes less to trigger the
aggressive response in men. In any event, we must always be aware
that the chronic aggressor is more thin-skinned than we are, and if we
know we are dealing with this type, we must be particularly careful to
not inadvertently trigger their rage response by challenging their self-
esteem or criticizing them.
Another common aspect of aggressive behavior is that it can easily
become an addiction. In acting out their desires in an overt and
immediate way, in getting the best of people through their maneuvers,
aggressors receive a jolt of adrenaline that can become addictive. They
feel stimulated and excited, and the more socially acceptable ways of
relieving boredom can seem tepid in comparison. (Certainly the thrill
of getting easy money, whether as Wall Street brokers peddling
dubious investments or as criminals stealing what they can, has an
immensely addictive quality.) At first glance, this might seem self-
destructive, as each aggressive outburst creates more enemies and
unintended consequences. But aggressors are often adept at upping
the ante with even more intimidating behavior, so that few will
challenge them.
This often leads to the phenomenon of the aggressor’s trap: the
more power they get, and the larger their empire, the more points of
vulnerability they create; they have more rivals and enemies to worry
about. This sparks in them the need to be more and more aggressive
and gain more and more power. (Certainly Rockefeller fell victim to
this dynamic.) They also come to feel that to stop acting in this way
would make them seem weak. No matter what aggressors might say to
us or how they try to disguise their intentions, we must realize that
their past pattern of behavior will inevitably continue in the present,
because they are both addicted and trapped. We must never be naive
in dealing with them. They will be relentless. If they take a step back, it
is only momentary. They are rarely capable of changing this essential
pattern in their behavior.
We must also be aware that aggressors see the people around them
as objects to use. They might have some natural empathy, but because
their need for power and control is so strong, they cannot be patient
enough to rely solely upon charm and social skills. To get what they
want, they have to use people, and this becomes a habit that degrades
any empathy they once had. They need adherents and disciples, so
they train themselves to listen, to occasionally praise others, and to do
favors for people. The charm they may display upon occasion,
however, is only for effect and has little human warmth to it. When
they are listening to us, they are gauging the strength of our will and
seeing how we can serve their purposes down the road. If they praise
us or do us a favor, it is a way to further entrap and compromise us.
We can see this in the nonverbal cues, in the eyes that look through us,
in how thinly they are engaged in our stories. We must always try to
make ourselves immune to any attempt at charm on their part,
knowing what purpose it serves.
It is interesting to note that despite all of the socially negative
qualities that aggressors inevitably reveal, they are frequently able to
attract enough followers to help them in their quest for power. The
people who are attracted to such aggressors often have their own deep-
seated issues, their own frustrated aggressive desires. They find the
confidence and sometimes brazenness of the aggressor quite exciting
and appealing. They fall in love with the narrative. They become
infected with the leader’s aggression and get to act it out on others,
perhaps those below them. But such an environment is tiring, and
those serving the aggressor are constantly taking hits to their self-
esteem. With most aggressors, the turnover is high and the morale
low. As the ancient Greek dramatist Sophocles once wrote, “Whoever
makes his way into a tyrant’s court becomes his slave, although he
went there a free man.”
—
Your task as a student of human nature is threefold: First, you must
stop denying the reality of your own aggressive tendencies. You are on
the aggressive spectrum, like all of us. Of course, there are some
people who are lower down on this spectrum. Perhaps they lack
confidence in their ability to get what they want; or they may simply
have less energy. But a lot of us are in the mid-to-upper range on the
spectrum, with relatively strong levels of will. This assertive energy
must be expended in some way and will tend to go in one of three
directions.
First, we can channel this energy into our work, into patiently
achieving things (controlled aggression). Second, we can channel it
into aggressive or passive-aggressive behavior. Finally, we can turn it
inward in the form of self-loathing, directing our anger and aggression
at our own failings and activating our internal saboteur (more on this
later). You need to analyze how you handle your assertive energy. A
way to judge yourself is to see how you handle moments of frustration
and uncertainty, situations in which you have less control. Do you tend
to lash out, grow angry and tense, and do things you later regret? Or
do you internalize the anger and grow depressed? Look at those
inevitable moments in which you have gone past the guardrails and
analyze them. You are not as peaceful and gentle as you imagine.
Notice what pushed you into this behavior, and how during such times
you found ways to rationalize your behavior. Now, with some distance,
you can perhaps see through those rationalizations.
Your goal is not to repress this assertive energy but to become
aware of it as it drives you forward and to channel it productively. You
need to admit to yourself that you have a deep desire to have an effect
on people, to have power, and to realize this you must develop higher
social and technical skills, must become more patient and resilient.
You need to discipline and tame your natural assertive energy. This is
what we shall call controlled aggression, and it will lead to
accomplishing great things. (For more on this, see the last section of
this chapter.)
Your second task is to make yourself a master observer of
aggression in the people around you. When you look at your work
world, for instance, imagine that you can visualize the continual war
between people’s different levels of will, and all of the intersecting
arrows of such conflicts. Those who are more assertive seem to rise to
the top, but they inevitably display signs of submission to those higher
up. It is not much different from the hierarchies we can observe
among chimpanzees. If you stop focusing on people’s words and the
façade they present, and concentrate on their actions and their
nonverbal cues, you can almost sense the level of aggressiveness they
emanate.
In looking at this phenomenon, it is important that you be tolerant
of people: we have all crossed the line at some point and turned more
aggressive than usual, often because of circumstances. When it comes
to those who are powerful and successful, it is impossible in this world
to reach such heights without higher levels of aggression and some
manipulation. For accomplishing great things, we can forgive them
their occasional harsh and assertive behavior. What you need to
determine is whether you are dealing with chronic aggressors, people
who cannot tolerate criticism or being challenged on any level, whose
desire for control is excessive, and who will swallow you up in their
relentless quest to have more.
Look for some telltale signs. First, if they have an unusually high
number of enemies whom they have accumulated over the years, there
must be a good reason, and not the one they tell you. Pay close
attention to how they justify their actions in the world. Aggressors will
tend to present themselves as crusaders, as some form of genius who
cannot help the way they behave. They are creating great art, they say,
or helping the little man. People who get in their way are infidels and
evil. They will claim, as Rockefeller did, that no one has been criticized
or investigated as much as they have; they are the victims, not the
aggressors. The louder and more extreme their narrative, the more you
can be certain you are dealing with chronic aggressors. Focus on their
actions, their past patterns of behavior, much more than anything they
say.
You can look for subtler signs as well. Chronic aggressors often
have obsessive personalities. Having meticulous habits and creating a
completely predictable environment is their way of holding control.
Obsessing over an object or a person indicates a desire to swallow it
whole. Also, pay attention to the nonverbal cues. We saw with
Rockefeller that he could not stand to be passed by anyone in the
street. The aggressor type will show such physical obsessions—always
front and center. In any event, the earlier you can spot the signs the
better.
Once you realize you are dealing with this type, you must use every
ounce of your energy to disengage mentally, to gain control of your
emotional response. Often what happens when you face aggressors is
that you initially feel mesmerized and even paralyzed to some extent,
as if in the presence of a snake. Then, as you process what they have
done, you become emotional—angry, outraged, frightened. Once you
are in that state, they find it easy to keep you reacting and not
thinking. Your anger doesn’t lead to anything productive but rather
melts into bitterness and frustration over time. Your only answer is to
find a way to detach from their spell, bit by bit. See through their
maneuvers, contemplate the underlying weakness that propels them,
cut them down to size. Always focus on their goals, what they are really
after, and not the distractions they set up.
If battle with them is inevitable, never engage in direct
confrontation or challenge them in an overt way. If they are the
sophisticated type, they will use all their cunning to ruin you, and they
can be relentless. You must always fight them indirectly. Look for the
vulnerabilities they are inevitably covering up. This could be their
dubious reputation, some particularly dirty actions in the past they
have managed to keep secret. Poke holes in their narrative. Through
exposure of what they want to keep hidden, you have a powerful
weapon to scare them out of attacking you. Remember that their
greatest fear is to lose control. Think of what act of yours could
frighten them by setting off a chain reaction of events that might spin
out of control. Make the easy victory they are counting on with you
suddenly seem more expensive.
Aggressors generally have the advantage that they are willing to go
outside the guardrails more often and more widely in fighting you.
This gives them more options, more dirty maneuvers they can surprise
you with. In negotiations, they will hit you with some last-minute
change to what they had agreed upon, violating all rules but knowing
you will give in because you have come this far and don’t want to blow
it up. They will spread rumors and disinformation to muddy the
waters and make you seem as dubious as they are. You must try to
anticipate these manipulations and rob aggressors of the element of
surprise.
And on occasion you yourself must be willing to venture outside the
guardrails as well, knowing this is a temporary and defensive measure.
You can practice deception and distract them, appearing weaker than
you are, baiting them into an attack that will make them look bad and
for which you have prepared a crafty counterattack. You can even
spread rumors that will tend to imbalance their minds, since they are
not used to others playing the same tricks back on them. In any event,
with the stakes being high, you must calculate that defeating
aggressors is more important than maintaining your purity.
Finally, your third task as a student of human nature is to rid
yourself of the denial of the very real aggressive tendencies in human
nature itself and what such aggression might mean for our future as a
species. This denial tends to take the form of one of two myths you are
likely to believe in. The first myth is that long ago we humans were
peace-loving creatures, in harmony with nature and with our fellow
humans. It is the myth of the noble savage, the innocent hunter-
gatherer. The implication is that civilization, along with the
development of private property and capitalism, turned the peaceful
human into an aggressive and selfish creature. Our form of society is
to blame for this, so the myth goes. By developing a more egalitarian
political and social system, we could revert to our natural goodness
and peace-loving nature.
Recent finds in anthropology and archaeology, however, have
proven beyond a shadow of a doubt that our ancestors (going back
tens of thousands of years, well before civilization) engaged in warfare
that was as murderous and brutal as anything in the present. They
were hardly peaceful. There are also numerous examples of indigenous
cultures destroying much of the flora and fauna in their environment
in an endless quest for food sources and shelter, sending many species
into extinction and despoiling entire regions of trees. (For more on
this see War Before Civilization, by Lawrence H. Keeley, and The
Third Chimpanzee, by Jared Diamond.) The great power of humans to
cooperate in these cultures was just as often used to help engage in the
bloodiest of skirmishes.
The other myth, more prevalent today, is that we may have been
violent and aggressive in the past, but that we are currently evolving
beyond this, becoming more tolerant, enlightened, and guided by our
better angels. But the signs of human aggression are just as prevalent
in our era as in the past. We can hold up as evidence the endless cycles
of war, the acts of genocide, and the increasing hostility between states
and ethnicities within states that continue well into this century. The
immense powers of technology have only enhanced our destructive
powers when it comes to war. And our depredation of the environment
has only gotten substantially worse, despite our awareness of the
problem.
We can also take note of the growing levels of inequality in power
and wealth around the globe in recent times, approaching the
disparities that existed centuries ago. Such inequalities continue to
reproduce themselves in human society because inevitably there are
individuals who are simply more aggressive than others when it comes
to accumulating power and wealth. No rules or laws seem to stop this.
The powerful write the rules to benefit themselves. And the
monopolizing tendencies of the nineteenth century, as exemplified by
Standard Oil, signs of corporate aggression, have just reshaped
themselves to fit the newest industries.
In the past, people attended executions as a form of entertainment.
We may not go that far, but more people than ever enjoy watching
others being humiliated on reality shows or in the news, and indulging
in games and movies that delight in graphic depictions of murder and
bloodshed. (We can also see an increasingly aggressive edge to our
humor.)
With technology, it has become easier to express and satisfy our
aggressive desires. Without having to physically face people, on the
internet our arguments and criticisms can become that much more
hostile, heated, and personal. The internet has also created a new and
powerful weapon—cyberwar. As they always have, criminals simply
co-opt technology to become more creative and elusive.
Human aggression simply adapts to the newest media and
technological innovations, finding ways to express and vent itself
through them. Whatever the new invention is in one hundred years for
communication, it will likely suffer the same fate. As Gustave Flaubert
put it, “Speak of progress as much as you want. Even when you take
out the canines of a tiger, and he can only eat gruel, his heart remains
that of a carnivore.”
Human aggression in individuals and in groups tends to emerge or
heat up when we feel helpless and vulnerable, when the impatience for
control and effect rises. And as increasing numbers of people and
groups are feeling this way, we can expect more of this and not less in
the future. Wars will get dirtier. As insecurities rise, there will be more
confrontations between political groups, between cultures, between
generations, between men and women. And there will be even better
and more sophisticated ways for humans to justify their aggression to
themselves and to the world.
The denial is stronger than ever—it is always the other person, the
other side, the other culture that is more aggressive and destructive.
We must finally come to terms with the fact that it is not the other but
ourselves, all of us, no matter the time or the culture. We must own
this fact of our nature before we can even begin to consider moving
beyond it. It is only in our awareness that we can start to think of
progress.
Passive Aggression—Its Strategies and How to Counter
Them
Most of us are afraid of outright confrontation; we want to appear
reasonably polite and sociable. But often it is impossible to get what
we want without asserting ourselves in some way. People can be
stubborn and resistant to our influence, no matter how congenial we
are. And sometimes we need a release from all of the inner tension
that comes from having to be so deferential and correct. And so all of
us inevitably engage in behavior in which we assert ourselves
indirectly, striving for control or influence as subtly as possible.
Perhaps we take extra time to respond to people’s communications, to
signal a slight bit of disdain for them; or we seem to praise people but
insert subtle digs that get under their skin and instill doubts.
Sometimes we make a comment that could be taken as quite neutral,
but our tone of voice and the expression on our face indicate we are
upset, stirring up some guilt.
We can call this form of aggression passive, in that we give the
appearance that we are merely being ourselves, not actively
manipulating or trying to influence people. Nevertheless, a message is
sent that creates the effect we desire. We are never quite as passive as
we seem in this. In the back of our minds, we are aware that we are
taking an extra long time to get back to someone or putting a dig in a
comment, but at the same time we can also pretend to ourselves and to
others that we are innocent. (We humans are capable of holding such
conflicting thoughts at the same time.) In general, we must consider
this everyday version of passive aggression to be merely an irritating
part of social life, something we are all guilty of. We should be as
tolerant as possible of this low-grade passive aggression that thrives in
polite society.
Some people, however, are chronic passive aggressors. Like the
more active aggressors, they generally have a high degree of energy
and need for control but at the same time a fear of outright
confrontation. They often had domineering or neglectful parents;
passive aggression became their way of getting attention or asserting
their will while avoiding punishment. Such behavior becomes a
pattern for them as adults, as they often repeat the same types of
strategies that worked in childhood. (If we observe the passive
aggressor closely enough, we can often see the manipulative child
peeking through the adult mask.)
These chronic types operate in a personal or work relationship, in
which their drip-drip passive-aggressive strategies can take effect on
an individual over time. They are masters at being ambiguous and
elusive—we can never quite be sure that they are attacking us; perhaps
we are imagining things and are paranoid. If they were directly
aggressive, we would get angry and resist them, but by being indirect
they sow confusion, and exploit such confusion for power and control.
If they are truly good at this and get their hooks into our emotions,
they can make our lives miserable.
Keep in mind that actively aggressive types can generally be quite
passive-aggressive at times, as Rockefeller certainly was. Passive
aggression is simply an additional weapon for them in their attempts
at control. In any event, the key to defending ourselves against passive
aggressors is to recognize what they are up to as early as possible.
The following are the most common strategies employed by such
aggressors, and ways to counter them.
The Subtle-Superiority Strategy: A friend, colleague, or
employee is chronically late, but he or she always has a ready excuse
that is logical, along with an apology that seems sincere. Or similarly,
such individuals forget about meetings, important dates, and
deadlines, always with impeccable excuses at hand. If this behavior
repeats often enough, your irritation will increase, but if you try to
confront them, they very well might try to turn the tables by making
you seem uptight and unsympathetic. It is not their fault, they say—
they have too much on their mind, people are pressuring them, they
are temperamental artists who can’t keep on top of so many irritating
details, they are overwhelmed. They may even accuse you of adding to
their stress.
You must understand that at the root of this is the need to make it
clear to themselves and to you that they are in some way superior. If
they were to say in so many words that they felt superior to you, they
would incur ridicule and shame. They want you to feel it in subtle
ways, while they are able to deny what they are up to. Putting you in
the inferior position is a form of control, in which they get to define
the relationship. You must pay attention to the pattern more than the
apologies, but also notice the nonverbal signs as they excuse
themselves. The tone of the voice is whiny, as if they really feel it is
your problem. The apologies are laid on extra thick to disguise the lack
of sincerity; in the end, such excuses communicate more about their
problems in life than about the facts of their forgetfulness. They are
not really sorry.
If this is chronic behavior, you must not get angry or display overt
irritation—passive aggressors thrive on getting a rise out of you.
Instead, stay calm and subtly mirror their behavior, calling attention
to what they are doing, and inducing some shame if possible. You
might make dates or appointments and leave them in the lurch, or
show up impossibly late with the sincerest of apologies, laced with a
touch of irony. Let them brood on what this might mean.
Earlier on in his career, when the renowned psychotherapist Milton
Erickson was a medical professor at a university, he had to deal with a
very smart student named Anne, who always showed up late to classes,
then apologized profusely and very sincerely. She happened to be a
straight-A student. She always promised to be on time for the next
class but never was. This made it difficult for her fellow students; she
frequently held up lectures or laboratory work. And on the first day of
one of Erickson’s lecture classes she was up to her old tricks, but
Erickson was prepared. When she entered late, he had the entire class
stand up and bow down to her in mock reverence; he did the same.
Even after class, as she walked down the hall, the students continued
their bowing. The message was clear—“We see through you”—and
feeling embarrassed and ashamed, she stopped showing up late.
If you are dealing with a boss or someone in a position of power
who makes you wait, their assertion of superiority is not so subtle. The
best you can do is keep as calm as possible, showing your own form of
superiority by remaining patient and cool.
The Sympathy Strategy: Somehow the person you are dealing
with is always the victim—of irrational hostility, of unfair
circumstances, of society in general. You notice with these types that
they seem to relish the drama in their stories. No one else suffers as
they do. If you are careful, you can detect a vaguely bored expression
when they listen to other people’s problems; they are not so engaged.
Because they play up their supposed helplessness, you will naturally
feel sympathetic, and once they elicit this, they will ask for favors,
extra care, and attention. That is the control they are after. They are
hypersensitive to any signs of doubt on your face, and they don’t want
to hear advice or how they might be slightly to blame. They may
explode and classify you as one of the victimizers.
What might make this hard to see through is that often they do
suffer through unusual adversity and personal pain, but they are
masters at attracting the pain. They choose partners who will
disappoint them; they have a bad attitude at work and attract
criticism; they are negligent with details, and so things around them
fall apart. It is not malicious fate that is to blame but something from
within them that wants and feeds off the drama. People who are
genuine victims cannot help but feel some shame and embarrassment
at their fate, part of an age-old human superstition that a person’s bad
luck is a sign of something wrong with the individual. These true
victims do not enjoy telling their stories. They do so reluctantly.
Passive aggressors, on the other hand, are dying to share what has
happened to them and bask in your attention.
As part of this, passive aggressors may display various symptoms
and ailments—anxiety attacks, depression, headaches—that make
their suffering seem quite real. Since childhood, we have all been
capable of willing such symptoms to get attention and sympathy. We
can make ourselves sick with worry; we can think our way into
depression. What you are looking for is the pattern: this seems to
recur in passive aggressors when they need something (such as a
favor), when they feel you pulling away, when they feel particularly
insecure. In any case, they tend to soak up your time and mental
space, infecting you with their negative energy and needs, and it is
very hard to disengage.
These types will often prey upon those who are prone to feel guilty
—the sensitive, caregiving types. To deal with the manipulation
involved here you need some distance, and this is not easy. The only
way to do this is to feel some anger and resentment at the time and
energy you are wasting in trying to help them, and how little they give
back to you. The relationship inevitably tilts in their favor when it
comes to attention. That is their power. Creating some inner distance
will allow you to see through them better and eventually quit the
unhealthy relationship. Do not feel bad about this. You will be
surprised at how quickly they find another target.
The Dependency Strategy: You are suddenly befriended by
someone who is unusually attentive and concerned for your welfare.
They want to help you with your work or some other tasks. They want
to listen to your stories of hardship and adversity. How refreshing and
unusual to have such attention. You find yourself becoming ever so
dependent on what they give you. But every now and then you detect
some coldness on their part, and you rack your brain to figure out
what you might have said or done to trigger this. In fact, you can’t
really be sure if they’re upset with you, but you find yourself trying to
please them nonetheless, and slowly, without really noticing it, the
dynamic is reversed, and the displays of sympathy and concern seem
to shift from them to you.
Sometimes a similar dynamic is played out between parents and
their children. A mother, for instance, can shower her daughter with
affection and love, keeping the girl bound to her. If the daughter tries
to exercise independence at some point, the mother responds as if this
were an aggressive and unloving act on the daughter’s part. To avoid
feeling guilty, the daughter stops asserting herself and works harder to
earn more of the affection she has become dependent on. The
relationship has reversed itself. Later, the mother exercises control
over other aspects of her daughter’s life, including money, career, and
intimate partners. This can also occur within couples.
A variation of this strategy comes from people who love to make
promises (of assistance, money, a job), but don’t quite deliver on them.
Somehow they forget what they had promised, or only give you part of
it, always with a reasonable excuse. If you complain, they may accuse
you of being greedy or insensitive. You have to chase after them to
make up for your rudeness or to beg to get some of what they had
promised.
In any event, this strategy is all about gaining power over another.
The person who is made to feel dependent is returned to the position
of the needy and vulnerable child, wanting more. It is hard to imagine
that someone who is or was so attentive could be using this as a ploy,
which makes it doubly hard to see through. You must be wary of those
who are too solicitous too early on in a relationship. It is unnatural, as
we are normally a bit suspicious of people in the beginning of any
relationship. They may be trying to make you dependent in some way,
and so you must keep some distance before you can truly gauge their
motives. If they start to turn cold and you are confused as to what you
did, you can be nearly certain they are using this strategy. If they react
with anger or dismay when you try to establish some distance or
independence, you can clearly see the power game as it emerges.
Getting out of any such relationships should be a priority.
In general, be wary about people’s promises and never completely
rely on them. With those who fail to deliver, it is more likely a pattern,
and it is best to have nothing more to do with them.
The Insinuating-Doubt Strategy: In the course of a
conversation, someone you know, perhaps a friend, lets slip a
comment that makes you wonder about yourself and if they are in
some way insulting you. Perhaps they commend you on your latest
work, and with a faint smile they say they imagine you will get lots of
attention for it, or lots of money, the implication being that that was
your somewhat dubious motive. Or they seem to damn you with faint
praise: “You did quite well for someone of your background.”
Robespierre, one of the leaders of the Terror of the French
Revolution, was the absolute master of this strategy. He came to see
Georges Danton, a friend and fellow leader, as having become an
enemy of the revolution, but did not want to say this outright. He
wanted to insinuate it to others and strike some fear in Danton. In one
instance, at an assembly, Robespierre leaped to his feet to support his
friend, who had been accused of using his power in the government to
make money. In defending Danton, Robespierre carefully repeated all
of the various charges leveled against him in great detail, then
concluded, “I may be wrong about Danton, but, as a family man, he
deserves nothing but praise.”
As a variation on this, people may say some rather harsh things
about you, and if you seem upset, they will say they were kidding:
“Can’t you take a joke?” They may interpret things you have said in a
slightly negative light, and if you call them on this, they will innocently
reply, “But I’m only repeating what you said.” They may use these
insinuating comments behind your back as well, to sow doubts in
other people’s minds about you. They will also be the first ones to
report to you any bad news, or bad reviews, or the criticisms of others,
always expressed with sympathy, but secretly delighting in your pain.
The point of this strategy is to make you feel bad in a way that gets
under your skin and causes you to think of the insinuation for days.
They want to strike blows at your self-esteem. Most often they are
operating out of envy. The best counter is to show that their
insinuations have no effect on you. You remain calm. You “agree” with
their faint praise, and perhaps you return it in kind. They want to get a
rise out of you, and you will not give them this pleasure. Hinting that
you might see through them will perhaps infect them with their own
doubts, a lesson worth delivering.
The Blame-Shifter Strategy: With certain people, you feel
irritated and upset by something they have done. Perhaps you have
felt used by them, or they’ve been insensitive or ignored your pleas to
stop behavior that is unpleasant. Even before you express your
annoyance, they seem to have picked up your mood, and you can
detect some sulking on their part. And when you do confront them,
they grow silent, wearing a hurt or disappointed look. It is not the
silence of someone with remorse. They may respond with a “Fine.
Whatever. If that’s how you feel.” Any apologies on their part are said
in a way (through tone of voice or facial expressions) that subtly
conveys some disbelief that they have done anything wrong.
If they are really clever, in response they might conjure up
something you’ve said or done in the past, which you’ve forgotten but
which still rankles them, as if you are not so innocent. It doesn’t sound
like something you’ve said or done, but you can’t be sure. Perhaps they
will say something in their defense that pushes your buttons, and as
you get angry, they can now accuse you of being hostile, aggressive,
and unfair.
Whatever their type of response, you are left with the feeling that
perhaps you were wrong all along. Maybe you overreacted or were
paranoid. You might even slightly doubt your sanity—you know you
felt upset, but maybe you can’t trust your own feelings. Now you are
the one to feel guilty, as if you were to blame for the tension. Better to
reassess yourself and not repeat this unpleasant experience, you tell
yourself. As an adjunct to this strategy, passive aggressors are often
quite nice and polite to other people, only playing their games on you,
since you are the one they want to control. If you try to confide in
people your confusion and anger, you get no sympathy, and the blame
shifting has double the effect.
This strategy is a way of covering up all kinds of unpleasant
behavior, of deflecting any kind of criticism, and of making people
skittish about ever calling them on what they are doing. In this way
they can gain power over your emotions and manipulate them as they
see fit, doing whatever they want with impunity. They are exploiting
the fact that many of us, since early childhood, are prone to feeling
guilty at the slightest impetus. This strategy is used most obviously in
personal relationships, but you will find it in more diffused form in the
work world. People will use their hypersensitivity to any criticism, and
the ensuing drama they stir up, to dissuade people from ever trying to
confront them.
To counter this strategy, you need to be able to see through the
blame shifting and remain unaffected by it. Your goal is not to make
them angry, so don’t get caught in the trap of exchanging
recriminations. They are better at this drama game than you are, and
they thrive by their power to rankle you. Be calm and even fair,
accepting some of the blame for the problem, if that seems right.
Realize that it is very difficult to get such types to reflect on their
behavior and change it; they are too hypersensitive for this.
What you want is to have the requisite distance to see through them
and to disengage. To help in this, you must learn to trust your past
feelings. In the moments they are irritating you, write down what they
are doing and memorialize their behavior. Perhaps in doing so, you
will realize that you are in fact overreacting. But if not, you can return
to these notes to convince yourself that you are not crazy and to stop
the blame-shifting mechanism in its tracks. If you don’t allow the
shifting to occur, they might be discouraged from using this strategy.
If not, it is best to lessen your involvement with such a passive
aggressor.
The Passive-Tyrant Strategy: The person you are working for
seems to be bubbling with energy, ideas, and charisma. They are a bit
disorganized, but that is normal—they have so much to do, so much
responsibility and so many plans, they can’t keep on top of it all. They
need your help, and you strain every fiber of your being to provide it.
You listen extra hard to their instructions and try to execute them.
Occasionally they praise you, and this keeps you going, but sometimes
they rail at you for letting them down, and this sticks in your mind
more than the praise.
You can never feel comfortable or take your position for granted.
You have to try harder to avoid these nasty temperamental rants.
They’re such perfectionists, with such high standards, and you’re not
measuring up. You rack your brain to anticipate their needs and live in
terror of displeasing them. If they were actively ordering you around,
you would simply do what they asked. But by being somewhat passive
and moody, they force you to work doubly hard to please them.
This strategy is generally used by those in power on their
underlings, but it could be applied by people in relationships, one
partner tyrannizing the other by simply being impossible to please.
The strategy is based on the following logic: If people know what it is
that you want and how to get it for you, they have some power over
you. If they follow your instructions and do your bidding, you cannot
criticize them. If they are consistent, you can even grow dependent on
their work, and they can squeeze concessions out of you by threatening
to leave. But if they have no idea what actually works, if they can’t
exactly discern what kind of behavior draws praise and what draws
punishment, they have no power, no independence, and can be made
to do anything. As with a dog, an occasional pat on their shoulder will
deepen their submission. This was how Michael Eisner exercised
dictatorial control over everyone around him, including Jeffrey
Katzenberg (see chapter 11 for more on this).
If people quit on these tyrants, they are fine with that. This
demonstrates that the individual retains some independence, and they
will find a replacement who will be more submissive, at least for the
time being. They may also increase their difficult behavior to test
certain individuals and get them to quit or submit. Such tyrants may
try to act like helpless children. They are the temperamental artist or
genius type, so naturally brilliant and absentminded. Their pleas for
assistance from you and their urgent need for you to do more seem to
express their vulnerability. They use such feigned weakness to justify
the ugly nature of their tyranny.
It is very hard to strategize against such types, because most often
they are your superiors and have real power over you. They tend to be
hypersensitive and prone to anger, which makes any form of
resistance or inner detachment hard to maintain. Overt rebellion will
only make the situation worse. You must first realize that this strategy
of theirs is more conscious than it appears. They are not weak and
helpless but cunning tyrants. Instead of lingering on anything positive
they’ve said or done, think only of their manipulations and harshness.
Your ability to detach from them emotionally will neutralize the
obsessive presence they try to instill. But in the end nothing really will
work, because if, in their hypersensitivity, they detect your distance,
their behavior will only get worse. The only real counter is to quit and
recuperate. No position is worth such abuse, for the damage to your
self-esteem could take years to recover from.
Controlled Aggression
We are born with a powerful energy that is distinctly human. We can
call it willpower, assertiveness, or even aggression, but it is mixed with
our intelligence and cleverness. It was revealed to us in its purest state
in childhood. This energy made us bold and adventurous, not only
physically but mentally, wanting to explore ideas and soak up
knowledge. It made us actively search for friends with whom we could
explore together. It also made us rather relentless when it came to
solving problems or getting what we wanted. (Children can often be
bold in what they ask for.) It made us open to the world and to new
experiences. And if we felt frustrated and helpless for long enough
periods of time, this same energy could make us unusually combative.
As we get older and we encounter mounting frustrations, resistance
from others, and feelings of impatience for power, some among us
may become chronically aggressive. But another phenomenon is even
more common: we become uncomfortable with and even frightened of
that assertive energy within, and our own potential for aggressive
behavior. Being assertive and adventurous could lead to some failed
action, making us feel exposed and vulnerable. If we express this
energy too much, people may not like us. We could stir up conflict.
Perhaps our parents induced in us as well some shame for our
aggressive outbursts. In any event, we may come to view the
aggressive part of the self as dangerous. But since this energy cannot
disappear, it turns inward, and we create what the great English
psychoanalyst Ronald Fairbairn called the internal saboteur.
The saboteur operates like a persecutor from within, continually
judging and attacking us. If we are about to attempt something, it
reminds us of the potential for failure. It tries to tamp down any
exuberance, because that could open us to criticism from others. It
makes us uncomfortable with strong sensations of pleasure or the
expression of deep emotion. It impels us to tamp down our ambitions,
the better to fit into the group and not stand out. It wants us to retreat
inward, where we can protect ourselves, even if that leads to
depression. And it makes us forge a fake self to present to the world,
one that is humble and self-effacing. In the end, the internal saboteur
works to lower our energy and constrain what we do, making our
world more manageable and predictable but also quite dead. It is the
same goal as the aggressor—gaining control over uncertainty—but
through the opposite means.
The internal saboteur can also have a dampening effect on our
mental powers. It discourages us from being bold and adventurous in
our thinking. We limit our ideas and settle for the conventional
opinions of the group, because that is safer. Creative people display
great aggressiveness in their thinking, as they try out many options
and search for possible solutions. By trying to rid ourselves of any kind
of aggressive impulse, we actually thwart our own creative energies.
Understand: The problem has never been that we humans are
assertive and aggressive. That would be to make a problem of our own
nature. The positive and negative aspects of this energy are but two
sides of the same coin. To try to tamp down the negative, to give
ourselves over to the internal saboteur, only dulls the positive. The real
problem is that we do not know how to harness this energy in an adult,
productive, and prosocial manner. This energy needs to be embraced
as totally human and potentially positive. What we must do is tame
and train it for our own purposes. Instead of being chronically
aggressive, passive-aggressive, or repressed, we can make this energy
focused and rational. Like all forms of energy, when it is concentrated
and sustained, it has so much more force behind it. By following such
a path, we can recover some of that pure spirit we had as children,
feeling bolder, more integrated, and more authentic.
The following are four potentially positive elements of this energy
that we can discipline and use, improving what evolution has
bestowed on us.
Ambition: To say you’re ambitious in the world today is often to
admit to something slightly dirty, perhaps revealing too much self-
absorption. But think back to your childhood and youth—you
inevitably entertained big dreams and ambitions for yourself. You
were going to make a mark in this world in some way. You played out
in your mind various scenes of future glory. This was a natural impulse
on your part, and you felt no shame. Then, when you got older, you
probably tried to stifle this. Either you kept your ambitions secret and
acted modestly or you actually stopped dreaming altogether, trying to
avoid seeming self-absorbed and being judged for this.
Much of this sneering at ambition and ambitious people in our
culture actually stems from a great deal of envy at the
accomplishments of others. Tamping down your youthful ambitions is
a sign that you don’t like or respect yourself; you no longer believe you
deserve to have the power and recognition you once dreamed about.
That doesn’t make you more adult, simply more likely to fail—by
lowering your ambitions, you limit your possibilities and diminish
your energy. In any event, in trying to appear unambitious, you are
just as self-absorbed as anyone else; being so humble and saintly is
your ambition, and you want to make a display of it.
Some people remain ambitious as they get older, but their
ambitions are too vague. They want success, money, and attention.
Because of such vagueness, it is hard for them to ever feel they have
satisfied their desires. What constitutes enough money or success or
power? Not sure of what exactly they want, they cannot put a limit to
their desires, and although it is not the case in every instance, this can
lead them to aggressive behavior, as they continually want more and
don’t know when to stop.
Instead, what you must do is embrace that childish part of you,
revisit your earliest ambitions, adapt them to your current reality, and
make them as specific as possible. You want to write a particular book,
expressing some deeply held ideas or emotions; you want to start the
kind of business that has always excited you; you want to create a
cultural or political movement to address a particular cause. This
specific ambition might be grand enough, but you can visualize quite
clearly the end point and how to get there. The more clearly you see
what you want, the likelier you are to realize it. Your ambitions may
involve challenges, but they should not be so far above your capacity
that you only set yourself up for failure.
Once your goal is realized, however long that takes, you now turn to
a new ambition, a new project, feeling tremendous satisfaction that
you reached the last one. You do not stop in this upward process,
building momentum. The key is the level of desire and aggressive
energy you put into each ambitious project. You don’t infect yourself
with doubts and guilt; you are in harmony with your nature, and you
will be amply rewarded for that.
Persistence: If you observe infants, you will notice how willful and
relentless they are when they want something. Such persistence is
natural to us, but it is a quality that we tend to lose as we get older and
our self-confidence fades. This is often what happens later in life when
we face a problem or some resistance: We summon up the energy to
attack the problem, but in the back of our mind, we have some doubts
—are we up to the task? This ever-so-slight diminishment in self-belief
translates into a reduction in the energy with which we attack the
problem. This leads to a less effective result, which raises the volume
of the background doubts even more, lessening the effect of our next
action or blow. At some point, we admit defeat and give up. But we
inevitably give up too soon. We surrender inwardly long before we
surrender outwardly.
What you must understand is the following: almost nothing in the
world can resist persistent human energy. Things will yield if we strike
enough blows with enough force. Look at how many great people in
history have succeeded in this way. It was painstaking persistence over
several years that allowed Thomas Edison to invent the proper form of
the lightbulb, and Marie Curie to discover radium. They simply
continued where others had given up. Over the course of ten years, it
was through continual thought experiments, day and night, exploring
every possible solution, that Albert Einstein finally came up with the
theory of relativity. In the spiritual realm, the great eighteenth-century
Zen master Hakuin was able to finally reach full enlightenment, and
revive a dying branch of Zen, because he applied himself to the task
with relentless persistence over the course of some twenty years. This
is aggressive energy, undivided from within, aimed with laser focus at
a problem or resistance.
It is because the infant or the scientist or the aspiring practitioner
of Zen wants something so badly that nothing will deter them. They
understand the power of persistence, and so it becomes a self-fulfilling
prophecy—knowing its value, they are able to summon up the energy
and self-belief to solve the problem. They are adopting Hannibal’s
motto: “I will either find a way, or make a way.” You must do the same.
The trick is to want something badly enough that nothing will stop you
or dull your energy. Fill yourself with the requisite desire to reach a
goal. Train yourself to not give up as easily as you did in the past. Keep
attacking from new angles, in new ways. Drop the background doubts
and continue striking with full force, knowing that you can break
through anything if you don’t let up. Once you sense the power in this
form of attack, you will keep returning to it.
Fearlessness: We are bold creatures by nature. As children, we were
not afraid to ask for more or assert our will. We were remarkably
resilient and fearless in so many ways. Timidity is a quality we
generally acquire. It is a function of our mounting fears as we get older
and a loss of confidence in our powers to get what we want. We
become overly concerned with how people perceive us and worry what
they will think if we stand up for ourselves. We internalize their
doubts. We become afraid of any kind of conflict or confrontation,
which will churn up emotions and lead to consequences we cannot
predict or control. We develop the habit of backing down. We don’t say
what we feel even when it would be appropriate, and we fail to set
boundaries to people’s harmful behavior. We find it hard to ask for a
raise or a promotion or the respect due to us. Losing our bold spirit, a
positive form of aggression, is losing a deep part of our self, and it is
inevitably painful.
You must try to recover the fearlessness you once possessed,
through incremental steps. The key is to first convince yourself that
you deserve good and better things in life. Once you feel that, you can
start by training yourself to speak up or even talk back to people in
everyday situations, if they are proving to be insensitive. You are
learning to defend yourself. You might call people on their passive-
aggressive behavior, or not be so timid in expressing an opinion that
they may not share or in telling them what you really think of their bad
ideas. You will often come to realize that you have less to fear in doing
this than you had imagined. You might even gain some respect. You
try this out in small ways every day.
Once you lose your fear in these less dramatic encounters, you can
start to ramp it up. You can make greater demands on people that they
treat you well, or honor the quality work that you do. You do this
without a complaining or defensive tone. You make it clear to bullies
that you are not as meek as you seem, or as easily manipulated as
others. You can be as relentless as they are in defending your interests.
In negotiations, you can train yourself not to settle for less but to make
bolder demands and see how far you can push the other side.
You can apply this growing boldness to your work. You will not be
so afraid to create something that is unique, or to face criticism and
failure. You will take reasonable risks and test yourself out. All of this
must be built up slowly, like a muscle that has atrophied, so that you
don’t risk a large-scale battle or aggressive reaction before you have
toughened yourself up. But once you develop this muscle, you will gain
the confidence that you can meet any adversity in life with a fearless
attitude.
Anger: It is natural and healthy for you to feel anger at certain types
of people—those who unfairly block your advancement, the many fools
who have power but are lazy and incompetent, the sanctimonious
critics who espouse their clichés with so much conviction and attack
you without understanding your views. The list could go on forever.
Feeling such anger can be a powerful motivating device to take some
kind of action. It can fill you with valuable energy. You should embrace
it and use it throughout your life for such a purpose. What might make
you hold back or tamp down your anger is that it can seem to be such a
toxic and ugly emotion, as it often is in our culture.
What makes anger toxic is the degree to which it is disconnected
from reality. People channel their natural frustrations into anger at
some vague enemy or scapegoat, conjured up and spread by
demagogues. They imagine grand conspiracies behind simple
inescapable realities, such as taxes or globalism or the changes that are
part of all historical periods. They believe that certain forces in the
world are to blame for their lack of success or power, instead of their
own impatience and lack of effort. There is no thought behind their
anger, and so it leads nowhere or it becomes destructive.
You must do the opposite. Your anger is directed at very specific
individuals and forces. You analyze the emotion—are you certain that
your frustration does not stem from your own inadequacies? Do you
really understand the cause of the anger and what it should be directed
at? In addition to determining if it is justified and where the anger
should be directed, you also analyze the best way to channel this
emotion, the best strategy for defeating your opponents. Your anger is
controlled, realistic, and targeted at the actual source of the problem,
never losing sight of what initially inspired the emotion.
Most people engage in some cathartic release of their anger, some
giant protest, and then it goes away and they slip back into
complacency or become bitter. You want to cool your anger, bring it
more to a simmer than a boil. Your controlled anger will help give you
the resolve and patience you will need for what might be a longer
struggle than you had imagined. Let the unfairness or injustice lie in
the back of your mind and keep you energized. The real satisfaction
comes not in one spasm of emotion but in actually defeating the bully
and exposing the narrow-minded for who they are.
Do not be afraid to use your anger in your work, particularly if it is
allied to some cause or if you are expressing yourself through
something creative. It is often the sense of contained rage that makes
an orator so effective; it was the source of much of the charisma of
Malcolm X. Look at the most lasting and compelling works of art, and
you can often read or feel the restrained anger behind them. We are all
so careful and correct that when we feel the carefully channeled anger
in a film or a book or wherever it is, it is like a fresh wind. It attracts all
of our own frustrations and resentments and lets them out. We
recognize that it is something real and authentic. In your expressive
work, never shy away from anger but capture and channel it, letting it
breathe into the work a sense of life and movement. In giving
expression to such anger, you will always find an audience.
Power is required for communication. To stand before an
indifferent or hostile group and have one’s say, or to speak
honestly to a friend truths that go deep and hurt, these require
self-affirmation, self-assertion, and even at times aggression.
—Rollo May
Y
17
Seize the Historical Moment
The Law of Generational Myopia
ou are born into a generation that defines who you are more than
you can imagine. Your generation wants to separate itself from
the previous one and set a new tone for the world. In the process, it
forms certain tastes, values, and ways of thinking that you as an
individual internalize. As you get older, these generational values
and ideas tend to close you off from other points of view,
constraining your mind. Your task is to understand as deeply as
possible this powerful influence on who you are and how you see the
world. Knowing in depth the spirit of your generation and the times
you live in, you will be better able to exploit the zeitgeist. You will be
the one to anticipate and set the trends that your generation hungers
for. You will free your mind from the mental constraints placed on
you by your generation, and you will become more of the individual
you imagine yourself to be, with all the power that freedom will bring
you.
The Rising Tide
On May 10, 1774, sixty-four-year-old King Louis XV of France died,
and though the country went into the requisite mourning for its king,
many French people felt a sense of relief. He had ruled France for over
fifty years. He left a country that was prosperous, the preeminent
power in Europe, but things were changing—the expanding middle
class craved power, the peasantry was restless, and people in general
yearned for a new direction. And so it was with great hope and
affection that the French people turned to their new ruler, King Louis
XVI, the grandson of the deceased king, who was a mere twenty years
old at the time. He and his young wife, Marie Antoinette, represented
a new generation that would certainly revitalize the country and the
monarchy itself.
The young king, however, did not share the optimism of his
subjects. In fact, at moments he was on the verge of panic. Ever since
he was a boy, he had dreaded the possibility that he might become
king. Compared with his affable grandfather, Louis was quite shy
around people; he was an awkward young man, always uncertain and
fearful of making mistakes. He felt the august role of French king to be
beyond his capacities. Now, having ascended the throne, he could no
longer disguise his insecurities from the court and from the French
people. But as he prepared for his coronation, to take place in the
spring of 1775, Louis began to feel differently. He had decided to study
the coronation ritual itself so that he could be prepared and not make
mistakes; and what he learned actually filled him with the confidence
that he desperately needed.
According to legend, a dove sent from the Holy Spirit had deposited
some sacred oil that was kept at a church in the town of Reims and
was used to anoint all kings of France from the ninth century on. Once
anointed with this oil, the king was suddenly elevated above the ranks
of mere mortals and imbued with a divine nature, becoming God’s
lieutenant on earth. The ritual represented the marriage of the new
king with the church and the French people. In his body and spirit, the
king would now embody the entire populace, their two fates
intertwined. And, sanctified by God, the king could depend on the
Lord’s guidance and protection.
By the 1770s, many French people and progressive clergymen had
come to see this ritual as a relic of a superstitious past. But Louis felt
the opposite. To him, the ancientness of the rite was comforting.
Believing in its significance would be the means to overcome his fears
and doubts. He would be buoyed by a profound sense of mission, his
divine nature made real by the anointment.
Louis decided to reenact this sacred ritual in its more original form.
And he would go even further. At the palace of Versailles he noticed
that many of the paintings and statues of Louis XIV associated him
with Roman gods, a way to symbolically strengthen the image of the
French monarchy as something ancient and unshakable. The new king
decided he would surround himself with similar imagery for the public
part of the coronation, overwhelming his subjects with the spectacle
and the symbols he had chosen.
—
Louis XVI’s coronation took place on June 11, 1775, and in the crowd
outside the cathedral that warm day was a most unlikely tourist—a
fifteen-year-old youth named Georges-Jacques Danton. He was a
student at a boarding school in the town of Troyes. His family had
come from the peasantry, but his father had managed to become a
lawyer, raising the family up into the expanding French middle class.
His father had died when Danton was three, and his mother had raised
him with the hope that Danton would continue in his father’s
footsteps, securing a solid career.
Danton was quite strange-looking, if not downright ugly. He was
unusually large for his age, with an enormous head and a rather
monstrous face. Growing up on the family farm, he had twice been
attacked by bulls, their horns splitting his upper lip and cracking his
nose. Some people found him frightening, but many were charmed by
his youthful exuberance and could ignore the face. The boy was simply
fearless, always in search of adventure, and it was his bold spirit that
attracted people to him, particularly among his classmates.
At the school he was attending, the liberal priests who ran it had
decided to award a prize to the student who wrote an essay that best
described the upcoming coronation, its necessity and meaning at a
time when France was trying to modernize itself. Danton was not the
intellectual type. He preferred swimming in the nearby river and any
other kind of physical activity. The one subject that excited him was
history, particularly ancient Rome. His favorite historical figure was
the great Roman lawyer and orator Cicero. He identified with Cicero,
who also came from the middle class. He memorized Cicero’s speeches
and developed a love for oratory. With his powerful speaking voice, he
was a natural at the art. But he was not very good at writing.
He desperately wanted to win the essay prize—it would instantly
elevate him among the ranks of fellow students. He had reasoned,
however, that the only way he could compensate for his less-than-
stellar literary skills was to witness the coronation firsthand and give a
vivid description of it. He also felt a strange affinity with the young
king: they were not far apart in age, and both were large and
considered decidedly unhandsome.
Playing hooky to get to Reims, only eighty miles away, was just the
kind of adventure that had always attracted him. He had told his
friends, “I want to see how a king is made.” And so he had snuck off to
Reims the day before the coronation and had arrived just in time. He
moved through the throng of French people congregating outside the
cathedral. Guards brandishing tall pikes held them back. Only the
nobility was allowed inside. Danton pushed as far forward as he could,
and then he spotted the king, wearing the most spectacular ceremonial
robe encrusted with diamonds and gold, making his way up the steps.
There was the pretty queen following him in a splendid gown, her hair
piled impossibly high, followed by other members of her entourage.
From a distance, they were all like figures from another era, so
different from anybody he had ever seen before.
He waited patiently outside for the end of the ritual, at which point
the king reemerged, now sporting a crown. For a brief moment he got
a closer look at Louis’s face as he passed by, and he was surprised to
find that the king seemed quite ordinary, despite the robes and jewels.
The king then got into the most elaborate carriage imaginable, named
the Sacre. It was like something out of a fairy tale. It was built for the
coronation and designed to represent the chariot of Apollo, glistening
like the sun (the sun being the symbol of the French king), and it was
enormous. On all sides it featured gold statuettes of Roman gods. On
the door panel facing Danton, he could see an elaborate painting of
Louis XVI as a Roman emperor atop a cloud, beckoning the French
people below him. Strangest of all, the carriage itself sported a large
bronze crown.
The Sacre was meant to serve as the very symbol of the monarchy,
dazzling and mythical. It was quite a sight, but for some reason it
seemed oddly out of place—too large, too bright, and when the king
got in, it seemed to swallow him up. Was it magnificent or was it
grotesque? Danton could not decide.
Danton returned to school later that same day, his head spinning
with all of these strange images. Inspired by what he had witnessed, he
wrote his best essay yet and won the prize.
In the years after graduating from the school in Troyes, Danton
would make his mother proud. In 1780 he moved to Paris to clerk in
the law courts. Within a few years, he passed the bar exam and became
a practicing lawyer. In court, with his booming voice and oratorical
skills, he naturally commanded attention and quickly rose through the
ranks. And as he mingled with his fellow lawyers and read the
newspapers, he detected something strange going on in France: a
growing discontent with the king, the profligate queen, and the
arrogant upper classes, whom the great thinkers of the day were
ridiculing in their plays and books.
The main problem was the country’s finances—France seemed
perpetually on the brink of running out of money. At the root of this
was France’s vastly antiquated financial structure. The French people
were subject to all kinds of onerous taxes that dated back to feudal
times, but the clergy and the nobility were largely exempt from any
such burdens. Taxes on the French lower and middle classes could
never bring in enough revenue, especially considering the lavish
expenditures of the French court, which had only gotten worse with
Queen Marie Antoinette’s elaborate parties and love of finery.
As the money supply ran short and the price of bread kept rising,
and with millions of people facing starvation, riots began to break out
throughout the countryside and even in Paris. And amid all of this
turmoil, the young king was proving to be too indecisive to handle the
pressure.
In 1787, as the financial situation worsened, the opportunity of a
lifetime came to Danton—a position as a lawyer on the King’s Council,
with a rather nice bump in salary. Wanting to marry a young woman
named Gabrielle, whose father opposed the marriage because Danton
did not earn enough, he accepted the position on the council, despite
his fears that he was joining a sinking ship. Two days later he married
Gabrielle.
Danton did his job well but found himself increasingly absorbed by
the turmoil in Paris. He joined a club called the Cordeliers. Its
members were an odd mix of bohemian artists and political agitators.
It was located near his apartment, so he began to spend a great part of
his day there, and soon he was participating in the raucous debates
about the future of France that took place at the club. He felt a strange
new spirit in the air, a boldness that made people suddenly say things
they could never have said a few years before about the monarchy. He
found it exciting and irresistible. He began to give his own fiery
speeches, focusing on the brutality of the upper classes, and he basked
in the attention he received.
In 1788 he was offered a higher position on the King’s Council, and
he turned it down. He told the king’s minister who presented the offer
that the monarchy was doomed: “This is no longer about modest
reforms,” he said. “We are more than ever on the brink of
revolution. . . . Can’t you see the avalanche coming?”
In the spring of 1789, Louis was forced to call a national assembly
to deal with the looming bankruptcy. The assembly was known as the
Estates General. It was an institution meant to deal with a national
crisis, but always as a measure of last resort, the previous one having
been held in 1614, after the death of King Henry IV. It brought
together representatives of the three estates of France—the nobility,
the clergy, and the tax-paying commoners. Although the vast majority
of French people were to be represented by members of the Third
Estate, the power of the assembly was heavily tilted in favor of the
nobility and clergy. Nevertheless, the French people held great hopes
for the Estates General, and Louis had been extremely reluctant to call
for it.
Only a month before the convening of the Estates General, riots in
Paris had broken out over the price of bread, and royal troops had shot
into the crowds, killing dozens. Danton had witnessed the bloodshed
and he felt a turning point in the mood of the people, particularly the
lower classes, and in himself. He shared their desperation and anger;
they could no longer be placated with the usual rhetoric. He began to
address the angry crowds on street corners, attracting followers and
making a name for himself. To a friend who was surprised at this new
direction in his life, he responded that it was like seeing a strong tide
in the river, jumping in, and letting it carry him where it might.
—
As he prepared for the convening of the Estates General, King Louis
could barely contain his resentment and anger. In the years since he
had become king, various finance ministers had warned him of an
impending crisis if France did not reform its tax system. He had
understood this and had tried to initiate reforms, but the nobility and
clergy, fearing where this might lead, had become so hostile to such
ideas that the king had been forced to back down. And now, with the
state’s coffers nearly empty, the nobility and the Third Estate were
holding him hostage, making him convene the Estates General and
putting him in the position of begging for funds from his people.
The Estates General was not a traditional part of French
government; it was an anomaly, a challenge to the divine right of the
king, a recipe for anarchy. Who knew what was best for France—his
subjects, with their million different opinions? The nobility, with their
own narrow interests and hunger to grab more power? No, only the
king could navigate the nation through this crisis. He had to regain the
upper hand over these rowdy children.
The king decided upon a plan: he would impress upon them all the
majesty of the monarchy and its absolute necessity as the supreme
power in France. To do so, he would hold the Estates General at
Versailles, something his advisers warned him not to do, considering
Versailles’s closeness to Paris and all its agitators. Louis reasoned that
most of the delegates of the Third Estate came from the middle classes
and were relatively moderate. Amid the grandeur and all the symbols
of the French monarchy, the members of the Third Estate could not
help but think of what Louis XIV, the builder of Versailles, had created
and how much they owed the monarchy for transforming France into a
great power. He would hold an opening ceremony that would rival his
coronation and remind all of the estates of the divine origin of his
kingship.
Having impressed them with the weight of the past, he would then
agree to some reforms of the tax system, which the Third Estate would
certainly be grateful for. At the same time, however, he would make it
clear that under no circumstances would the monarchy or the first two
estates relinquish any of their other powers or privileges. In this way,
the government would get its necessary funds through taxes, and the
traditions he was meant to uphold would remain unchanged.
The opening ceremonies went just as he had planned, but to his
dismay the deputies of the Third Estate seemed rather uninterested in
the splendors of the palace and all of the pomp. They were barely
respectful during the religious ceremonies. They did not applaud very
warmly during his opening speech. The tax reforms he proposed were
not enough, in their eyes. And as the weeks went by, the members of
the Third Estate became increasingly demanding, its members now
insisting that the three estates have equal power.
When the king refused to accept their demands, they did the
unthinkable—they declared themselves the true representatives of the
French people, equal to the king, and they called their body the
National Assembly. They proposed the formation of a constitutional
monarchy, and they claimed to have the overwhelming support of the
country. If they did not get their way, they would make sure the
government would be unable to raise the necessary taxes. At one point,
as the king grew furious at this form of blackmail, he ordered the Third
Estate to disband from their meeting place, and they refused,
disobeying a royal decree. Never had any French king witnessed such
insubordination from the lower classes.
As he faced a growing uprising throughout the country, Louis
sensed the urgency of nipping the problem in the bud. He decided to
forget any attempts at conciliation and instead resort to force. He
called in the army to establish order in Paris and elsewhere. But on
July 13 messengers from Paris relayed some disturbing news: the
Parisians, anticipating Louis’s use of the military, were quickly arming
themselves, looting military stockades. The French troops that had
moved in to quell the rebellion were unreliable, many of them refusing
to fire on their compatriots. The following day, a vast contingent of
Parisians marched on the Bastille, the royal prison in Paris that was a
symbol of the most oppressive practices of the monarchy, and they
took control of it.
Paris was in the hands of the people now, and there was nothing
Louis could do. He watched with horror as the National Assembly, still
meeting in Versailles, quickly voted to eliminate the various privileges
enjoyed by the nobility and clergy. In the name of the people, they
voted to take over the Catholic Church and auction off to the public the
vast lands that it owned. They went even further, proclaiming that
henceforth all French citizens were equal. The monarchy would be
allowed to survive, but the people and the king were to share power.
In the following weeks, as the courtiers, shocked and terrified by
these events, quickly fled Versailles to safe regions or to other
countries, the king could now feel the full brunt of what had happened
in the past few months. He wandered the halls of the palace, virtually
alone. The paintings and august symbols of Louis XIV stared back at
him in mockery of all that he had allowed under his rule.
Somehow he had to retake control of France, and the only way to do
so was to lean even more on the military, finding those regiments that
had remained loyal to him. In mid-September he recalled the Flanders
Regiment—containing some of the best soldiers in the country and
renowned for its royalist sympathies—to Versailles. On the evening of
October 1, the king’s personal guard decided to host a banquet in
honor of the Flanders Regiment. All of the courtiers who had
remained in the palace, along with the king and the queen, attended
the banquet.
The soldiers became drunk. They shouted cheers to the king and
oaths to the monarchy. They sang ballads ridiculing the French people
in the raunchiest terms. They grabbed handfuls of the tricolor badges
and ribbons that symbolized the revolution and trampled them with
their boots. The king and the queen, so despondent of late, took this all
in with undisguised delight—it was a taste of years gone by, when the
very sight of the royal couple inspired such displays of affection. But
news of what had transpired at this banquet quickly spread to Paris,
and it caused outrage and panic. Parisians of all classes suspected that
the king was planning some sort of countercoup. They imagined the
nobility returning under Louis’s command and exacting revenge on
the French people.
Within days, the king learned that thousands of Parisians were now
marching on Versailles. They were armed and dragging cannons. He
thought of escaping with his family but hesitated. Soon it was too late,
as the mob arrived. On the morning of October 6, a group of citizens
penetrated into the palace, killing everyone in their path. They
demanded that Louis and his family be escorted back to Paris, so that
the French citizens could keep an eye on him and ensure his loyalty to
the new order.
Louis had no choice: he and his traumatized family piled into a
single carriage. As they made their way to Paris, surrounded by the
crowd, Louis could see the heads of the king’s personal guard paraded
on long pikes. What shocked him even more was the sight of so many
men and women surrounding the carriage, dressed in rags, thinned by
hunger, pressing their faces to the window and swearing at him and
the queen in the vilest language. He could not recognize his own
subjects. These were not the French people he had known. They must
be outside agitators, brought in by enemies to destroy the monarchy.
Somehow the world had gone mad.
In Paris the king, his family, and the few courtiers who had
remained with them were housed in the Tuileries, a royal residence
that had been uninhabited for over a hundred years.
Within a week of his arrival in Paris, the king received a visit from a
strange man whose face and manner frightened him. It was Georges-
Jacques Danton, now one of the leaders of the French Revolution. On
behalf of the French people, he had come to welcome the king to Paris.
He explained that he had been a member of the King’s Council, and he
reassured the king that the people were grateful for his submission to
their will and that there was still an important part for him to play as a
monarch who swore allegiance to a new constitution.
Louis could barely listen. He was transfixed by the man’s enormous
head, by the strange outfit he wore (black satin breeches over white
silk stockings, and buckled shoes, a mix of fashion styles Louis had
never seen before), and by his whole manner, his fast way of talking,
the lack of awe and respect in the king’s presence. He bowed
graciously before the king, but he refused to kiss his hand, quite a
breach of protocol. So this was a revolutionary, a man of the people?
Louis had never met such a fellow, and he found the experience
decidedly unpleasant.
—
During the summer months of 1789, Danton had largely supported the
decisions of the National Assembly, but he had remained wary of the
aristocracy and wanted to make sure they had permanently lost their
privileges. The nobility was the source of the country’s misery, and the
French must never forget this. He had become one of the principal
fomenters against the upper classes, and as such he had earned the
mistrust of the more moderate and bourgeois leaders of the revolution,
who wanted to go slowly. To them, Danton was like a ranting,
monstrous ogre, and they had excluded him from their social circles
and any official position in the new government under formation.
Feeling ostracized and perhaps recalling his own peasant roots,
Danton had come to increasingly identify with the sans-culottes
(“without breeches”), members of the lowest classes in France and the
most revolutionary in spirit. As the news of the scandalous behavior of
the Flanders Regiment on October 1 had reached Paris, Danton had
been one of the key agitators for the march on Versailles, and with its
success he had become the leader of the Cordeliers. And it was in that
capacity that he had paid a visit to the Tuileries, as much to discern the
king’s degree of support for the new constitution as to welcome him.
Danton could not help but recall the coronation he had attended
over fourteen years earlier, with all of its pomp, for despite everything
that had happened in the last few months, the king seemed bent on re-
creating the protocol and ceremony of Versailles. He wore his royal
outfit, with its sash and various medals attached to his coat. He
insisted on the old formalities, and he kept his attendants in their
elaborate uniforms. It was all so empty, so disconnected from what
was going on. Danton was polite. He still felt a strange sympathy for
the king, but now, as he scrutinized him, all he could see was a relic of
the past. He doubted the king’s allegiance to the new order. He left the
meeting more certain than ever that the French monarchy had become
obsolete.
In the months that followed, the king professed his loyalty to the
new constitution, but Danton suspected that Louis was playing a
double game, still plotting to bring the monarchy and nobility back to
power. A coalition of armies from other countries in Europe was now
waging open war against the revolution, determined to rescue the king
and restore the old order. And Danton felt certain that the king was in
communication with them.
Then in June of 1791 came the most startling news of all: the king
and his family had somehow escaped from Paris in a carriage. A few
days later they were caught. It would all have been rather comical if it
hadn’t been so alarming. The family members had been dressed like
everyday members of the bourgeoisie out on holiday, but they had
ridden in a splendid carriage that did not match their outfits and that
called attention to itself. They had been recognized, captured, and
returned to the capital.
Now Danton sensed that his moment had arrived. The liberals and
moderates in the revolution were trying to maintain that the king was
innocent, that he had been duped into escaping or even abducted.
They feared what would happen to France if the monarchy was
abolished and how the foreign armies, now within the country’s
borders, would react if anything happened to the king. But to Danton
this was absurd. They were merely postponing the inevitable. The
monarchy had lost its meaning and purpose; the king had revealed
himself to be a traitor, and they must not be afraid to say so. It was
time, he proclaimed, for France to declare itself a republic and get rid
of the monarchy once and for all.
His call for a republic began to resonate, particularly among the
sans-culottes. As a sign of his growing influence, Danton was elected
to his first official position—deputy prosecutor for the commune in
charge of Paris—and he began to fill the commune with his
sympathizers, preparing for something large.
The following summer a large contingent of sans-culottes from
Marseilles was in Paris to celebrate the third anniversary of the
revolution. The men from Marseilles, enthused by Danton’s calls for a
republic, placed themselves under his charge, and throughout June
and July they marched through Paris singing hymns to the revolution
and spreading Danton’s demand for the formation of a republic. Each
day more and more people joined the men from Marseilles. Quietly
planning his coup, Danton gained control of the commune. Its
members now voted to lift the blockade on the various bridges of Paris
leading to the Tuileries from the Left Bank, effectively ending any
protection for the royal family, as crowds could now march straight to
the palace.
On the morning of August 10, alarm bells rang out throughout the
city, and accompanied by a steady drumbeat, an enormous contingent
of Parisians marched across several bridges to invade the Tuileries.
Most of the guards protecting the palace scattered, and soon the royal
family was forced to flee for their lives, taking refuge in the nearby hall
where the National Assembly met. The crowd quickly massacred the
remaining soldiers guarding the palace and took it over.
Danton’s gambit had worked—the people had spoken and the
National Assembly voted to end the monarchy, stripping the king and
his family of any powers and protections that had remained. In one
blow, Danton had put an end to the longest-lasting and most powerful
monarchy in Europe. The king and his family were shuttled to the
Temple, a medieval priory that would serve as their private prison as
the new government decided their fate. Danton was now named
minister of justice, and he was the de facto leader of the new Republic
of France.
—
At the Temple, Louis found himself separated from his family,
awaiting trial for treason in December. He was now to be known as
Louis Capet (the family name of the founder of the French tenth-
century kingship that would end with Louis), a commoner with no
privileges. Mostly alone, he had time to reflect on the traumas of the
past three and a half years. If only the French people had kept their
faith in him, he would have found a way to solve all of the problems.
He was still certain that godless demagogues and outside agitators had
spoiled the people’s natural love for him.
The revolutionaries had recently discovered a stash of papers that
Louis had hidden in a safe in a wall in the Tuileries, and among them
were letters that revealed how deeply he had conspired with foreign
powers to overturn the revolution. He was certain now to be sentenced
to death, and he prepared himself for this.
For his trial in front of the assembly, Louis Capet wore a simple
coat, the kind any middle-class citizen would sport. He now had a
beard. He looked sad and exhausted, and hardly like a king. But
whatever sympathy his judges had had for him quickly vanished as
prosecutors read out the many charges against him, including how he
had conspired to overturn the revolution. A month later the private
citizen Capet was sentenced to die at the guillotine, Danton himself
casting one of the deciding votes.
Louis was determined to show a brave face. On the morning of
January 21, a cold and windy day, he was transported to the Place de la
Révolution, where an enormous crowd had gathered to witness the
execution. They watched in stunned amazement as the former king
had his hands tied and his hair cut like any ordinary criminal. He
climbed the stairs to the guillotine, and before kneeling at the block,
he cried out, “People, I die innocent! I pardon those who sentenced
me. I pray God my blood does not fall again over France.”
As the blade fell, he emitted a horrifying cry. The executioner held
up the king’s head for all to see. After a few cries of “Vive la nation,” a
deathly silence fell over the crowd. Minutes later they rushed to the
scaffold to dip their hands in Louis’s blood and buy locks of his hair.
—
As the leader of the French Revolution, Danton now faced two rather
daunting forces: the invading armies that kept pressing closer to Paris
and the restiveness of the French citizens, many of whom clamored for
revenge on the aristocracy and all counterrevolutionaries. To meet the
enemy armies, Danton unleashed an enormous citizen army of
millions that he had created, and in the first few months of battle these
new French forces turned the tide of the war.
To channel the people’s taste for revenge, he set up a revolutionary
tribunal to bring quick justice to those suspected of trying to restore
the monarchy. The tribunal initiated what would become known as the
Terror, as it sent thousands of suspects to the guillotine, often on the
flimsiest of charges.
Shortly after the execution of the king, Danton traveled to Belgium
to help oversee the war effort on that front. While there, he received
the news that his beloved wife, Gabrielle, had died in premature
childbirth. He felt horribly guilty for not being by her side in that
moment, and the thought that he had no chance to say good-bye to her
and that he would never see her face again was unbearable. Without
thinking of the consequences, he abandoned his mission in Belgium
and hurried back to France.
By the time he arrived, his wife had been dead for a week and
buried in the public cemetery. Overwhelmed with grief and the desire
to see her one more time, he hurried to the cemetery, bringing along
with him a friend and some shovels. On a moonless, rainy night, they
managed to find the grave. He dug and he dug, and with his friend’s
help, he lifted the casket out of the ground and, with much effort,
finally pried the lid off. He gasped at the sight of her bloodless face. He
pulled her out, hugging her tightly to his body, begging her to forgive
him. He kissed her again and again on her cold lips. After several
hours, he finally returned her to the ground.
In the months to come, something seemed to have changed in
Danton. Had it been the loss of his wife, or was it the guilt he now felt
for having unleashed the Terror within France? He had ridden the
wave of the revolution to the pinnacle of power, but now he wanted it
to go in another direction. He became less engaged in affairs of state
and was no longer in favor of the Terror. Maximilien Robespierre, his
main rival for power, noticed the change and began to spread the
rumor that Danton had lost his revolutionary fervor and could no
longer be trusted. Robespierre’s campaign had effect: when it came
time to elect members to the highest governing body, the Committee
of Public Safety, Danton did not receive enough votes and Robespierre
packed it with his sympathizers.
Danton now openly worked to put an end to the Terror, through
speeches and pamphlets, but this only played into the hands of his
rival. On March 30, 1794, Danton was arrested for treason and
brought before the revolutionary tribunal. It seemed ironic that the
tribunal he had formed now held his fate in its hands. The charges
against him were based on pure innuendo, but Robespierre made
certain he was found guilty and sentenced to death. Upon hearing the
sentence, he yelled at his judges, “My name is engraved on every
institution of the revolution—the army, the committees, the tribunal. I
have killed myself!”
That same afternoon he and other condemned men were put in
carts and led to the Place de la Révolution. Along the way, Danton
passed the residence where Robespierre lived. “You’re next,” Danton
shouted in his booming voice, pointing his finger at Robespierre’s
apartment. “You will follow me!”
Danton was the last one to be executed that day. An enormous
crowd had followed the cart, and now they were quiet as he was led up
the stairs. He could not help but think of Louis, whom he had
reluctantly sent to the guillotine, and the many former friends who
had died during the Terror. It had taken a few months, but he had
grown sick of all the bloodshed, and he could sense the crowd before
him was feeling the same way. As he laid his neck on the block, he
shouted to the executioner, “Make sure you show my head to the
people. It is worth a look!”
After the execution of Danton, Robespierre unleashed what became
known as the Great Terror. During four tumultuous months, the
tribunal sent close to twenty thousand French men and women to the
guillotine. But Danton had anticipated the shift in mood: the French
public had had enough of the executions, and they turned against
Robespierre with remarkable speed. In late July, in a heated meeting
at the assembly, its members voted to arrest Robespierre. He tried to
defend himself, but the words came out haltingly. One member
shouted, “It is the blood of Danton that chokes you!” The following
morning, without a trial, Robespierre was guillotined, and days later
the assembly abolished the revolutionary tribunal.
—
At around the time of Robespierre’s execution, the new leaders of the
revolution were looking for ways to drum up funds for the various
emergencies France was facing, and someone mentioned the recent
rediscovery of Louis’s magnificent coronation carriage, the Sacre.
Perhaps they could sell it. A few of them went to inspect it, and they
were aghast at what they perceived as its sheer hideousness. One
deputy described it as “a monstrous assemblage built of the people’s
gold and an excess of flattery.” All agreed that no one would buy such a
grotesquerie. They had all of the gold from the coach removed and
melted, sending it to the treasury. They dispatched the salvaged
bronze to the republic’s foundries to help forge some much-needed
cannons. When it came to the painted panels on the doors, with all of
their mythological symbols, they found them too weird for anyone’s
tastes and promptly had them burned.
•   •   •
Interpretation: Let us look momentarily at the prerevolutionary
world in France through the eyes of King Louis XVI. Much of what he
saw seemed to be the same reality that previous kings had faced. The
king was still considered the absolute ruler of France, divinely
appointed to lead the nation. The various classes and estates in France
remained quite stable; the distinctions among the nobility, the clergy,
and the rest of the French people were still largely respected. The
commoners enjoyed the relative prosperity that Louis himself had
inherited from his grandfather.
Yes, there were financial problems, but the great Louis XIV himself
had faced such crises, and they had passed. Versailles was still the
glittering jewel of Europe, the center of everything civilized. Louis’s
beloved queen, Marie Antoinette, hosted the most spectacular parties,
which were the envy of all European aristocrats. Louis himself did not
care for such amusements, but he had his hunting parties and his
other rather pedestrian hobbies that obsessed him.
Life at the palace was rather sweet and relatively tranquil. Most
important to Louis, the glory and the majesty of France, as embodied
in its ceremonies and visual symbols, still carried the same weight as
before. Who could help but be impressed by the splendors of Versailles
itself, or by the rituals of the Catholic Church? He was the ruler of a
great nation, and there was no reason to believe that the monarchy
would not continue for as many centuries as it had already lasted.
Below the surface of what he saw, however, there were some
troubling signs of discontent. Beginning during the reign of Louis XV,
writers such as Voltaire and Diderot began to ridicule the church and
the monarchy for all of their backward, superstitious beliefs. They
reflected a new scientific spirit spreading throughout Europe, and it
was hard to reconcile this with many of the practices of the church and
the nobility. Their ideas became known as the Enlightenment, and
they began to gain influence among the expanding middle class, which
had felt excluded from power and was not so immersed in all of the
symbolism of the monarchy.
Below the seemingly tranquil façade of the nobility, there were
quite a few cracks. Many aristocrats had come to loathe the absolute
power of the king, whom they saw as weak and not worthy of their
respect. They hungered for more power for themselves.
Secret societies were sprouting up everywhere, promoting a whole
new way of socializing, far from the stuffy environment of the court.
Supreme among them were the Freemasons and their lodges, with
their own secret rituals. Danton himself was a member. The
Freemasons’ lodges were hotbeds of discontent with the monarchy,
their members highly sympathetic to the ideas of the Enlightenment.
They craved a new order in France. In Paris, the theater had suddenly
become the most popular place to frequent and to be seen at, much
more popular than the church. And plays were now being performed
that mocked the monarchy in the most brazen manner.
And all of those majestic symbols and ceremonies of the monarchy
that had remained relatively unchanged were beginning to seem rather
empty, masks with nothing behind them. Courtiers no longer really
understood what they were doing, or why, when they engaged in their
elaborate rituals in company with the king. The paintings, statues, and
fountains ornamented with mythological figures were as beautiful as
ever, but they were simply seen as surface pieces of art, not as
indications of a deep connection to France’s glorious past.
All of these signs were subtle and disparate. It was hard to connect
them all to any kind of trend, let alone a revolution. They could pass as
novelties, new pastimes for a bored nation, without any underlying
meaning. But then came the worsening crisis in the late 1780s, and
suddenly these separate examples of disenchantment began to
combine into an undeniable force. The price of bread had risen, as well
as the cost of living, for all French subjects. As the discontent spread,
the nobility and the bourgeoisie smelled weakness in the king and
demanded more power.
Now the king could not ignore what was happening, and at the
Estates General the loss of respect and the disenchantment were all
too visible to him in the behavior of the Third Estate. Louis, however,
could only view these events through the lens of the divine monarchy
that he had inherited and clung to so desperately. These French
subjects who were disrespecting and disobeying his absolute rule must
be godless individuals, and only a noisy minority. To disobey his word
was tantamount to sacrilege.
If such people could not be persuaded by the symbols of the
glorious past, he would have to use force to make the past and the
traditions prevail. But once something has lost its spell and no longer
enchants, no amount of force can bring it back to life. And as he rode
in that carriage in October of 1789 that carried him away forever from
Versailles and the past, all he could see were people who were not his
subjects but aliens of some sort. He had to include Danton in such a
group. At his execution, he addressed the crowd as if he were still the
king, forgiving them their sins. The crowd instead saw just a human,
stripped of all his previous glory, no better than they were.
When Georges-Jacques Danton looked out at the same world as the
king, he saw something quite different. Unlike the king, he was not
timid or insecure but the opposite. He had no inner need to rely upon
the past to prop him up. He had been educated by liberal priests who
had instilled in him Enlightenment ideas. And at the age of fifteen, at
the coronation he caught a fleeting glimpse of the future, intuiting for
a moment how empty the monarchy and its symbols had become, and
that the king was just an ordinary man.
In the 1780s he began to pick up the disparate signs of change—
from within the King’s Council and the growing disrespect among the
lawyer class, to the clubs and street life, where a new spirit could be
detected. He could feel the pain of the lower classes and empathize
with their sense of exclusion. And this new spirit was not simply
political but also cultural. The youth of Danton’s generation had grown
tired of all of the empty formality in French culture. They yearned for
something freer and more spontaneous. They wanted to express their
emotions openly and naturally. They wanted to get rid of all the
elaborate outfits and hairstyles and wear looser clothing with less
ostentation. They wanted more open socializing, the open mingling of
all the classes, as occurred in the clubs in Paris.
We could call this cultural movement the first real explosion of
Romanticism, valuing emotions and sensations above the intellect and
formalities. Danton both exemplified this Romantic spirit and
understood it. He was a man who always wore his heart on his sleeve
and whose speeches had the feel of spontaneous outpourings of ideas
and emotions. His disinterment of his wife was like something out of
Romantic literature, an expression of emotion unimaginable some ten
years before. This side of Danton was what made him so relatable and
compelling to the public.
In a way that made him quite unique, Danton was able before
anyone else to connect the meaning behind all of these signs and
foresee a mass revolution on its way. An avid swimmer, he compared
all of this to the tide in a river. Nothing in human life is ever static.
There is always discontent below the surface, and hunger for change.
Sometimes this is rather subtle, and the river seems somewhat placid
but still moving. At other times it is like a rush, a rising tide that no
one, not even a king with absolute power, can hold back.
Where was this tide carrying the French? That was the key
question. To Danton it soon became clear it was heading toward the
formation of a republic. The monarchy was now just a façade. Its show
of majesty no longer stirred the masses. They now saw that the actions
of the king were all about holding on to power; they saw the
aristocracy as a bunch of thieves, doing little work and sucking up the
wealth of France. With such levels of disenchantment, there could be
no turning back, no middle ground, no constitutional monarchy.
As part of his unusual perspicacity and sensitivity to the spirit of
the times, before any of the other revolutionary leaders, Danton
understood that the Terror he had unleashed was a mistake and that it
was time to stop it. In this one instance, his sense of timing was off, as
he moved on this intuition at least several months in advance of the
public, giving his enemies and rivals an opening to get rid of him.
Understand: You might see King Louis XVI as an extreme
example of someone out of tune with the times, not particularly
relevant to your own life, but in fact he is much closer to you than you
think. Like him, you are probably looking at the present through the
lens of the past. When you look at the world around you, it seems
pretty much as it appeared a day or a week or a month or even a year
ago. People act more or less the same. The institutions that hold power
remain in place and are not going anywhere. People’s ways of thinking
have not really changed; the conventions that govern behavior in your
field are still followed religiously. Yes, there might be some new styles
and trends in culture, but they are not critical factors or signs of deep
change. Lulled by these appearances, it seems to you that life simply
goes on as it always has.
Below the surface, however, the tide is moving; nothing in human
culture stands still. Those who are younger than you no longer have
the same level of respect for certain values or institutions that you
have. Power dynamics—among classes, regions, industries—are in a
state of flux. People are beginning to socialize and interact in new
ways. New symbols and myths are being formed, and old ones are
fading. All of these things can seem rather disconnected until there is
some crisis or clash and people must confront what was once
seemingly invisible or separate, in the form of some sort of revolution
or cry for change.
When this occurs, some people will feel, like the king, profoundly
uncomfortable and will hold on even more fervently to the past. They
will band together to try to stop the tide from advancing, a futile task.
Leaders will feel threatened and cling more tightly to their
conventional ideas. Others will be carried along without really
understanding where it is all headed or why things are changing.
What you want and need is the power that Danton possessed to
make sense of it all and act accordingly. And this power is a function of
vision, of looking at events from a different angle, through a fresh
framework. You ignore the clichéd interpretations that others will
inevitably spout when facing changes. You drop the mental habits and
past ways of looking at things that can cloud your vision. You stop the
tendency to moralize, to judge what is happening. You simply want to
see things as they are. You look for the undercurrents of discontent
and disharmony with the status quo, which are always there below the
surface. You see commonalities and connections among all these signs.
Slowly the flow, the tide itself, comes into focus, indicating a course, a
direction that is hidden to so many others.
Do not think of this as some intellectual exercise. Intellectuals are
often the last to really discern the spirit of the times, because they are
so grounded in theories and conventional frameworks. First and
foremost, you must be able to feel the change in the collective mood, to
sense how people are diverging from the past. Once you feel the spirit,
you can begin to analyze what is behind it. Why are people dissatisfied,
and what are they really craving? Why are they gravitating toward
these new styles? Look at those idols from the past that no longer cast
a spell, that seem ridiculous, that are the subject of mockery,
particularly among the young. They are like Louis’s carriage. When
you detect enough such disenchantment, you can be sure something
strong is cresting.
Once you have an adequate feel for what is really going on, you
must be bold in how you respond, giving voice to what other people
are feeling but not understanding. Be careful to not get too far out
ahead and be misunderstood. Ever alert, always letting go of your
prior interpretations, you can seize the opportunities in the moment
that others cannot even begin to detect. Think of yourself as an enemy
of the status quo, whose proponents must view you in turn as
dangerous. See this task as absolutely necessary for the revitalization
of the human spirit and the culture at large, and master it.
Our era is a birth-time, and a period of transition. The spirit of
man has broken with the old order of things . . . and with the old
ways of thinking, and is of the mind to let them all sink into the
depths of the past and to set about its own transformation. . . . The
frivolity and boredom which unsettle the established order, the
vague foreboding of something unknown, these are the heralds of
approaching change.
—G. W. F. Hegel
Keys to Human Nature
In human culture, we can see a phenomenon—changes in fashions and
styles—that at first glance might appear trivial, but that in fact is quite
profound, revealing a deep and fascinating part of human nature. Look
at clothing styles, for instance. In the stores or in fashion shows we can
perhaps detect some trends and changes from a few months before,
but they are usually subtle. Go back to styles ten years ago and,
compared with the present, the differences are quite apparent. Go
back twenty years and it is even clearer. With such a distance in time,
we can even notice a particular style of twenty years ago that now
probably looks a bit amusing and passé.
These changes in fashion styles that are so detectable in increments
of decades can be characterized as creating something looser and more
romantic than the previous style, or more overtly sexual and body
conscious, or more classic and elegant, or gaudier and with more frills.
We could name several other categories of changes in style, but in the
end they are limited in number, and they seem to come in waves or
patterns that are detectable over the course of several decades or
centuries. For example, the interest in sparser and more classic
clothing will recur at various intervals of time, not at precisely the
same intervals, but with a degree of regularity.
This phenomenon raises some interesting questions: Do these
shifts relate to something more than just the desire for what is new
and different? Do they reflect deeper changes in people’s psychology
and moods? And how do these changes occur, so that over enough
time we can detect them? Do they come from a top-down dynamic in
which certain individuals and tastemakers initiate a change, which is
then slowly picked up by the masses and spread virally? Or are these
tastemakers themselves responding to signs of change from within the
society as a whole, from that social force described in chapter 14,
giving it a bottom-up dynamic?
We can ask these questions about styles in music or any other
cultural form. But we can also ask them about changing styles in
thinking and theorizing, in how arguments in books are constructed.
Fifty years ago, many arguments were rooted in psychoanalysis and
sociology, writers often seeing the environment as the primary
influence on human behavior. The style was loose, literary, and given
to much speculation.
Now arguments tend to revolve around genetics and the human
brain, with everything having to be backed up by studies and statistics.
The mere appearance of numbers on a page can lend a certain air of
credibility to the argument. Speculation is frowned upon. Sentences
are shorter, designed to communicate information. But this change in
theorizing style is not anything new. We can notice a similar back-and-
forth—from the literary and speculative to the sober and data driven—
beginning in the eighteenth century and up to the present.
What is fascinating in these shifts in style is the limited range of
changes, their recurrence, and the increasing speed we now see in the
shifts, as if we are witnessing a quickening in human restlessness and
nervous energy. And if we examine this phenomenon closely enough,
we can see quite clearly that these seemingly superficial changes do in
fact reflect deeper alterations in people’s mood and values, emerging
from the bottom up. Something as simple as a desire for looser styles
of clothing, as happened in the 1780s, reflects an overall psychological
shift. Nothing is innocent in this realm. An interest in brighter colors,
or a harder sound in music, have something else to say about what is
stirring in the collective minds of the people of that time.
And in examining this phenomenon even more deeply, we can also
make the following discovery: what drives these changes is the
continual succession of new generations of young people, who are
trying to create something more relevant to their experience of the
world, something that reflects more their values and spirit and that
goes in a different direction from that of the previous generation. (We
can generally describe a generation as comprising around twenty-two
years, with those born at the earliest and latest parts of that period
often identifying more with the previous or succeeding generation.)
And this pattern of change from one generation to the next is itself
part of a larger pattern in history, going back thousands of years, in
which particular reactions and shifts in values recur rather regularly,
all of which suggests something about human nature that transcends
us as individuals, that has programmed us to repeat these patterns for
some reason.
Many of us intuit the truth about generations—how they tend to
have a kind of personality and how the younger generation initiates so
many changes. Some of us are in denial about the phenomenon
because we like to imagine that we as individuals shape what we think
and believe, or that other forces such as class, gender, and race play a
greater role. Certainly the study of generations can be imprecise; it is a
subtle and elusive subject. And other factors play a role as well. But
looking in depth at the phenomenon reveals that in fact it is more of
an influence than we generally imagine, and is in many ways the great
generator of so much that happens in history.
And understanding this generational phenomenon can yield several
other benefits: We can see what forces shaped our parents’ mind-set,
and then ours in turn, as we have tried to go in a different direction.
We can make better sense of the underlying changes going on in all
areas of society and begin to surmise where the world is headed, to
anticipate future trends, and to understand the role we can play in
shaping events. This can not only bring us great social power but can
also have a therapeutic, calming effect on us as we view events in the
world with some distance and equanimity, elevated above the chaotic
changes of the moment.
We shall call this knowledge generational awareness. To attain it,
first we must understand the actual profound effect that our
generation has on how we view the world, and second we must
understand the larger generational patterns that shape history and
recognize where our time period fits into the overall scheme.
The Generational Phenomenon
In our first years of life we are sponges, absorbing deeply the energy,
style, and ideas of our parents and teachers. We learn language,
certain essential values, ways of thinking, and how to function among
people. We are slowly inculcated with the culture of the time. Our
minds are supremely open at this moment, and because of this our
experiences are more intense and bound with strong emotions. As we
become a few years older, we become aware of our peers, those more
or less of the same age, going through the same process of assimilating
this strange new world we were cast into at birth.
Although we are encountering the same reality as everyone else
alive at the time, we are doing so from a peculiar angle—that of being a
child, physically smaller, more helpless, and dependent on adults.
From this point of view, the world of the adults can seem rather alien,
as we do not understand so well what motivates them, or their adult
cares or concerns. What our parents might take as serious we can
often see as comical or odd. We may watch the same forms of
entertainment as they do, but we see them from the angle of a child,
with little life experience. We don’t have the power yet to affect this
world, but we start to interpret it in our own way, and we share this
with our peers.
Then, when we reach our teen years or perhaps earlier, we become
aware that we are part of a generation of young people (focusing more
on those around our age) with whom we can identify. We bond over
our particular way of seeing things and the similar sense of humor we
have developed; we also tend to form common ideals about success
and coolness, among other values. In these years, we inevitably go
through a period of rebellion, struggling to find our own identity,
separate from our parents. This makes us deeply attuned to
appearances—to styles and fashions. We want to show that we belong
to our generational tribe, with its own look and manner.
Often a decisive event or trend will occur during these youthful
years—this could be a major war, a political scandal, a financial crisis
or economic boom. It could also be the invention of some new form of
technology that has a profound impact on social relations. Because we
are so young and impressionable, such events have a decisive
influence on the generational personality that is forming, making us
cautious (if it is a war or crash in the economy) or hungry for
adventure (if it is something that sparks prosperity or stability).
Naturally, we view such decisive events very differently from our
parents and are affected more deeply.
As we become more aware of what is going on in the world, we
often come to see the ideas and values of our parents as not fitting very
well our own experience of reality. What they have told or taught us
does not seem so relevant, and we hunger for ideas that are more
related to our youthful experience.
In this first phase of life, we shape a generational perspective. It is a
kind of collective mind-set, as we absorb the prevailing culture at the
same time as our peers, from the point of view of childhood and youth.
And because we are too young to understand or analyze this
perspective, we are generally ignorant of its formation and how it
influences what we see and how we interpret events.
Then, when we reach our twenties and into our thirties, we enter a
new phase of life and experience a shift. Now we are in a position to
assume some power, to actually alter this world according to our own
values and ideals. As we progress in our work, we begin to influence
the culture and its politics. We inevitably clash with the older
generation that has held power for some time, as they insist on their
own way of acting and evaluating events. Many of them often view us
as immature, unsophisticated, soft, undisciplined, pampered,
unenlightened, and certainly not ready to assume power.
In some periods, the youth culture that is generated is so strong
that it comes to dominate the culture at large—in the 1920s and the
1960s, for instance. In other periods, the older generation in positions
of leadership is much more dominant, and the influence of the
emerging adults in their twenties is less noticeable. In any event, to a
greater or lesser degree, a struggle and clash occurs between these two
generations and their perspectives.
Then, as we enter our forties and midlife and assume many of the
leadership positions in society, we begin to take notice of a younger
generation that is fighting for its own power and position. Its members
are now judging us and finding our own style and ideas rather
irrelevant. We begin to judge them in return, describing them as
immature, unsophisticated, soft, et cetera. We might begin to entertain
the notion that the world is heading downhill fast, the values we found
so important no longer mattering to this youthful set.
When we judge in this way, we are not aware that we are reacting
according to a pattern that has existed for at least three thousand
years. (There is an inscription on a Babylonian clay tablet that dates
from around 1000 BC that reads, “Today’s youth is rotten, evil, godless
and lazy. It will never be what youth used to be, and it will never be
able to preserve our culture.” We find similar complaints in all
cultures and in all time periods.) We think we are judging the younger
generation in an objective manner, but we are merely succumbing to
an illusion of perspective. It is also true that we are probably
experiencing some hidden envy of their youth and mourning the loss
of our own.
When it comes to the changes generated by the tensions between
two generations, we can say that the greater part of them will come
from the young. They are more restless, in search of their own identity,
and more attuned to the group and how they fit in. By the time such a
younger generation emerges into their thirties and forties, they will
have shaped the world with their changes and given it a look and feel
that is distinct from their parents.
When looking at any generation, we naturally see variations within
it. We find individuals who are more aggressive than others—they tend
to be leaders, the ones who sense the styles and trends of the time and
express them first. They have less fear about breaking with the past
and defying the older generation. Danton exemplifies this type. We
also find a much larger group of followers who are not so aggressive,
who find it more exciting to keep up with trends, helping to shape and
promote them. And finally, we also find the rebels, those types who
defy their own generation and define themselves by going against the
grain. This could include the beatniks of the 1950s or those young
people in the 1960s who gravitated toward conservative politics.
We can say of these rebel types that they are just as marked by their
generation as anyone, but in reverse. And in fact, much of the same
spirit of the generation can be detected underneath this reverse
version—for instance, those younger people in the 1780s who rallied
around the aristocracy and in defense of the monarchy often felt a very
romanticized love of the old order; the young conservatives of the
1960s were just as preachy, fanatic, and idealistic in their reverse
values as the majority. The generational mind-set inevitably
dominates everyone from within, no matter how they personally try to
react against it. We cannot step outside the historical moment that we
are born into.
In considering this mind-set, we must try to think in terms of a
collective personality, or what we shall call spirit. Our generation has
inherited from our parents and the past certain key values and ways of
looking at the world that remain unquestioned. But at any moment,
people of a new generation are searching for something more alive and
relevant, something that expresses what is different, what is altering in
the present. This sense of what is moving and evolving in the present,
as opposed to what is inherited from the past, is the collective spirit
itself, its restless and searching nature. It is not something we can
easily put into words. It is more a mood, an emotional tone, a way that
people relate to one another.
That is why we can often best associate the generational spirit with
its dominant musical style, or an artistic trend for a certain type of
imagery, or a mood captured in the literature or films of that
generation. For instance, nothing better captures the wild spirit and
frenetic pace of the 1920s than the jazz of the period and the brassy
sound of the saxophone, which was the new rage.
This spirit will tend to alter as our generation passes through the
various phases of life. How we collectively relate to the world will not
be the same in our fifties as it was in our twenties. Circumstances,
historical events, and the aging process will modify this spirit. But, as
with any individual, there is something in the generational personality
that remains intact and transcends the passing years.
The famous lost generation of the 1920s, with its flappers and wild
jazz, had certain noticeable obsessions and traits during this decade—
wild parties, alcohol, sex, money, and success, as well as a hard-boiled,
cynical attitude toward life. As it aged, its members tended to drop the
pursuit of some of these pleasures and manias, but in their later years,
they remained rather tough, cynical, materialistic, and brazen in
expressing their opinions. The baby boomers who came of age in the
1960s displayed an intense idealism and a propensity to judge and
moralize. They tend to retain such qualities, but their ideals and what
they moralize about have shifted.
If our generation has a particular spirit to it, we could say the same
for the time period that we are living through, which generally
comprises four generations alive at the same time. The blending of
these generations, the tension among them, and the clashing that
often occurs create what we shall call the overall spirit of the times or
what is commonly known as the zeitgeist. For instance, when it comes
to the 1960s, we cannot separate the mood of the powerful youth
culture of that period from the antagonism and dismay it stirred
among those who were older. The dynamic and spirit of those times
came from the dramatic interaction of two clashing perspectives.
To see this in your own experience, look back at periods in the past
in which you were alive and conscious, at least some twenty years ago,
if you are old enough. With some distance, you can reflect upon how
different those times felt, what was in the air, how people interacted,
the degree of tension. The spirit of that period is not only in the styles
and clothes that are different from those of the present, but also in
something social and collective, an overall mood or feeling in the air.
Even the differences in fashions and architecture, the colors that
became popular, the look of the cars speaks of a spirit behind them
that is animating these changes and choices.
That spirit can be characterized as wild and open, with people
hungry for all kinds of social interaction; or it can be rather tight and
cautious, with people prone to conforming and being hypercorrect; it
can be cynical or hopeful, stale or creative. What you want to do is to
be able to gauge the spirit of the present moment, with a similar sense
of distance, and to see where your generation fits into the overall
scheme of history, giving you a sense of where things might be headed.
Generational Patterns
Since the beginning of recorded time, certain writers and thinkers
have intuited a pattern to human history. It was perhaps the great
fourteenth-century Islamic scholar Ibn Khaldun who first formulated
this idea into the theory that history seems to move in four acts,
corresponding to four generations.
The first generation is that of the revolutionaries who make a
radical break with the past, establishing new values but also creating
some chaos in the struggle to do so. Often in this generation there are
some great leaders or prophets who influence the direction of the
revolution and leave their stamp on it. Then along comes a second
generation that craves some order. They are still feeling the heat of the
revolution itself, having lived through it at a very early age, but they
want to stabilize the world, establish some conventions and dogma.
Those of the third generation—having little direct connection to the
founders of the revolution—feel less passionate about it. They are
pragmatists. They want to solve problems and make life as
comfortable as possible. They are not so interested in ideas but rather
in building things. In the process, they tend to drain out the spirit of
the original revolution. Material concerns predominate, and people
can become quite individualistic.
Along comes the fourth generation, which feels that society has lost
its vitality, but they are not sure what should replace it. They begin to
question the values they have inherited, some becoming quite cynical.
Nobody knows what to believe in anymore. A crisis of sorts emerges.
Then comes the revolutionary generation, which, unified around some
new belief, finally tears down the old order, and the cycle continues.
This revolution can be extreme and violent, or it can be less intense,
with simply the emergence of new and different values.
Although this pattern certainly has variations and is not a science,
we tend to see a lot of the overall sequencing in history. Most notable
of all is the emergence of the fourth generation and the crisis in values
that comes with it. This period is often the most painful to live through
—we humans feel a deep need to believe in something, and when we
begin to doubt and question the old order and sense a vacuum in our
values, we can go a little mad. We tend to latch onto the latest belief
systems peddled by the charlatans and demagogues who thrive in such
periods. We look for scapegoats for all the problems that now arise
and the spreading dissatisfaction. Without a unifying belief to anchor
and calm us, we become tribal, relying on some small affinity group to
give us a feeling of belonging.
Often, in a crisis period, we will notice the forming of a subgroup
among those who feel particularly anxious and resentful at the
breakdown of order. They are often people who felt somewhat
privileged in the past, and the chaos and coming change threatens
what they have taken for granted. They want to hold on to the past,
return to some golden age they can vaguely remember, and prevent
any coming revolution. They are doomed, because the cycle cannot be
stopped, and the past cannot be magically brought back to life. But as
this crisis period fades and begins to merge into the revolutionary
period, we often detect rising levels of excitement, as those who are
young and particularly hungry for something new can sense the
changes coming that they have set up in their own way.
It seems that we are living through such a crisis period, with a
generation that is experiencing it in its key phase in life. Although we
cannot see how close we might be to the end of this period, such times
never last too long, because the human spirit will not tolerate them.
Some unifying belief system is in gestation, and some new values are
being generated that we cannot yet see.
At the core of this pattern is a continual back-and-forth rhythm that
comes from emerging generations reacting against the imbalances and
mistakes of the previous generation. If we go back four generations in
our own time we can clearly see this. We start with the silent
generation. As children experiencing the Great Depression and as
adults coming of age during World War II and the postwar period,
they became rather cautious and conservative, valuing stability,
material comforts, and fitting tightly into the group. The next
generation, the baby boomers, found the conformity of their parents
rather stifling. Emerging in the 1960s, and not haunted by the harsh
financial realities of their parents, this generation valued personal
expression, having adventures, and being idealistic.
This was followed by Generation X, which was marked by the chaos
of the 1960s and the ensuing social and political scandals. Coming of
age in the 1980s and 1990s, it was pragmatic and confrontational,
valuing individualism and self-reliance. This generation reacted
against the hypocrisies and impracticalities in their parents’ idealism.
This was followed by the millennial generation. Traumatized by
terrorism and a financial crisis, they reacted against the individualism
of the last generation, craving security and teamwork, with a noted
dislike of conflict and confrontation.
We can deduce two important lessons from this: First, our values
will often depend upon where we fall in this pattern and how our
generation reacts against the particular imbalances of the previous
generation. We would simply not be the same person we are now, with
the same attitude and ideals, if we had emerged during the 1920s or
the 1950s instead of later periods. We are not aware of this critical
influence because it is too close to us to observe. Certainly we bring
our own individual spirit into play in this drama, and to the degree
that we can cultivate our uniqueness, we will gain power and the
ability to direct the zeitgeist. But it is critical that we recognize first the
dominant role that our generation plays in our formation, and where
this generation falls in the pattern.
Second, we notice that generations seem capable only of reacting
and moving in an opposing direction to the previous generation.
Perhaps this is because a generational perspective is formed in youth,
when we are more insecure and prone to thinking in black-and-white
terms. A middle way, a balanced form of choosing what might be good
or bad in the values and trends of the previous generation, seems
contrary to our collective nature.
On the other hand, this back-and-forth pattern has a salutary effect.
If one generation simply carried forward the tendencies of the
previous one, we would probably have destroyed ourselves long ago.
Imagine generations that succeeded the wildness of the 1920s or the
1960s by continuing with this spirit, and going further with it; or a
generation that succeeded the 1950s by remaining equally
conservative and conformist. We would suffocate ourselves with too
much self-expression or stagnation. The pattern may lead to
imbalances, but it also ensures that we revitalize ourselves.
Sometimes the changes that are generated in a revolutionary period
are rather trivial and do not last past the cycle. But sometimes, from a
strong crisis, a revolution forges something new that lasts for centuries
and represents progress toward values that are more rational and
empathetic. In seeing this historical pattern, we must recognize what
seems to be an overall human spirit that transcends any particular
time and that keeps us evolving. If for any reason the cycle stopped, we
would be doomed.
—
Your task as a student of human nature is threefold: First and
foremost, you must alter your attitude toward your own generation.
We like to imagine that we are autonomous and that our values and
ideas come from within, not without, but this is in fact not the case.
Your goal is to understand as deeply as possible how profoundly the
spirit of your generation, and the times that you live in, have
influenced how you perceive the world.
We are usually hypersensitive when it comes to our own
generation. The perspective was formed in our childhood, when we
were most vulnerable, and our emotional bond to our peers was
established early on. We often hear an older or younger generation
criticizing us, and we naturally become defensive. When it comes to
the flaws or imbalances in our generation, our tendency is to see them
as virtues. For instance, if we grew up in a generation that was more
fearful and cautious, we might shy away from major responsibilities,
such as owning a house or a car. We will interpret this as a desire for
freedom or a desire to help the environment, unwilling to confront the
fears that are really underneath it all.
We cannot understand our generation in the same way that we
understand a scientific fact, such as the characteristics of an organism.
It is something alive within us, and our understanding of it is tainted
by our own emotions and biases. What you must do is to try to attack
the problem free from judgments and moralizing, and to become as
objective as humanly possible. The personality of your generation is
neither positive nor negative; it is simply an outgrowth of the organic
process described above.
Consider yourself a kind of archaeologist digging into your own
past and that of your generation, looking for artifacts, for observations
that you can piece together to form a picture of the underlying spirit.
When you examine your memories, try to do so with some distance,
even when you recall the emotions you felt at the time. Catch yourself
in the inevitable process of making judgments of good and bad about
your generation or the next one, and let go of them. You can develop
such a skill through practice. Forging such an attitude will play a key
role in your development. With some distance and awareness, you can
become much more than a follower of or a rebel against your
generation; you can mold your own relationship to the zeitgeist and
become a formidable trendsetter.
Your second task is to create a kind of personality profile of your
generation, so that you can understand its spirit in the present and
exploit it. Keep in mind that there are always nuances and exceptions.
What you are looking for is common traits that signal an overall spirit.
You can begin this by looking at the decisive events that occurred in
the years before you entered the work world and that played a large
role in shaping this personality. If this period comprises more or less
twenty-two years, there is often more than just one decisive event for
that period. For instance, for those who came of age during the 1930s,
there was the Depression and then the advent of World War II. For the
baby boomers, there was the Vietnam War, and later Watergate and
the political scandals of the early 1970s.
Generation X were children during the sexual revolution and
adolescents in the era of latchkey kids. For millennials there was 9/11
and then the financial meltdown of 2008. Depending on where you
fall, both will influence you, but one more than the other, as it occurs
closer to those formative years between ten and eighteen, when you
were gaining awareness of the wider world and developing core values.
Some times, such as the 1950s, can be periods of relative stability
bordering on stagnation. This will have a powerful effect as well,
considering the restlessness of the human mind, particularly among
the young, who will come to yearn for adventure and to stir things up.
You must also factor into this equation any major technological
advances or inventions that alter how people interact.
Try to map out the ramifications of these decisive events. Pay
particular attention to the effect they may have had on the pattern of
socialization that will characterize your generation. If the event was a
major crisis of some sort, that will tend to make those of your
generation band together for comfort and security, valuing the team
and feelings of love, and allergic to confrontation. A period of stability
and nonevents will make you gravitate toward others for adventure,
for group experimentation, sometimes bordering on the reckless. In
general, you will tend to notice a socializing style of your peers, most
evident in your twenties. Search for the roots of this.
These larger events will have an effect on how you view success and
money and whether you value status and wealth or less material values
such as creativity and personal expression. How those of your
generation view failure in a venture or career will be quite telling—is it
a badge of shame or considered part of the entrepreneurial process,
even a positive experience? You can gauge this as well by those years
when you entered the work world—did you feel the pressure to start
making money right away, or was it a time to explore the world and
have adventures, then settle on something in your thirties?
In filling out this profile, look at the parenting styles of those who
raised you—permissive, overcontrolling, neglectful, or empathetic. The
famously permissive style of those who raised children in the 1890s
helped create the wild, carefree attitude of the lost generation of the
1920s. Those parents who were deeply affected by the 1960s often
ended up being quite self-absorbed and somewhat neglectful toward
their children, who could not help but feel a bit alienated and even
angry because of this. Parents who are overprotective will shape a
generation that fears going outside its comfort zones. These parenting
styles come in waves. The children who were overprotected do not
generally become helicopter parents. Your own parents might have
been an exception to the prevailing style, but you will notice a
personality stamp on your peers that will become very evident in the
teen years and early twenties.
Pay close attention to the heroes and icons of a generation, those
who act out the qualities that others secretly wish they had as well.
They are often the types who gain celebrity in youth culture—the
rebels, the successful entrepreneurs, the gurus, the activists. These
indicate emerging new values. Similarly, look at the trends and fads
that suddenly sweep through your generation, for instance the sudden
popularity of digital currencies. Do not take these trends at face value,
but look for the underlying spirit, the unconscious attraction toward
certain values or ideals that they reveal. Nothing is too trivial for this
analysis.
Like an individual, any generation will tend to have an
unconscious, shadow side to its personality. A good sign of this can be
found in the particular style of humor that each generation tends to
forge. In humor people release their frustrations and express their
inhibitions. Such humor could tend toward the irrational, or
something edgier and even aggressive. A generation might seem rather
prudish and correct, but its humor is raunchy and irreverent. This is
the shadow side leaking out.
As part of this, you will want to look at the relationship of the
genders in your generation. In the 1920s and 1930s, men and women
were trying to bridge their differences, to socialize in mixed groups as
much as possible. The male icons were often quite feminine, such as
Rudolph Valentino; and the female icons had a pronounced masculine
or androgynous edge, such as Marlene Dietrich and Josephine Baker.
Contrast this with the 1950s and the sudden and rather strong split
between the genders, revealing an unconscious discomfort with and
split from the cross-gender tendencies we all feel (see chapter 12).
In looking at this shadow side of your generation, keep in mind that
its tendency toward one extreme—materialism, spirituality, adventure,
safety—conceals a hidden attraction to the opposite. A generation like
the one that came of age in the 1960s seemed disinterested in material
things. Its main values were spiritual and inward, being spontaneous
and what was thought of as authentic, all of this in reaction to their
materialistic parents. But underneath this spirit, we could detect a
secret attraction to the material side of life, in the desire to always
have the best of something—the latest sound systems, the highest-
quality drugs, the hippest clothes. This attraction was revealed in all
its truth during the yuppie years of the late 1970s and early 1980s.
With all of this accumulated knowledge you can begin to form an
overall profile of your generation, one that is as complex and organic
as the phenomenon itself.
Your third task, then, is to expand this knowledge to something
broader, first trying to piece together what could be considered the
zeitgeist. In this sense, you are looking particularly at the relationship
between the two dominant generations, early adults (ages twenty-two
to forty-four) and those in midlife (forty-five to sixty-six). No matter
how close the parents and children of these generations might seem,
there is always an underlying tension, along with some resentment
and envy. There are natural differences between their values and how
they look at the world. You want to examine this tension and
determine which generation tends to dominate and how this power
dynamic might be shifting in the present. You will also want to see
which part of the larger historical pattern your generation might fit
into.
This overall awareness will yield several important benefits. For
instance, your generational perspective tends to create a particular
kind of myopia. Each generation tends toward some imbalance as it
reacts against the previous one. It views and judges everything
according to certain values that it holds over others and this closes the
mind to other possibilities. We can be both idealistic and pragmatic,
value teamwork and our own individual spirit, et cetera. There is much
to be gained by looking at the world from the perspective of your
parents or your children, and even adopting some of their values.
Feeling that your generation is superior is simply an illusion. Your
awareness will free you from these mental blocks and illusions,
making your mind more fluid and creative. You will be able to shape
your own values and ideas and not be such a product of the times.
With your awareness of the overall zeitgeist, you will also
understand the historical context. You will have a sense of where the
world is headed. You can anticipate what is around the corner. With
such knowledge, you can bring your own individual spirit into play
and help shape this future that is gestating in the present.
And feeling deeply connected to the unbroken chain of history, and
your role in this grand historical drama, will infuse you with a
calmness that will make everything in life more bearable. You do not
overreact at the outrage of the day. You do not go gaga over the latest
trend. You are aware of the pattern that will tend to swing things in a
different direction within a period of time. If you feel out of harmony
with the times, you know that the bad days will end and you can play
your part in making the next wave happen.
Keep in mind that this knowledge is more critical to posses now
than ever, for two reasons. First, despite any antiglobal sentiments
sweeping the world, technology and social media have unified us in
inalterable ways. This means that people of one generation will often
have more in common with those of the same generation in other
cultures than with older generations in their own country. This
unprecedented state of affairs means that the zeitgeist is more directly
globalized than ever before, making knowledge of it that much more
essential and powerful.
And second, because of these sharp changes initiated by
technological innovations, the pace has quickened, creating a self-
fulfilling dynamic. Young people feel almost addicted to this pace and
crave more shifts, even if of a trivial nature. With the quickening pace
there are more crises, which only speeds up the process. This pace will
tend to make you get dizzy and lose your perspective. You might
imagine some trivial shift as groundbreaking and will thus ignore the
real groundbreaking change under way. You will not be able to keep
up, let alone anticipate what might come next. Only your generational
awareness, your calm historical perspective, will allow you to master
such times.
Strategies for Exploiting the Spirit of the Times
To make the most of the zeitgeist, you must begin with a simple
premise: you are a product of the times as much as anyone; the
generation you were born into has shaped your thoughts and values,
whether you are aware of this or not. And so, if you feel from deep
within some frustration with the way things are in the world or with
the older generation, or if you sense there is something that is missing
in the culture, you can be almost certain that other people of your
generation are feeling the same way. And if you are the one to act on
this feeling, your work will resonate with your generation and help
shape the zeitgeist. With this in mind, you must put into practice some
or all of the following strategies.
Push against the past. You may feel a deep need to create something
new and more relevant to your generation, but the past will almost
always exercise a strong pull on you, in the form of the values of your
parents that you internalized at a young age. Inevitably you are a bit
fearful and conflicted. And because of this, you might hesitate to go
full throttle with whatever you do or express, and your defiance of the
past ways of doing things will tend to be rather tepid.
Instead you must force yourself in the opposite direction. Use the
past and its values or ideas as something to push against with great
force, using any anger you might feel to help in this. Make your break
with the past as sharp and clear as possible. Express what is taboo;
shatter the conventions that the older generation adheres to. All of this
will excite and attract the attention of people of your generation, many
of whom will want to follow your lead.
It was by being so audacious and defiant of the older generation
that the Earl of Essex epitomized the new, confident spirit of post-
armada England and became the darling of his generation (see chapter
15 for more on this). Danton gained power by how far he went in
defying the monarchy and fomenting for the republic. In the 1920s,
the African American dancer Josephine Baker came to exemplify the
new spirit of spontaneity among the lost generation by making her
performances as unfettered and shocking as possible. By breaking so
deeply with the past images of previous first ladies and their usual
demure manner, Jacqueline Kennedy became the icon for the new
spirit of the early 1960s. In going further in this direction, you create a
shock of the new and spark desires among others that are waiting to
come out.
Adapt the past to the present spirit. Once you identify the essence of
the zeitgeist, it is often a wise strategy to find some analogous moment
or period in history. The frustrations and rebellions of your generation
were certainly felt to some degree by some previous generation and
were expressed in dramatic fashion. The leaders of such past
generations resonate through history and take on a kind of mythic hue
the more time passes. By associating yourself with those figures or
times, you can give added weight to whatever movement or innovation
you are promoting. You take some of the emotionally loaded symbols
and styles of that historical period and adapt them, giving the
impression that what you are attempting in the present is a more
perfect and progressive version of what happened in the past.
In doing this, think in grand, mythic terms. Danton associated
himself with Cicero, whose speeches and actions in favor of the Roman
Republic and against tyranny naturally resonated with many French
people and gave Danton’s mission the added weight of the ancient
past. The filmmaker Akira Kurosawa brought back to life the world of
the samurai warrior, so celebrated in Japanese culture, but re-created
it in such a way as to make judicious comments on the issues and
moods of postwar Japan. When running for president, John F.
Kennedy wanted to herald a new American spirit that was moving past
the staleness of the 1950s. He called the programs he would initiate
the New Frontier, associating his ideas with the pioneer spirit so
reverentially ingrained in the American psyche. Such imagery became
a powerful part of his appeal.
Resurrect the spirit of childhood. By bringing to life the spirit of
your early years—its humor, its decisive historical events, the styles
and products of the period, the feeling in the air as it affected you—you
will reach a vast audience of all those who experienced those years in a
similar way. It was a time of life of great emotional intensity, and by
re-creating it in some form, but reflected through the eyes of an adult,
your work will resonate with your peers. You must use this strategy
only if you feel a particularly powerful connection to your childhood.
Otherwise your attempt to re-create the spirit will seem flat and
contrived.
Keep in mind that you are not aiming for a literal re-creation of the
past but capturing its spirit. To have real power, it should connect to
some issue or problem in the present and not simply be some mindless
bit of nostalgia. If you are inventing something, try to update and
incorporate the styles of that childhood period in a subtle manner,
exploiting the unconscious attraction we all feel to that early period in
life.
Create the new social configuration. It is human nature for people
to crave more social interaction with those with whom they feel an
affinity. You will always gain great power by forging some new way of
interacting that appeals to your generation. You organize a group
around new ideas or values that are in the air or the latest technology
that allows you to bring people together of a like mind in a novel way.
You eliminate the middlemen who used to set up barriers that
prevented freer associations of people. In this new form of a group, it
is always wise to introduce some rituals that bond the members
together and some symbols to identify with.
We see many examples of this in the past—the salons of
seventeenth-century France, where men and women could talk freely
and openly; the lodges of the Freemasons in eighteenth-century
Europe, with their secret rituals and air of subversion; the speakeasies
and jazz clubs of the 1920s, where the mood was “anything goes”; or
more recently, online platforms and groups, or flash mobs. In using
this strategy, think of the repressive elements of the past that people
are yearning to shake free of. This could be a period of stultifying
correctness or prudery, or rampant conformity, or the overvaluing of
individualism and all the selfishness that breeds. The group you
establish will let flourish a new spirit and even offer the thrill of
breaking past taboos on correctness.
Subvert the spirit. You might find yourself at odds with some part
of the spirit of your generation or the times you live in. Perhaps you
identify with some tradition in the past that has been superseded, or
your values differ in some way because of your own individual
temperament. Whatever the reason, it is never wise to preach or
moralize or condemn the spirit of the times. You will only marginalize
yourself. If the spirit of the times is like a tide or a stream, better to
find a way to gently redirect it, instead of fighting its direction. You
will have more power and effect by working within the zeitgeist and
subverting it.
For instance, you make something—a book, a film, any product—
that has the look and feel of the times, even to an exaggerated degree.
However, through the content of what you produce, you insert ideas
and a spirit that is somewhat different, that points to the value of the
past you prefer or depicts another possible way of relating to events or
interpreting them, helping to loosen up the tight generational
framework through which people view their world.
After World War II, the great European fashion designers felt a
great deal of disdain for the American market that now dominated the
world. They disliked the emerging popular culture and its vulgarity.
The fashion designer Coco Chanel had always emphasized elegance in
her designs and certainly shared some of this antipathy. But she went
in the opposite direction of other designers of the time: she embraced
the new power of American women and catered to their desire for
clothing that was less fussy and more athletic. Gaining their trust and
using their language, Chanel now had great power to subtly alter
American tastes, bringing in more of her true sensibility and imparting
some elegance to the streamlined designs American women loved. In
this way she helped redirect the zeitgeist in fashion, anticipating the
changes of the early 1960s. That is the power that comes from working
with the spirit rather than against it.
Keep adapting. It was in your youth that your generation forged its
particular spirit, a period of emotional intensity that we often
remember fondly. The problem that you face is that as you get older,
you tend to remain locked in the values, ideas, and styles that marked
this period. You become a kind of caricature of the past to those who
are younger. You stop evolving with your thinking. The times leave you
behind, which only makes you hold on more tightly to the past as your
only anchor. And as you age, and more and more young people occupy
the public stage, you narrow your audience.
It is not that you should abandon the spirit that marked you, a
rather impossible task anyway. Trying to ape the styles of the younger
generation will only make you seem ludicrous and inauthentic. What
you want is to modernize your spirit, to possibly adopt some of the
values and ideas of the younger generation that appeal to you, gaining
a new and wider audience by blending your experience and
perspective with the changes going on, making yourself into an
unusual and appealing hybrid.
For the film director Alfred Hitchcock, the decade that shaped him
and his work was the 1920s, when he entered the industry and became
a director. What mattered most in these silent films was perfecting a
visual language for telling a story. Hitchcock mastered the art of using
camera angles and movement to make the audience feel as if it were in
the middle of the story.
He never abandoned this obsession with visual language
throughout the six decades he worked as a director, but he continually
adapted his style—to the color spectacles so much in vogue in the
1950s and to the popular thrillers and horror films of the sixties and
seventies. Unlike other aging film directors, who either fell completely
out of fashion or simply tried to mimic the current style, Hitchcock
created a hybrid of the past and the present. This gave his later films
tremendous depth, as he had incorporated all of the adaptations from
earlier in his career. His films could have mass appeal, but they were
made unique by these layers of innovations embedded in the film.
Such depth will always have an uncanny effect on any audience, as
your work seems beyond time itself.
The Human Beyond Time and Death
We humans are masters of transforming whatever we get our hands
on. We have completely transformed the environment of the planet
Earth to suit our purposes. We have transformed ourselves from a
physically weak species into the preeminent and most powerful social
animal, effectively enlarging and rewiring our brains as we did so. We
are restless and endlessly inventive. But one area seems to defy our
transformational powers—time itself. We are born and enter the
stream of life, and each day it carries us closer to death. Time is linear,
always advancing, and there is nothing we can do to stop its course.
We move through the various phases of life, which mark us
according to patterns beyond our control. Our bodies and minds slow
down and lose their youthful elasticity. We watch helplessly as more
and more young people fill the stage of life, pushing us to the side. We
are born into a period of history and into a generation that are not of
our choice and that seem to determine so much of who we are and
what happens to us. In relation to time, our active nature is
neutralized, and although we do not consciously register this, our
helplessness here is the source of much of our anxiety and bouts of
depression.
If we look more closely, however, at our personal experience of
time, we can notice something peculiar—the passage of the hours or
days can alter depending on our mood and circumstances. A child and
an adult experience time very differently—for the former it moves
rather slowly, and all too quickly for the latter. When we are bored,
time feels empty and grinds to a crawl; when we are excited and
enjoying ourselves, we wish it would slow down. When we are calm
and meditative, the time might pass slowly, but it seems full and
satisfying.
What this means in general is that time is a human creation, a way
for us to measure its passage for our own purposes, and our
experience of this artificial creation is quite subjective and changeable.
We have the power to consciously slow it down or speed it up. Our
relationship to time is more malleable than we think. Although we
cannot stop the aging process or defy the ultimate reality of death, we
can alter the experience of them, transforming what is painful and
depressing into something much different. We can make time feel
more cyclical than linear; we can even step outside the stream and
experience forms of timelessness. We do not have to remain locked in
the hold of our generation and its perspective.
Although this might seem like wishful thinking, we can point to
various historical figures—Leonardo da Vinci and Johann Wolfgang
von Goethe, to name two—who consciously transcended their era and
described their transformed experience of time. It is an ideal, one that
our active nature allows for, and one well worth aiming to realize to
some degree.
Here’s how we could apply this active approach to four elemental
aspects of time.
The phases of life: As we pass through the phases of life—youth,
emerging adult, middle age, and old age—we notice certain common
changes in us. In our youth we experience life more intensely. We are
more emotional and vulnerable. Most of us tend to be outwardly
focused, concerned with what people might think of us and with how
we fit in. We are more gregarious but prone to foolish behavior and
self-righteousness.
As we get older, the intensity diminishes, our minds tend to tighten
up around certain conventional ideas and beliefs. We slowly become
less concerned with what people think of us, and thus more inwardly
directed. What we sometimes gain in these later phases is some
distance from life, some self-control, and perhaps the wisdom that
comes from accumulating experiences.
We have the power, however, to drop or mitigate the negative
qualities that often go with certain phases of life, in a way defying the
aging process itself. For instance, when we are young, we can make a
point of lessening the influence of the group on us and not being so
fixated on what others are thinking and doing. We can make ourselves
more inwardly directed, more in harmony with our uniqueness (see
chapter 13 for more on this). We can consciously develop more of that
inner distance that comes naturally with the years, think more deeply
about our experiences, learn the lessons from them, and develop a
premature wisdom.
As we age, we can strive to retain the positive youthful qualities that
often fade with the years. For instance, we can regain some of the
natural curiosity we had as children by dropping some of the
smugness and know-it-all attitude that often come over us as we get
older. We keep looking at the world through a fresh framework,
questioning our own values and preconceptions, making our minds
more fluid and creative in the process. As part of this, we can learn a
new skill or study a new field to return us to the joy we once had in
learning something new. We can also meditate on some of the more
intense experiences in our youth, putting ourselves back in those
moments through our imagination, connecting more deeply to who we
were. We can feel that youthful intensity return to some degree in our
present experiences.
Part of the reason we become less gregarious with the years is that
we become judgmental and intolerant of people’s quirks, all of which
does not enhance our experience of life. We can alter that as well by
coming to understand human nature more deeply and accepting
people as they are.
Aging has a psychological component and can be a self-fulfilling
prophecy—we tell ourselves we are slowing down and cannot do or
attempt as much as we did in past, and as we act on these thoughts, we
intensify the aging process, which makes us depressed and prone to
slow down even more. We can see icons in the past like Benjamin
Franklin, who went in the opposite direction, continually challenging
his mind and body as he aged, and who by all accounts retained the
most delightfully childlike and jovial disposition well into his seventies
and eighties.
Present generations: Your goal here is to be less a product of the
times and to gain the ability to transform your relationship to your
generation. A key way of doing this is through active associations with
people of different generations. If you are younger, you try to interact
more with those of older generations. Some of them, who seem to have
a spirit you can identify with, you can try to cultivate as mentors and
role models. Others you relate to as you would your peers—not feeling
superior or inferior but paying deep attention to their values, ideas,
and perspectives, helping to widen your own.
If you are older, you reverse this by actively interacting with those
of a younger generation, not as a parent or authority figure but as a
peer. You allow yourself to absorb their spirit, their different way of
thinking, and their enthusiasm. You approach them with the idea that
they have something to teach you.
In interacting on a more authentic level with those of different
generations, you are creating a unique bond—that of people alive at
the same time in history. This will only enhance your grasp of the
zeitgeist.
Past generations: When we think about history, we tend to render
the past into a kind of dead and spiritless caricature. Perhaps we feel
smug and superior to past eras, and so we focus on those aspects of
history that indicate backward ideas and values (not realizing that
future generations will do the same to us), seeing what we want to see.
Or we project onto the past the ideas and values of the present, which
have little relation to how those of the past experienced the world. We
drain away their own generational perspective, something we see most
obviously in filmed versions of history, where people talk and act just
like us, only in costumes. Or we simply ignore history, imagining it has
no relevance to our present experience.
We must rid ourselves of such absurd notions and habits. We are
not as superior to those in the past as we like to imagine (see previous
chapters on irrationality, shortsightedness, envy, grandiosity,
conformity, and aggression). There are cultural moments in history
that were superior to our own when it comes to participatory
democracy, or creative thinking, or cultural liveliness. There are
periods in the past in which people had a deeper grasp of human
psychology and a bracing realism that would make us look quite
deluded by comparison. Although human nature remains a constant,
those in the past faced different circumstances with different levels of
technology and had values and beliefs quite different from our own,
and not necessarily inferior. They had the values that reflected their
different circumstances, and we would have shared them as well.
Most important of all, however, we must understand that the past is
by no means dead. We do not emerge in life as blank slates, divorced
from millions of years of evolution. All that we think and experience,
our most intimate thoughts and beliefs, are shaped by the struggles of
past generations. So many ways we relate to the world now came from
changes in thinking long ago.
Whenever we see people who completely sacrifice everything for
some cause, they are reliving a shift in values initiated by the early
Christians of the first century, who revolutionized our way of thinking
by devoting all aspects of life to some ideal. Whenever we fall in love
and idealize the beloved, we are reliving the emotions that the
troubadours of the twelfth century introduced into the Western world,
a sentiment that had never existed before.
Whenever we extol emotions and spontaneity over the intellect and
effort, we are reexperiencing what the Romantic movements of the
eighteenth century first introduced into our psychology. We are not
aware of all this, but we in the present are motley products of all the
accumulated changes in human thinking and psychology. By making
the past into something dead, we are merely denying who we are. We
become rootless and barbaric, disconnected from our nature.
You must radically alter your own relationship to history, bringing
it back to life within you. Begin by taking some era in the past, one that
particularly excites you for whatever reason. Try to re-create the spirit
of those times, to get inside the subjective experience of the actors you
are reading about, using your active imagination. See the world
through their eyes. Make use of the excellent books written in the last
hundred years to help you gain a feel for daily life in particular periods
(for example, Everyday Life in Ancient Rome by Lionel Casson or The
Waning of the Middle Ages by Johan Huizinga). In the literature of
the time you can detect the prevailing spirit. The novels of F. Scott
Fitzgerald will give you a much livelier connection to the Jazz Age than
any scholarly book on the subject. Drop any tendencies to judge or
moralize. People were experiencing their present moment within a
context that made sense to them. You want to understand that from
the inside out.
In this way you will feel differently about yourself. Your concept of
time will expand and you will realize that if the past lives on in you,
what you are doing today, the world you live in, will live on and affect
the future, connecting you to the larger human spirit that moves
through us all. You in this moment are a part of that unbroken chain.
And this can be an intoxicating experience, a strange intimation of
immortality.
The future: We can understand our effect on the future most clearly
in our relationship to our children, or to those young people we
influence in some way as teachers or mentors. This influence will last
years after we are gone. But our work, what we create and contribute
to society, can exert even greater power and can become part of a
conscious strategy to communicate with those of the future and
influence them. Thinking in this way can actually alter what we say or
what we do.
Certainly Leonardo da Vinci followed such a strategy. He
continually tried to envision what the future might be like, to live in it
through his imagination. We can see the evidence of this in his
drawings of possible inventions that might exist in the future, some of
which, like flying machines, he actually attempted to create. He also
thought deeply about the values people might hold in the future that
did not yet exist in the times that he lived through. For instance, he felt
a deep affinity for animals and saw them as possessing souls, a belief
that was virtually unheard of at the time. This impelled him to become
a vegetarian and to go around freeing caged birds in the marketplace.
He saw all nature as one, including humans, and he imagined a future
in which that belief would be shared.
The great feminist, philosopher, and novelist Mary Wollstonecraft
(1759–1797) believed that we humans can actually create the future by
how we imagine it in the present. For her, in her short life, much of
this came in her imagining a future in which the rights of women and,
most important, their reasoning powers were given equal weight to
men. Her thinking in these terms in fact did have a profound influence
on the future.
Perhaps one of the most uncanny examples of this is Johann
Wolfgang von Goethe (1749–1832), a scientist, novelist, and
philosopher. He aspired to a kind of universal knowledge, similar to
Leonardo’s, in which he tried to master all forms of human
intelligence, steep himself in all periods of history, and through this be
able to not only see the future but commune with its inhabitants. He
was able to anticipate a theory of evolution decades before Darwin. He
foresaw many of the great political trends of the nineteenth and
twentieth centuries, including the eventual unification of Europe after
World War II. He imagined many of the advances of technology and
the effects these would have on our spirit. He was someone who
actively attempted to live outside his time, and his prophetic powers
were legendary among his friends.
Finally, sometimes we may feel like we are born into the wrong
period in history, out of harmony with the times. And yet we are
locked into this moment and must live through it. If such is the case,
this strategy of immortality can bring us some relief. We are aware of
the cycles of history and how the pendulum will swing and the times
will change, perhaps after we are gone. In this way, we can look to the
future and feel some connection to those who are living well beyond
this terrible moment. We can reach out to them, make them part of
our audience. Some day they will read about us or read our words, and
the connection will go in both directions, indicating this supreme
human ability to surmount one’s time and the finality of death itself.
A man’s shortcomings are taken from his epoch; his virtues and
greatness belong to himself.
—Johann Wolfgang von Goethe
M
18
Meditate on Our Common
Mortality
The Law of Death Denial
ost of us spend our lives avoiding the thought of death. Instead,
the inevitability of death should be continually on our minds.
Understanding the shortness of life fills us with a sense of purpose
and urgency to realize our goals. Training ourselves to confront and
accept this reality makes it easier to manage the inevitable setbacks,
separations, and crises in life. It gives us a sense of proportion, of
what really matters in this brief existence of ours. Most people
continually look for ways to separate themselves from others and feel
superior. Instead, we must see the mortality in everyone, how it
equalizes and connects us all. By becoming deeply aware of our
mortality, we intensify our experience of every aspect of life.
The Bullet in the Side
As a child growing up in Savannah, Georgia, Mary Flannery O’Connor
(1925–1964) felt a strange and powerful connection to her father,
Edward. Some of this naturally stemmed from their striking physical
resemblance—the same large, piercing eyes, the same facial
expressions. But more important to Mary, their whole way of thinking
and feeling seemed completely in sync. She could sense this when her
father participated in the games she invented—he slipped so naturally
into the spirit of it all, and his imagination moved in such a similar
direction to her own. They had ways of communicating without ever
saying a word.
Mary, an only child, did not feel the same way about her mother,
Regina, who came from a socially superior class to her husband and
had aspirations of being a figure in local society. The mother wanted to
mold her rather bookish and reclusive daughter into the quintessential
southern lady, but Mary, stubborn and willful, would not go along.
Mary found her mother and relatives a bit formal and superficial. At
the age of ten, she wrote a series of caricatures of them, which she
called “My Relitives.” In a mischievous spirit, she let her mother and
relatives read the vignettes, and they were, naturally, shocked—not
only by how they were portrayed but also by the sharp wit of this ten-
year-old.
The father, however, found the caricatures delightful. He collected
them into a little book that he showed to visitors. He foresaw a great
future for his daughter as a writer. Mary knew from early on that she
was different from other children, even a bit eccentric, and she basked
in the pride he displayed in her unusual qualities.
She understood her father so well that it frightened her when in the
summer of 1937 she sensed a change in his energy and spirit. At first it
was subtle—rashes on his face, a sudden weariness that came over him
in the afternoon. Then he began to take increasingly long naps and
suffer frequent bouts of flu, his entire body aching. Occasionally Mary
would eavesdrop on her parents as they talked behind closed doors of
his ailments, and what she could glean was that something was
seriously wrong.
The real estate business her father had started some years earlier
was not doing so well, and he had to let it go. A few months later, he
was able to land a government job in Atlanta, which did not pay very
well. To manage their tight budget Mary and her mother moved into a
spacious home owned by relatives in the town of Milledgeville, in the
center of Georgia, not too far from Atlanta.
By 1940 the father was too weak to continue at his job. He moved
back home, and over the next few months Mary watched as her
beloved father grew weaker and thinner by the day, racked by
excruciating pain in his joints, until he finally died on February 1, 1941,
at the age of forty-five. It was months later that Mary learned that his
illness was known as lupus erythematosus—a disease that makes the
body create antibodies that attack and weaken its own healthy tissues.
(Today it is known as systemic lupus erythematosus, and it is the most
severe version of the disease.)
In the aftermath of his death, Mary felt too stunned to speak to
anyone about the loss, but she confided in a private notebook the
effect his death had on her: “The reality of death has come upon us
and a consciousness of the power of God has broken our complacency,
like a bullet in the side. A sense of the dramatic, of the tragic, of the
infinite, has descended upon us, filling us with grief, but even above
grief, wonder.”
She felt as if a part of her had died with her father, so enmeshed
had they been in each other’s lives. But beyond the sudden and violent
wound it inflicted on her, she was made to wonder about what it all
meant in the larger cosmic scheme of things. Deeply devout in her
Catholic faith, she imagined that everything occurred for a reason and
was part of God’s mysterious plan. Something so significant as her
father’s early death could not be meaningless.
In the months to come, a change came over Mary. She became
unusually serious and devoted to her schoolwork, something she had
been rather indifferent to in the past. She began to write longer and
more ambitious stories. She attended a local college for women and
impressed her professors with her writing skill and the depth of her
thinking. She had determined that her father had guessed correctly
her destiny—to be a writer.
Increasingly confident in her creative powers, she decided that her
success depended on getting out of Georgia. Living with her mother in
Milledgeville made her feel claustrophobic. She applied to the
University of Iowa and was accepted with a full scholarship for the
academic year beginning in 1945. Her mother begged her to
reconsider, thinking her only child was too fragile to live on her own,
but Mary had made up her mind. Enrolled in the famous Writers’
Workshop at the university, she decided to simplify her name to
Flannery O’Connor, signaling her new identity.
Working with fierce determination and discipline, Flannery began
to attract attention for her short stories and the characters from the
South she depicted and seemed to know so well, bringing out the dark
and grotesque qualities just below the surface of southern gentility.
Agents and publishers came calling, and the most prestigious
magazines accepted her stories.
After Iowa, Flannery moved to the East Coast, settling in a country
house in Connecticut owned by her friends Sally and Robert
Fitzgerald, who rented out a room to her. There, without distractions,
she began to work feverishly on her first novel. The future seemed so
full of promise, and it was all going according to the plan she had laid
out for herself after the death of her father.
At Christmas of 1949 she returned to Milledgeville for a visit, and
once there she fell quite ill, the doctors diagnosing her with a floating
kidney. It would require surgery and some recovery time at home. All
she wanted was to get back to Connecticut, to be with her friends, and
to finish her novel, which was becoming increasingly ambitious.
Finally, by March, she was able to return, but over the course of the
next few months she experienced strange bouts of pain in her arms.
She visited doctors in New York, who diagnosed her with rheumatoid
arthritis. That December she was to return to Georgia once again for
Christmas, and on the train ride home she fell desperately ill. When
she got off the train and was met by her uncle, she could barely walk.
She felt as if she had suddenly turned elderly and feeble.
Racked with pain in her joints and suffering high fevers, she was
admitted immediately to a hospital. She was told it was a severe case
of rheumatoid arthritis, and that it would take months to stabilize her;
she would have to remain in Milledgeville for an indefinite period. She
had little faith in doctors and was not so sure of their diagnosis, but
she was far too weak to argue. The fevers made her feel as if she were
dying.
To treat her, the doctors gave her massive doses of cortisone, the
new miracle drug, which greatly alleviated the pain and the
inflammation in her joints. It also gave her bursts of intense energy
that troubled her mind and made it race with all kinds of strange
thoughts. As a side effect, it also made her hair fall out and bloated her
face. And as part of her therapy, she had to have frequent blood
transfusions. Her life had suddenly taken a dark turn.
It seemed to her a rather strange coincidence that when the fevers
were at their highest, she had the sensation that she was growing blind
and paralyzed. Only months before, when she was not yet ill, she had
decided to make the main character in her novel blind himself. Had
she foreseen her own fate, or had the disease already been there,
making her think such thoughts?
Feeling death at her heels and writing at a fast pace while in the
hospital, she finished the novel, which she now called Wise Blood,
inspired by all of the transfusions she had undergone. The novel
concerned a young man, Hazel Motes, determined to spread the gospel
of atheism to a new scientific age. He thinks he has “wise blood,” with
no need for any kind of spiritual guidance. The novel chronicles his
descent into murder and madness and was published in 1952.
After months of hospitalization and having sufficiently recovered at
home, Flannery returned to Connecticut for a visit with the
Fitzgeralds, hoping that in the near future she could perhaps resume
her old life at their country home. One day, as she and Sally were
taking a drive in the country, Flannery mentioned her rheumatoid
arthritis, and Sally decided to finally tell her the truth that her
overprotective mother, in league with the doctors, had kept from her.
“Flannery, you don’t have arthritis, you have lupus.” Flannery began to
tremble. After a few moments of silence, she replied, “Well, that’s not
good news. But I can’t thank you enough for telling me. . . . I thought I
had lupus, and I thought I was going crazy. I’d a lot rather be sick than
crazy.”
Despite her calm reaction, the news stunned her. This was like a
second bullet in her side, the original sensation returning with double
the impact. Now she knew for sure that she had inherited the disease
from her father. Suddenly she had to confront the reality that perhaps
she did not have long to live, considering how quickly her father had
gone downhill. It was now clear to her that there would be no plans or
hopes for living anywhere else but Milledgeville. She cut short the trip
to Connecticut and returned home, feeling depressed and confused.
Her mother was now the manager of her family’s farm, called
Andalusia, just outside Milledgeville. Flannery would have to spend
the rest of her life on this farm with her mother, who would take care
of her. The doctors seemed to think she could live a normal length of
life thanks to this new miracle drug, but Flannery did not share their
confidence, experiencing firsthand the many adverse side effects and
wondering how long her body could endure them.
She loved her mother, but they were very different. The mother was
the chatty type, obsessed with status and appearances. In her first
weeks back, Flannery felt a sense of panic. She had always been willful,
like her father. She liked living on her own terms, and her mother
could be quite intense and meddlesome. But beyond that, Flannery
associated her creative powers with living her own life outside Georgia,
encountering the wide world, among peers with whom she could talk
about serious matters. She felt her mind expanding with those larger
horizons.
Andalusia would feel like a prison, and she worried that her mind
would tighten up in these circumstances. But as she contemplated
death staring her in the face, she thought deeply about the course of
her life. What clearly mattered to her more than friends or where she
lived or even her health itself was her writing, expressing all of the
ideas and impressions she had accumulated in her short life. She had
so many more stories to write, and another novel or two. Perhaps, in
some strange way, this forced return home was a blessing in disguise,
part of some other plan for her.
In her room at Andalusia, far from the world, she would have no
possible distractions. She would make it clear to her mother that those
two or more hours of writing in the morning were sacred to her and
she would not tolerate any interruptions. Now she could focus all her
energy on her work, get even deeper into her characters, and bring
them to life. Back in the heart of Georgia, listening closely to visitors
and farmhands, she would be able to hear the voices of her characters,
their speech patterns, reverberating in her head. She would feel even
more deeply connected to the land, to the South, which obsessed her.
As she moved about in these first months back home, she began to
feel the presence of her father—in photographs, in objects that he
cherished, in notebooks of his that she discovered. His presence
haunted her. He had wanted to become a writer; she knew that.
Perhaps he had wanted her to succeed where he had failed. Now the
fatal disease they shared tied them together even more tightly; she
would feel the same form of pain that afflicted his body. But she would
write and write, insensitive to the pain, somehow realizing the
potential that her father had seen in her as a child.
Thinking in this way, she realized she had no time to waste. How
many more years would she live and have the energy and clarity to
write? Being so focused on her work would also help rid her of any
anxiety about the illness. When she was writing, she could completely
forget herself and inhabit her characters. It was a religious-like
experience of losing the ego. As she wrote to a friend with the news of
her illness, “I can with one eye squinted take it all as a blessing.”
There were other blessings to count as well: Knowing early on
about her disease, she would have time to get used to the idea of dying
young, and it would lessen the blow; she would relish every minute,
every experience, and make the most of her limited encounters with
outsiders. She could not expect much from life, so everything she got
would mean something. No need to complain or feel self-pity—
everyone had to die at some point. She would find it easier now to not
take so seriously the petty concerns that seemed to roil others so
much. She could even look at herself and laugh at her own pretensions
as a writer, and mock how ridiculous she looked with her bald head,
stumbling around with a cane.
As she returned to writing her stories with a new sense of
commitment, Flannery felt another change from within: an increasing
awareness of and disgust with the course of life and culture in America
in the 1950s. She sensed that people were becoming more and more
superficial, obsessed with material things and plagued by boredom,
like children. They had become unmoored, soulless, disconnected
from the past and from religion, flailing around without any higher
sense of purpose. And at the core of these problems was their inability
to face their own mortality and the seriousness of it.
She expressed some of this in a story inspired by her own illness,
called “The Enduring Chill.” The main character is a young man
returning home to Georgia, deathly ill. As he gets off the train, his
mother, there to meet him, “had given a little cry; she looked aghast.
He was pleased that she should see death in his face at once. His
mother, at the age of sixty, was going to be introduced to reality and he
supposed that if the experience didn’t kill her, it would assist her in the
process of growing up.”
As she saw it, people were losing their humanity and capable of all
kinds of cruelties. They did not seem to care very deeply about one
another and felt rather superior to any kind of outsider. If they could
only see what she had seen—how our time is so short, how everyone
must suffer and die—it would alter their way of life; it would make
them grow up; it would melt all their coldness. What her readers
needed was their own “bullet in the side” to shake them out of their
complacency. She would accomplish this by portraying in as raw a
manner as possible the selfishness and brutality lurking below the
surface in her characters, who seemed so outwardly pleasant and
banal.
The one problem Flannery had to confront with her new life was
the crushing loneliness of it all. She required the company of people to
soothe her, and she depended on the cast of characters she met to
supply her endless material for her work. As her fame grew with the
publication of Wise Blood and her collections of stories, she could
count on the occasional visit to the farm from other writers and fans of
her work, and she lived for such moments, putting every ounce of her
energy into observing her visitors and plumbing their depths.
To fill the gaps between these social encounters, she began a
lengthy correspondence with a growing number of friends and fans,
writing back to almost anyone who wrote to her. Many of them were
quite troubled. There was the young man in the Midwest who felt
suicidal and on the verge of madness. There was the brilliant young
woman from Georgia, Betty Hester, who felt ashamed for being a
lesbian and confided in Flannery, the two of them now regularly
corresponding. Flannery never judged any of them, feeling herself to
be rather odd and outside the mainstream. To this growing cast of
characters and misfits she offered advice and compassion, always
entreating them to devote their energies to something outside
themselves.
The letters were the perfect medium for Flannery, for it allowed her
to keep some physical distance from people; she feared too much
intimacy, as it would mean getting attached to those she would soon
have to say good-bye to. In this way she slowly built the perfect social
world for her purposes.
One spring day in 1953, she received a visit from a tall, handsome
twenty-six-year-old man from Denmark named Erik Langkjaier. He
was a traveling textbook salesman for a major publisher, his territory
including most of the South. He had met a professor at a local college
who had offered to introduce him to the great literary figure of
Georgia, Flannery O’Connor. From the moment he entered her house,
Flannery felt they had some kind of mystical connection. She found
Erik very funny and well read. It was indeed rare to meet someone so
worldly in this part of Georgia. His life as an itinerant salesman
fascinated her; she found it humorous that he carried with him a
“Bible,” what those in the business called the loose-leaf binder of
promotional materials.
Something about his rootless life struck a chord with her. Like
Flannery, Erik’s father had died when he was young. She opened up to
him about her own father and the lupus she had inherited. She found
Erik attractive and was suddenly self-conscious about her appearance,
constantly making jokes about herself. She gave him a copy of Wise
Blood, inscribing it, “For Erik, who has wise blood too.”
He began to arrange his travels so that he could pass often through
Milledgeville and continue their lively discussions. Flannery looked
forward to every visit and felt pangs of emptiness when he left. In May
of 1954, on one of his visits he told her he was taking a six-month leave
from his job to return to Denmark, and he suggested they take a good-
bye car ride through the county, their favorite activity. It was dusk,
and in the middle of nowhere he parked the car on the side of the road
and leaned over to kiss her, which she gladly accepted. It was short,
but for her quite memorable.
She wrote to him regularly and, clearly missing him, kept discreetly
referencing their car rides and how much they meant to her. In
January 1955, she began a story that seemingly poured out of her in a
few days. (Normally she was a careful writer who put stories through
several drafts.) She called it “Good Country People.” One of the
characters is a cynical young woman with a wooden leg. She is
romanced by a traveling salesman of Bibles. She suddenly lets down
her guard and allows him to seduce her, playing her own game with
him. As they are about to make love in a hayloft, he begs her to remove
her wooden leg, as a sign of her trust. This seems far too intimate and
a violation of all her defenses, but she relents. He then runs away with
the leg, never to return.
In the back of her mind she was aware that Erik was somehow
extending his stay in Europe. The story was her way of coping with
this, caricaturing the two of them as the salesman and the cynical
crippled daughter who had let down her guard. Erik had taken her
wooden leg. By April she felt his absence rather keenly and wrote to
him, “I feel like if you were here we could talk about a million things
without stopping.” But the day after she mailed this she received a
letter from him announcing his engagement to a Danish woman, and
he told her of their plans to return to the States, where he would take
up his old job.
She had intuited such an event would happen, but the news was a
shock nonetheless. She replied with utmost politeness, congratulating
him, and they wrote to each other for several more years, but she could
not get over this loss so easily. She had tried to protect herself from
any deep feelings of parting and separation because they were too
unbearable for her. They were like small reminders of the death that
would take her away at any moment, while others would go on living
and loving. And now those very feelings of separation came pouring in.
Now she knew what it was like to experience unrequited love, but
for her it was different—she knew that this was the last such chance for
her and that her life was to be led essentially alone, and it made it all
doubly poignant. She had trained herself to look death square in the
eye, so why should she recoil from facing this latest form of suffering?
She understood what she had to do—transmute this painful experience
into more stories and into her second novel, to use it as means to
enrich her knowledge of people and their vulnerabilities.
In the next few years the drugs began to take a toll, as the cortisone
softened her hip and jawbone and made her arms often too weak to
type. She soon needed crutches to get around. Sunlight had become
her nemesis, as it could reactivate the lupus rashes, and so to take
walks she had to cover every inch of her body, even in the stifling heat
of the summer. The doctors tried to remove her from the cortisone to
give her body some relief, and this lowered her energy and made the
writing that much harder.
Under all the duress of the past few years, she had managed to
publish two novels and several collections of short stories; she was
considered one of the great American writers of her time, although still
so young. But suddenly she began to feel worn down and inarticulate.
She wrote to a friend in the spring of 1962, “I’ve been writing for
sixteen years and I have the sense of having exhausted my original
potentiality and being now in need of the kind of grace that deepens
perception.”
One day shortly before Christmas of 1963, she suddenly fainted and
was taken to the hospital. The doctors diagnosed her with anemia and
began a series of blood transfusions to revive her. She was too weak
now to even sit at her typewriter. Then a few months later they
discovered a benign tumor that they needed to remove. Their only fear
was that the trauma of the surgery would somehow reactivate the
lupus and the powerful episodes of fevers that she had experienced ten
years before.
In letters to friends, she made light of it all. Strangely enough, now
that she was at her weakest, she found the inspiration to write more
stories and prepare a new collection of them for fall publication. In the
hospital she studied her nurses closely and found material for some
new characters. When the doctors prohibited her from working, she
concocted stories in her head and memorized them. She hid notebooks
under her pillow. She had to keep writing.
The surgery was a success, but by mid-March it was clear that her
lupus had come roaring back. She compared it to a wolf (lupus is Latin
for “wolf”) raging inside her now, tearing things up. Her hospital stay
was extended, and yet despite it all, she managed here and there to get
in her daily two hours, hiding her work from the nurses and doctors.
She was in a hurry to scratch out these last stories before it was all
over.
Finally, on June 21, she was allowed to return home, and in the
back of her mind she sensed the end was coming, the memory of her
father’s last days so vivid within her. Pain or no pain, she had to work,
to finish the stories and revisions she had started. If she could manage
only an hour a day, so be it. She had to squeeze out every last bit of
consciousness that remained to her and make use of it. She had
realized her destiny as a writer and had led a life of incomparable
richness. She had nothing now to complain about or regret, except the
unfinished stories.
On July 31, while watching the summer rain by her window, she
suddenly lost consciousness and was rushed to the hospital. She died
in the early hours of August 3, at the age of thirty-nine. In accordance
with her last wishes, Flannery was buried next to her father.
•   •   •
Interpretation: In the years after the onset of lupus, Flannery
O’Connor noticed a peculiar phenomenon: In her interactions with
friends, visitors, and correspondents, she often found herself playing
the role of the adviser, giving people guidance on how to live, where to
put their energies, how to remain calm amid difficulties and have a
sense of purpose. All the while, she was the one who was dying and
dealing with severe physical restrictions.
She sensed that increasing numbers of people in this world had lost
their way. They could not wholeheartedly commit themselves to their
work or to relationships. They were always dabbling in this or that,
searching for new pleasures and distractions but feeling rather empty
inside. They tended to fall apart in the face of adversity or loneliness,
and they turned to her as someone solid who would be able to tell
them the truth about themselves and give them some direction.
As she saw it, the difference between her and these other people
was simple: She had spent year after year looking death squarely in the
eye without flinching. She did not indulge in vague hopes for the
future, put her trust in medicine, or drown her sorrows in alcohol or
addiction. She accepted the early death sentence imposed on her,
using it for her own ends.
For Flannery, her proximity to death was a call to stir herself to
action, to feel a sense of urgency, to deepen her religious faith and
spark her sense of wonder at all mysteries and uncertainties of life.
She used the closeness of death to teach her what really matters and to
help her steer clear of the petty squabbles and concerns that plagued
others. She used it to anchor herself in the present, to make her
appreciate every moment and every encounter.
Knowing that that her illness had a purpose to it, there was no need
to feel self-pity. And by confronting and dealing with it straight on, she
could toughen herself up, manage the pain that racked her body, and
keep writing. By the time she had received yet another bullet, the
separation with Erik, she could regain her balance after several
months, without turning bitter or more reclusive.
What this meant was that she was thoroughly at home with the
ultimate reality represented by death. In contrast, so many other
people, including those she knew, suffered from a reality deficit,
avoiding the thought of their mortality and the other unpleasant
aspects of life.
Focusing so deeply on her mortality had one other important
advantage—it deepened her empathy and sense of connection to
people. She had a peculiar relationship to death in general: It did not
represent a fate reserved for her alone but rather was intimately tied to
her father. Their sufferings and deaths were intertwined. She saw her
own nearness to death as a call to take this further, to see that all of us
are connected through our common mortality and made equal by it. It
is the fate we all share and should draw us closer for that reason. It
should shake us out of any sense of feeling superior or separated.
Flannery’s increased empathy and feeling of unity with others, as
evidenced by her strong desire to communicate with all types of
people, caused her to eventually let go of one of her greatest
limitations: the racist sentiments toward African Americans she had
internalized from her mother and many others in the South. She saw
this clearly in herself and struggled against it, particularly in her work.
By the early 1960s she came to embrace the civil rights movement led
by Martin Luther King Jr. And in her later stories she began to express
a vision of all the races in America converging one day as equals,
moving past this dark stain on our country’s past.
For over thirteen years, Flannery O’Connor stared down the barrel
of the gun pointed at her, refusing to look away. Certainly her religious
faith helped her maintain her spirit, but as Flannery herself knew, so
many people who are religious are just as full of illusions and evasions
when it comes to their own mortality, and just as capable of
complacency and pettiness as anyone else. It was her particular choice
to use her fatal disease as the means for living the most intense and
fulfilling life possible.
Understand: We tend to read stories like Flannery O’Connor’s
with some distance. We can’t help but feel some relief that we find
ourselves in a much more comfortable position. But we make a grave
mistake in doing so. Her fate is our fate—we are all in the process of
dying, all facing the same uncertainties. In fact, by having her
mortality so present and palpable, she had an advantage over us—she
was compelled to confront death and make use of her awareness of it.
We, on the other hand, are able to dance around the thought, to
envision endless vistas of time ahead of us and dabble our way
through life. And then, when reality hits us, when we perhaps receive
our own bullet in the side in the form of an unexpected crisis in our
career, or a painful breakup in a relationship, or the death of someone
close, or even our own life-threatening illness—we are not usually
prepared to handle it.
Our avoidance of the thought of death has established our pattern
for handling other unpleasant realities and adversity. We easily
become hysterical and lose our balance, blaming others for our fate,
feeling angry and sorry for ourselves, or we opt for distractions and
quick ways to dull the pain. This becomes a habit we cannot shake,
and we tend to feel the generalized anxiety and emptiness that come
from all this avoidance.
Before this becomes a lifelong pattern, we must shake ourselves out
of this dreamlike state in a real and lasting way. We must come to look
at our own mortality without flinching, and without fooling ourselves
with some fleeting, abstract meditation on death. We must focus hard
on the uncertainty that death represents—it could come tomorrow, as
could other adversity or separation. We must stop postponing our
awareness. We need to stop feeling superior and special, seeing that
death is a fate shared by us all and something that should bind us in a
deeply empathetic way. We are all a part of the brotherhood and
sisterhood of death.
In doing so, we set a much different course for our lives. Making
death a familiar presence, we understand how short life is and what
really should matter to us. We feel a sense of urgency and deeper
commitment to our work and relationships. When we face a crisis,
separation, or illness, we do not feel so terrified and overwhelmed. We
don’t feel the need to go into avoidance mode. We can accept that life
involves pain and suffering, and we use such moments to strengthen
ourselves and to learn. And as with Flannery, the awareness of our
mortality cleanses us of silly illusions and intensifies every aspect of
our experience.
When I look back at the past and think of all the time I
squandered in error and idleness, lacking the knowledge needed to
live, when I think of how often I sinned against my heart and my
soul, then my heart bleeds. Life is a gift, life is happiness, every
minute could have been an eternity of happiness! If youth only
knew! Now my life will change; now I will be reborn. Dear brother,
I swear that I shall not lose hope. I will keep my soul pure and my
heart open. I will be reborn for the better.
—Fyodor Dostoyevsky
Keys to Human Nature
If we could step back and somehow examine the train of our daily
thoughts, we would realize how they tend to circle around the same
anxieties, fantasies, and resentments, like a continuous loop. Even
when we take a walk or have a conversation with someone, we
generally remain connected to this interior monologue, only half
listening and paying attention to what we see or hear.
Upon occasion, however, certain events can trigger a different
quality of thinking and feeling. Let us say we go on a trip to a foreign
land we have never visited before, outside our usual comfort zone.
Suddenly our senses snap to life and everything we see and hear seems
a little more vibrant. To avoid problems or dangerous situations in this
unfamiliar place, we have to pay attention.
Similarly, if we are about to leave on a trip and must say good-bye
to people we love, whom we may not see for a while, we might
suddenly view them in a different light. Normally we take such people
for granted, but now we actually look at the particular expressions on
their faces and listen to what they have to say. The sense of a looming
separation makes us more emotional and attentive.
A more intense version of this will occur if a loved one—a parent or
a partner or a sibling—dies. This person played a large role in our
lives; we have internalized them, and we have somehow lost a part of
ourselves. As we grapple with this, the shadow of our own mortality
falls over us for an instant. We are made aware of the permanence of
this loss and feel regret that we did not appreciate them more. We may
even feel some anger that life simply goes on for other people, that
they are oblivious to the reality of death that has suddenly struck us.
For several days or perhaps weeks after this loss, we tend to
experience life differently. Our emotions are rawer and more sensitive.
Particular stimuli will bring back associations with the person who has
died. This intensity of emotion will fade, but each time we are
reminded of the person we have lost, a small portion of that intensity
will return.
If we consider death as the crossing of a threshold that terrifies us
in general, the experiences enumerated above are intimations of our
own death in smaller doses. Separating from people we know,
traveling in a strange land, clearly entering some new phase of life, all
involve changes that cause us to look back at the past as if a part of us
has died. In such moments, and during the more intense forms of grief
from actual deaths, we notice a heightening of the senses and a
deepening of our emotions. Thoughts of a different order come to us.
We are more attentive. We can say that our experience of life is
qualitatively different and charged, as if we temporarily became
someone else. Of course, this alteration in our thinking, feeling, and
senses will be strongest if we ourselves survive a brush with death.
Nothing seems the same after such an experience.
Let us call this the paradoxical death effect—these moments and
encounters have the paradoxical result of making us feel more awake
and alive. We can explain the paradoxical effect in the following way.
For us humans, death is a source not only of fear but also of
awkwardness. We are the only animal truly conscious of our
impending mortality. In general, we owe our power as a species to our
ability to think and reflect. But in this particular case, our thinking
brings us nothing but misery. All we can see is the physical pain
involved in dying, the separation from loved ones, and the uncertainty
as to when such a moment might arrive. We do what we can to avoid
the thought, to distract ourselves from the reality, but the awareness of
death lies in the back of our minds and can never be completely
shaken.
Feeling the unconscious impulse to somehow soften the blow of our
awareness, our earliest ancestors created a world of spirits, gods, and
some concept of the afterlife. The belief in the afterlife helped mitigate
the fear of death and even give it some appealing aspects. It could not
eliminate the anxiety of separating from loved ones or lessen the
physical pain involved, but it offered a profound psychological
compensation for the anxieties we seemingly cannot shake. This effect
was fortified by all of the elaborate and pleasing rituals that
surrounded the passage to death.
In the world today, our growing reasoning powers and knowledge
of science have only made our awkwardness worse. Many of us can no
longer believe in the concept of the afterlife with any conviction, but
we are left with no compensations, with only the stark reality
confronting us. We might try to put a brave face on this, to pretend we
can accept this reality as adults, but we cannot erase our elemental
fears so easily. In the course of a few hundred years of this change in
our awareness, we cannot suddenly transform one of the deepest parts
of our nature, our fear of death. And so what we do instead of creating
belief systems such as an afterlife is to rely on denial, repressing the
awareness of death as much as possible. We do so in several ways.
In the past, death was a daily and visceral presence in cities and
towns, something hard to escape. By a certain age, most people had
seen firsthand the deaths of others. Today, in many parts of the world,
we have made death largely invisible, something that occurs only in
hospitals. (We have done something similar to the animals that we
eat.) We can pass through most of life without ever physically
witnessing what happens. This gives a rather unreal aspect to what is
so profoundly a part of life. This unreality is enhanced in the
entertainment we consume, in which death is made to seem rather
cartoonish, with dozens of people dying violent deaths without any
attendant emotion except excitement at the imagery on the screen.
This reveals how deep the need is to repress the awareness and
desensitize ourselves to the fear.
Furthermore, we have recently come to venerate youth, to create a
virtual cult around it. Objects that have aged, films from the past
unconsciously remind us of the shortness of life and the fate that
awaits us. We find ways to avoid them, to surround ourselves with
what is new, fresh, and trending. Some people have even come to
entertain the idea that through technology we can somehow overcome
death itself, the ultimate in human denial. In general, technology gives
us the feeling that we have such godlike powers that we can prolong
life and ignore the reality for quite a long time. In this sense, we are no
stronger than our most primitive ancestors. We have simply found
new ways to delude ourselves.
As a corollary to all this, we find hardly anyone willing to discuss
the subject as a personal reality we all face, and how we might manage
it in a healthier manner. The subject is simply taboo. And by a law of
human nature, when we go so far in our denial, the paradoxical effect
takes hold of us in the negative direction, making our life more
constrained and deathlike.
We became aware of our mortality quite early on in childhood, and
this filled us with an anxiety that we cannot remember but that was
very real and visceral. Such anxiety cannot be wished away or denied.
It sits in us as adults in a powerfully latent form. When we choose to
repress the thought of death, our anxiety is only made stronger by our
not confronting the source of it. The slightest incident or uncertainty
about the future will tend to stir up this anxiety and even make it
chronic. To fight this, we will tend to narrow down the scope of our
thoughts and activities; if we don’t leave our comfort zones in what we
think and do, then we can make life rather predictable and feel less
vulnerable to anxiety. Certain addictions to foods or stimulants or
forms of entertainment will have a similar dulling effect.
If we take this far enough, we become increasingly self-absorbed
and less dependent on people, who often stir up our anxieties with
their unpredictable behavior.
We can describe the contrast between life and death in the
following manner: Death is absolute stillness, without movement or
change except decay. In death we are separated from others and
completely alone. Life on the other hand is movement, connection to
other living things, and diversity of life forms. By denying and
repressing the thought of death, we feed our anxieties and become
more deathlike from within—separated from other people, our
thinking habitual and repetitive, with little overall movement and
change. On the other hand, the familiarity and closeness with death,
the ability to confront the thought of it has the paradoxical effect of
making us feel more alive, as the story of Flannery O’Connor well
illustrates.
By connecting to the reality of death, we connect more profoundly
to the reality and fullness of life. By separating death from life and
repressing our awareness of it, we do the opposite.
What we require in the modern world is a way to create for
ourselves the positive paradoxical effect. The following is an attempt to
help us accomplish this, by forging a practical philosophy for
transforming the consciousness of our mortality into something
productive and life enhancing.
A Philosophy of Life Through Death
The problem for us humans is that we are aware of our mortality, but
we are afraid to take this awareness further. It is like we are at the
shore of a vast ocean and stop ourselves from exploring it, even
turning our back to it. The purpose of our consciousness is to always
take it as far as we can. That is the source of our power as a species,
what we are called to do. The philosophy we are adopting depends on
our ability to go in the opposite direction we normally feel toward
death—to look at it more closely and deeply, to leave the shore and
explore a different way of approaching life and death, taking this as far
as we can.
The following are five key strategies, with appropriate exercises, to
help us achieve this. It is best to put all five into practice, so that this
philosophy can seep into our daily consciousness and alter our
experience from within.
Make the awareness visceral. Out of fear, we convert death into an
abstraction, a thought we can entertain now and then or repress. But
life is not a thought; it is a flesh-and-blood reality, something we feel
from within. There is no such thing as life without death. Our
mortality is just as much a flesh-and-blood reality as life. From the
moment we are born, it is a presence within our bodies, as our cells die
and we age. We need to experience it this way. We should not see this
as something morbid or terrifying. Moving past this block of ours in
which death is an abstraction has an immensely liberating effect,
connecting us more physically to the world around us and heightening
our senses.
In December of 1849, the twenty-seven-year-old writer Fyodor
Dostoyevsky, imprisoned for participating in an alleged conspiracy
against the Russian czar, found himself and his fellow prisoners
suddenly transported to a square in St. Petersburg, and told that they
were about to be executed for their crimes. This death sentence was
totally unexpected. Dostoyevsky had only a few minutes to prepare
himself before he faced the firing squad. In those few minutes,
emotions he had never felt before came rushing in. He noticed the rays
of light hitting the dome of a cathedral and saw that all life was as
fleeting as those rays. Everything seemed more vibrant to him. He
noticed the expressions on his fellow prisoners’ faces, and how he
could see the terror behind their brave façades. It was as if their
thoughts and feelings had become transparent.
At the last moment, a representative from the czar rode into the
square, announcing that their sentences had been commuted to
several years’ hard labor in Siberia. Utterly overwhelmed by his
psychological brush with death, Dostoyevsky felt reborn. And the
experience remained embedded in him for the rest of his life, inspiring
new depths of empathy and intensifying his observational powers.
This has been the experience of others who have been exposed to
death in a deep and personal way.
The reason for this effect can be explained as follows: Normally we
go through life in a very distracted, dreamlike state, with our gaze
turned inward. Much of our mental activity revolves around fantasies
and resentments that are completely internal and have little
relationship to reality. The proximity of death suddenly snaps us to
attention as our whole body responds to the threat. We feel the rush of
adrenaline, the blood pumping extra hard to the brain and through the
nervous system. This focuses the mind to a much higher level and we
notice new details, see people’s faces in a new light, and sense the
impermanence in everything around us, deepening our emotional
responses. This effect can linger for years, even decades.
We cannot reproduce that experience without risking our lives, but
we can gain some of the effect through smaller doses. We must begin
by meditating on our death and seeking to convert it into something
more real and physical. For Japanese samurai warriors, the center of
our most sensitive nerves and our connection to life was in the gut, the
viscera; it was also the center of our connection to death, and they
meditated on this sensation as deeply as possible, to create physical
death awareness. But beyond the gut, we can also feel something
similar in our bones when we are weary. We can often sense its
physicality in those moments before we fall asleep—for a few seconds
we feel ourselves passing from one form of consciousness to another,
and that slip has a deathlike sensation. There is nothing to be afraid of
in this; in fact, in moving in this direction, we make major
advancements in diminishing our chronic anxiety.
We can use our imagination in this as well, by envisioning the day
our death arrives, where we might be, how it might come. We must
make this as vivid as possible. It could be tomorrow. We can also try to
look at the world as if we were seeing things for the last time—the
people around us, the everyday sights and sounds, the hum of the
traffic, the sound of the birds, the view outside our window. Let us
imagine these things still going on without us, then suddenly feel
ourselves brought back to life—those same details will now appear in a
new light, not taken for granted or half perceived. Let the
impermanence of all life forms sink in. The stability and solidity of the
things we see are mere illusions.
We must not be afraid of the pangs of sadness that ensue from this
perception. The tightness of our emotions, usually so wound up
around our own needs and concerns, is now opening up to the world
and to the poignancy of life itself, and we should welcome this. As the
fourteenth-century Japanese writer Kenko noted, “If man were never
to fade away like the dews of Adashino, never to vanish like the smoke
over Toribeyama, but lingered on forever in the world, how things
would lose their power to move us! The most precious thing in life is
its uncertainty.”
Awaken to the shortness of life. When we unconsciously disconnect
ourselves from the awareness of death, we forge a particular
relationship to time—one that is rather loose and distended. We come
to imagine that we always have more time than is the reality. Our
minds drift to the future, where all our hopes and wishes will be
fulfilled. If we have a plan or a goal, we find it hard to commit to it
with a lot of energy. We’ll get to it tomorrow, we tell ourselves.
Perhaps we are tempted in the present to work on another goal or plan
—they all seem so inviting and different, so how can we commit fully
to one or another? We experience a generalized anxiety, as we sense
the need to get things done, but we are always postponing and
scattering our forces.
Then, if a deadline is forced upon us on a particular project, that
dreamlike relationship to time is shattered and for some mysterious
reason we find the focus to get done in days what would have taken
weeks or months. The change imposed upon us by the deadline has a
physical component: our adrenaline is pumping, filling us with energy
and concentrating the mind, making it more creative. It is invigorating
to feel the total commitment of mind and body to a single purpose,
something we rarely experience in the world today, in our distracted
state.
We must think of our mortality as a kind of continual deadline,
giving a similar effect as described above to all our actions in life. We
must stop fooling ourselves: we could die tomorrow, and even if we
live for another eighty years, it is but a drop in the ocean of the
vastness of time, and it passes always more quickly than we imagine.
We have to awaken to this reality and make it a continual meditation.
This meditation might lead some people to think, “Why bother to
try anything? What’s the point of so much effort, when in the end we
just die? Better to live for the pleasures of the moment.” This is not,
however, a realistic assessment but merely another form of evasion. To
devote ourselves to pleasures and distractions is to avoid the thought
of their costs and to imagine we can fool death by drowning out the
thought. In devoting ourselves to pleasures, we must always look for
new diversions to keep boredom at bay, and it’s exhausting. We must
also see our needs and desires as more important than anything else.
This starts to feel soulless over time, and our ego becomes particularly
prickly if we don’t get our way.
As the years go by, we become increasingly bitter and resentful,
haunted with the sense we have accomplished nothing and wasted our
potential. As William Hazlitt observed, “Our repugnance to death
increases in proportion to our consciousness of having lived in vain.”
Let the awareness of the shortness of life clarify our daily actions.
We have goals to reach, projects to get done, relationships to improve.
This could be our last such project, our last battle on earth, given the
uncertainties of life, and we must commit completely to what we do.
With this continual awareness we can see what really matters, how
petty squabbles and side pursuits are irritating distractions. We want
that sense of fulfillment that comes from getting things done. We want
to lose the ego in that feeling of flow, in which our minds are at one
with what we are working on. When we turn away from our work, the
pleasures and distractions we pursue have all the more meaning and
intensity, knowing their evanescence.
See the mortality in everyone. In 1665 a terrible plague roared
through London, killing close to 100,000 inhabitants. The writer
Daniel Defoe was only five years old at the time, but he witnessed the
plague firsthand and it left a lasting impression on him. Some sixty
years later, he decided to re-create the events in London that year
through the eyes of an older narrator, using his own memories, much
research, and the journal of his uncle, creating the book A Journal of
the Plague Year.
As the plague raged, the narrator of the book notices a peculiar
phenomenon: people tend to feel much greater levels of empathy
toward their fellow Londoners; the normal differences between them,
particularly over religious issues, vanish. “Here we may observe,” he
writes, “. . . that a near View of Death would soon reconcile Men of
good Principles, one to another, and that it is chiefly owing to our easy
Scituation in Life, and our putting these Things far from us, that our
Breaches are fomented, ill blood continued. . . . Another Plague Year
would reconcile all these Differences, a close conversing with Death, or
with Diseases that threaten Death, would scum off the Gall from our
Tempers, remove the Animosities among us, and bring us to see with
differing Eyes.”
There are plenty of examples of what seems to be the opposite—
humans slaughtering thousands of fellow humans, often in war, with
the sight of such mass deaths not stimulating the slightest sense of
empathy. But in these cases, the slaughterers feel separate from those
they are killing, whom they have come to see as less than human and
under their power. With the plague, no one is spared, no matter their
wealth or station in life. Everyone is equally at risk. Feeling personally
vulnerable and seeing the vulnerability of everyone else, people’s
normal sense of difference and privilege is melted away, and an
uncommon generalized empathy emerges. This could be a natural
state of mind, if we could only envision the vulnerability and mortality
of others as not separate from our own.
With our philosophy, we want to manufacture the cleansing effect
that the plague has on our tribal tendencies and usual self-absorption.
We want to begin this on a smaller scale, by looking first at those
around us, in our home and our workplace, seeing and imagining their
deaths and noting how this can suddenly alter our perception of them.
As Schopenhauer wrote, “The deep pain that is felt at the death of
every friendly soul arises from the feeling that there is in every
individual something which is inexpressible, peculiar to him or her
alone, and is, therefore, absolutely and inextricably lost.” We want to
see that uniqueness of the other person in the present, bringing out
those qualities we have taken for granted. We want to experience their
vulnerability to pain and death, not just our own.
We can take this meditation further. Let us look at the pedestrians
in any busy city and realize that in ninety years it is likely that none of
them will be alive, including us. Think of the millions and billions who
have already come and gone, buried and long forgotten, rich and poor
alike. Such thoughts make it hard to maintain our own sense of grand
importance, the feeling that we are special and that the pain we may
suffer is not the same as others’.
The more we can create this visceral connection to people through
our common mortality, the better we are able to handle human nature
in all its varieties with tolerance and grace. This does not mean we lose
our alertness to those who are dangerous and difficult. In fact, seeing
the mortality and vulnerability in even the nastiest individual can help
us cut them down to size and deal with them from a more neutral and
strategic space, not taking their nastiness personally.
In general, we can say that the specter of death is what impels us
toward our fellow humans and makes us avid for love. Death and love
are inextricably interconnected. The ultimate separation and
disintegration represented by death drive us to unite and integrate
ourselves with others. Our unique consciousness of death has created
our particular form of love. And through a deepening of our death
awareness we will only strengthen this impulse, and rid ourselves of
the divisions and lifeless separations that afflict humanity.
Embrace all pain and adversity. Life by its nature involves pain and
suffering. And the ultimate form of this is death itself. In the face of
this reality, we humans have a simple choice: We can try to avoid
painful moments and to muffle their effect by distracting ourselves, by
taking drugs or engaging in addictive behavior. We can also restrict
what we do—if we don’t try too hard in our work, if we lower our
ambitions, we won’t expose ourselves to failure and ridicule. If we
break off relationships early on, we can elude any sharp, painful
moments from the separation.
At the root of this approach is the fear of death itself, which
establishes our elemental relationship to pain and adversity, and
avoidance becomes our pattern. When bad things happen, our natural
reaction is to complain about what life is bringing us, or what others
are not doing for us, and to retreat even further from challenging
situations. The negative paradoxical death effect takes hold.
The other choice available to us is to commit ourselves to what
Friedrich Nietzsche called amor fati (“love of fate”): “My formula for
greatness in a human being is amor fati: that one wants nothing to be
other than it is, not in the future, not in the past, not in all eternity.
Not merely to endure that which happens of necessity . . . but to love
it.”
What this means is the following: There is much in life we cannot
control, with death as the ultimate example of this. We will experience
illness and physical pain. We will go through separations with people.
We will face failures from our own mistakes and the nasty malevolence
of our fellow humans. And our task is to accept these moments, and
even embrace them, not for the pain but for the opportunities to learn
and strengthen ourselves. In doing so, we affirm life itself, accepting
all of its possibilities. And at the core of this is our complete
acceptance of death.
We put this into practice by continually seeing events as fateful—
everything happens for a reason, and it is up to us to glean the lesson.
When we fall ill, we see such moments as the perfect opportunity to
retreat from the world and get away from its distractions, to slow
down, to reassess what we are doing, and to appreciate the much more
frequent periods of good health. Being able to accustom ourselves to
some degree of physical pain, without immediately reaching for
something to dull it, is an important life skill.
When people resist our will or turn against us, we try to assess what
we did wrong, to figure out how we can use this to educate ourselves
further in human nature and teach ourselves how to handle those who
are slippery and disagreeable. When we take risks and fail, we
welcome the chance to learn from the experience. When relationships
fail, we try to see what was wrong in the dynamic, what was missing
for us, and what we want from the next relationship. We don’t cocoon
ourselves from further pain by avoiding such experiences.
In all of these cases, we will of course experience physical and
mental pain, and we must not fool ourselves that this philosophy will
instantly turn the negative into a positive. We know that it is a process
and that we must take the blows, but that as time passes our minds
will go to work converting this into a learning experience. With
practice, it becomes easier and quicker to convert.
This love of fate has the power to alter everything we experience
and lighten the burdens we carry. Why complain over this or that,
when in fact we see such events as occurring for a reason and
ultimately enlightening us? Why feel envy for what others have, when
we possess something far greater—the ultimate approach to the harsh
realities of life?
Open the mind to the Sublime. Think of death as a kind of threshold
we all must cross. As such, it represents the ultimate mystery. We
cannot possibly find the words or concepts to express what it is. We
confront something that is truly unknowable. No amount of science or
technology or expertise can solve this riddle or verbalize it. We
humans can fool ourselves that we know just about everything, but at
this threshold we are finally left dumb and groping.
This confrontation with something we cannot know or verbalize is
what we shall call the Sublime, whose Latin root means “up to the
threshold.” The Sublime is anything that exceeds our capacity for
words or concepts by being too large, too vast, too dark and
mysterious. And when we face such things, we feel a touch of fear but
also awe and wonder. We are reminded of our smallness, of what is
much vaster and more powerful than our puny will. Feeling the
Sublime is the perfect antidote to our complacency and to the petty
concerns of daily life that can consume us and leave us feeling rather
empty.
The model for feeling the Sublime comes in our meditation on
mortality, but we can train our minds to experience it through other
thoughts and actions. For instance, when we look up at the night sky,
we can let our minds try to fathom the infinity of space and the
overwhelming smallness of our planet, lost in all the darkness. We can
encounter the Sublime by thinking about the origin of life on earth,
how many billions of years ago this occurred, perhaps at some
particular moment, and how unlikely it was, considering the
thousands of factors that had to converge for the experiment of life to
begin on this planet. Such vast amounts of time and the actual origin
of life exceed our capacity to conceptualize them, and we are left with a
sensation of the Sublime.
We can take this further: Several million years ago, the human
experiment began as we branched off from our primate ancestors. But
because of our weak physical nature and small numbers, we faced the
continual threat of extinction. If that more-than-likely event had
happened—as it had occurred for so many species, including other
varieties of humans—the world would have taken a much different
turn. In fact, the meeting of our own parents and our birth hung on a
series of chance encounters that were equally unlikely. This causes us
to view our present existence as an individual, something we take for
granted, as a most improbable occurrence, considering all of the
fortuitous elements that had to fall into place.
We can experience the Sublime by contemplating other forms of
life. We have our own belief about what is real based on our nervous
and perceptual systems, but the reality of bats, which perceive through
echolocation, is of a different order. They sense things beyond our
perceptual system. What are the other elements we cannot perceive,
the other realities invisible to us? (The latest discoveries in most
branches of science will have this eye-opening effect, and reading
articles in any popular scientific journal will generally yield a few
sublime thoughts.)
We can also expose ourselves to places on the planet where all our
normal compass points are scrambled—a vastly different culture or
certain landscapes where the human element seems particularly puny,
such as the open sea, a vast expanse of snow, a particularly enormous
mountain. Physically confronted with what dwarfs us, we are forced to
reverse our normal perception, in which we are the center and
measure of everything.
In the face of the Sublime, we feel a shiver, a foretaste of death
itself, something too large for our minds to encompass. And for a
moment it shakes us out of our smugness and releases us from the
deathlike grip of habit and banality.
—
In the end, think of this philosophy in the following terms: Since the
beginning of human consciousness, our awareness of death has
terrified us. This terror has shaped our beliefs, our religions, our
institutions, and so much of our behavior in ways we cannot see or
understand. We humans have become the slaves to our fears and our
evasions.
When we turn this around, becoming more aware of our mortality,
we experience a taste of true freedom. We no longer feel the need to
restrict what we think and do, in order to make life predictable. We
can be more daring without feeling afraid of the consequences. We can
cut loose from all the illusions and addictions that we employ to numb
our anxiety. We can commit fully to our work, to our relationships, to
all our actions. And once we experience some of this freedom, we will
want to explore further and expand our possibilities as far as time will
allow us.
id d
h f i
k
i
d
i
Let us rid death of its strangeness, come to know it, get used to it.
Let us have nothing on our minds as often as death. At every
moment let us picture it in our imagination in all its aspects. . . . It
is uncertain where death awaits us; let us await it everywhere.
Premeditation of death is premeditation of freedom. . . . He who
has learned how to die has unlearned how to be a slave. Knowing
how to die frees us from all subjection and constraint.
—Michel de Montaigne



also by robert greene
Mastery
The 50th Law (with 50 Cent)
The 33 Strategies of War (a Joost Elffers Production)
The Art of Seduction (a Joost Elffers Production)
The 48 Laws of Power (a Joost Elffers Production)
The Laws of Human Nature


VIKING
An imprint of Penguin Random House LLC
penguinrandomhouse.com
Copyright © 2021 by Robert Greene
Penguin supports copyright. Copyright fuels creativity, encourages diverse voices, promotes free speech, and creates a vibrant
culture. Thank you for buying an authorized edition of this book and for complying with copyright laws by not reproducing,
scanning, or distributing any part of it in any form without permission. You are supporting writers and allowing Penguin to
continue to publish books for every reader.
Grateful acknowledgment is made for permission to reprint the following:
Excerpts from The 48 Laws of Power by Robert Greene and Joost Elffers, copyright © 1998 by Robert Greene and Joost Elffers.
Used by permission of Viking Books, an imprint of Penguin Publishing Group, a division of Penguin Random House LLC, and
HighBridge Audio, a division of Recorded Books, Inc. All rights reserved.
Excerpts from The Art of Seduction by Robert Greene, copyright © 2001 by Robert Greene and Joost Elffers. Used by permission
of Viking Books, an imprint of Penguin Publishing Group, a division of Penguin Random House LLC, and HighBridge Audio, a
division of Recorded Books, Inc. All rights reserved.
Excerpts from The 33 Strategies of War by Robert Greene, copyright © 2006 by Robert Greene and Joost Elffers. Used by
permission of Viking Books, an imprint of Penguin Publishing Group, a division of Penguin Random House LLC, and HighBridge
Audio, a division of Recorded Books, Inc. All rights reserved.
Excerpts from Mastery by Robert Greene, copyright © 2012 by Robert Greene. Used by permission of Viking Books, an imprint
of Penguin Publishing Group, a division of Penguin Random House LLC. All rights reserved.
Excerpts from The Laws of Human Nature by Robert Greene, copyright © 2018 by Robert Greene. Used by permission of Viking
Books, an imprint of Penguin Publishing Group, a division of Penguin Random House LLC. All rights reserved.
library of congress cataloging-in-publication data
Names: Greene, Robert, author.
Title: The daily laws : 366 meditations on power, seduction, mastery, strategy, and human nature / Robert Greene.
Description: New York : Viking, 2021.
Identifiers: LCCN 2021016908 (print) | LCCN 2021016909 (ebook) | ISBN 9780593299210 (hardcover) | ISBN 9780593299227
(ebook) | ISBN 9780593489369 (international edition)
Subjects: LCSH: Self-actualization (Psychology) | Motivation (Psychology) | Power (Philosophy) | Seduction. | Self-confidence.
Classification: LCC BF637.S4 G7383 2021 (print) | LCC BF637.S4 (ebook) | DDC 158.1 — dc23
LC record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021016908
LC ebook record available at https://lccn.loc.gov/2021016909
Cover design: Joost Elffers Studio
book design by lucia bernard, adapted for ebook by cora wigen
pid_prh_5.8.0_c0_r0

To the memory of Brutus, the greatest cat who ever lived.

Contents
Preface
january
Your Life’s Task: Planting the Seeds for Mastery
february
The Ideal Apprenticeship: Transforming Yourself
march
The Master at Work: Activating Skills and Attaining Mastery
april
The Perfect Courtier: Playing the Game of Power
may
The Supposed Nonplayers of Power: Recognizing Toxic Types and
Disguised Power Strategies
june
The Divine Craft: Mastering the Arts of Indirection and Manipulation
july
The Seductive Character: Penetrating Hearts and Minds
august
The Master Persuader: Softening People’s Resistance
september
The Grand Strategist: Rising Out of Tactical Hell
october
The Emotional Self: Coming to Terms with Our Dark Side
november
The Rational Human: Realizing Your Higher Self
december
The Cosmic Sublime: Expanding the Mind to Its Furthest Reaches

F
preface
rom the beginning of our existence as a species, we humans have
depended on our connection to reality for our very survival and
success. What this meant for our ancestors was that they had to
become highly sensitive to their environment, detecting any changes in the
weather, anticipating the presence of predators, discerning where
opportunities for food might lie. They had to be aware, alert, and
continually thinking about what the environment was telling them.
In such an atmosphere, with the pressures so immediate and the
consequences of any inattention being life or death, the human brain
evolved as an instrument for helping humans to not only detect dangers, but
also to slowly gain control of a treacherous environment. The moment our
ancestors began to turn inward and give in to wishes and fantasies, reality
rigorously punished them for their delusions and bad decisions.
Today, so many hundreds of thousands of years later, we have the same
brain designed for the same purpose. But because we have increasingly
gained control of our environment and the physical pressures have loosened
dramatically, the dangers have become much more subtle—they come in
the form of people (not leopards) and their tricky psychology, and the
delicate political and social games we have to play. And because of these
less obvious dangers, our greatest problem is that our minds tend to become
less sensitive to the environment; we turn inward, absorbed in our dreams
and fantasies. We become naive.
To add to this dangerous brew, our culture tends to fill our heads with all
kinds of false notions, making us believe things about what the world and
human nature should be like, rather than what they are actually like. We
take all of this for the truth and act on these misconceptions and, just as in
the past, the environment and reality eventually punish us for our
delusionary behavior. We may not lose our lives, but our careers and
relationships take wrong turns. We blame other people for our woes when
all along the problem is inside us, stemming from our naiveté and the
fantasies we’ve absorbed, which unconsciously guide our actions.
The following are some of the common false notions in our culture that
can lead us astray: For instance, when it comes to our career, we believe
that where we went to school, who we know, and who we are connected to
is the key to our future success. We think that making mistakes or failing or
any kind of conflict are to be avoided at all costs, and that we need to be in
a hurry to make money, gain attention, and rise to the top. We imagine that
work should be fun, that boredom is bad, and that we can take shortcuts to
becoming really good at things. We have the idea that creativity is
something we are born with, a natural gift. We feel that everyone is equal,
and that hierarchies are a thing of the past.
With people, we operate under the belief that most of our friends and
colleagues like us and want the best for us. We think that those with a
pattern of bad behavior can be trusted if they say they’ve reformed, that
people full of conviction and a sense of outrage must be telling the truth,
and that those in power, including our bosses, are not insecure. We imagine
that people who are extremely nice and accommodating are not potentially
masking a dark and devious nature, that those who espouse progressive
ideas have a corresponding virtuous character, and that people will be
grateful for any favors we do for them.
With ourselves, we think that it’s important to be honest and to tell
others what’s exactly on our minds. We feel that it’s good to show off our
best qualities—our intelligence, our industriousness, etc. We think that if
bad things happen to us, we’re just victims and not responsible in any way.
We of course see that some people are narcissistic, aggressive, envious,
grandiose, and manipulative, but we believe that these are just a few bad
apples and that we ourselves have none of these qualities.
What often happens is that at a fairly young age, burdened with such
delusions, we enter the work world, and reality suddenly slaps us in the
face. We discover that some people have fragile egos and can be devious
and not at all what they seem. We are blindsided by their indifference or
sudden acts of betrayal. Being ourselves and just saying what we think can
land us in all kinds of trouble. We come to realize that the work world is
riddled with political games that nobody has prepared us for.
Some of our career decisions, based on the desire for money and
attention, lead to emotional burnout, disenchantment, and dead ends. And
by not looking at ourselves in an honest way, and glossing over our own
flaws and weaknesses, we become trapped in patterns of behavior that we
cannot control. As the years go by, and the misreadings, missteps, and
unrealistic decisions pile up, we can become bitter, confused, and damaged.
The Daily Laws is designed to reverse these toxic patterns and to
reconnect you to reality. It takes aim at the various delusions we have all
absorbed and seeks to attune your mind instead to the most entrenched traits
of human nature and how our brains actually operate. Its goal is to
transform you into a radical realist, so that when the book is finished, you
will continue, on your own, to see people and events through this clarifying
lens, and become ever more sensitive to the dangers and opportunities in
your social environment. It is based on twenty-five years of intense research
on the subjects of power, persuasion, strategy, mastery, and human nature,
and is the distillation of all the lessons in my books.
The entries in the first three months will help rid you of all the external
voices telling you about which career path to follow, and instead will
connect you to your own voice, to what makes you unique, to your purpose
and calling in life. Once this connection is made, you will have a guide for
all your subsequent career decisions. These entries will show you that what
matters is not education or money, but your persistence and the intensity of
your desire to learn; that failures, mistakes, and conflicts are often the best
education of all; and how true creativity and mastery emerge from all this.
The next three months will train you to see the political nature of the
work world and how dangerous it is to take appearances for reality. They
will help you to recognize the toxic types before they immerse you in their
emotional maelstroms and teach you how to consciously outwit the great
manipulators out there.
The ensuing three months will attempt to show you how real persuasion
and influence work—not by thinking first of yourself and saying what’s on
your mind, but from getting into the mindset of others and appealing to
their self-interest. They will also help you to become a superior strategist in
life, effectively advancing those causes you so deeply believe in and
realizing your goals.
And the last three months will immerse you in the underlying
motivations that drive human behavior, including your own. By making you
reflect on who you are and realize that you are a flawed human being like
everyone else, you will not only have greater empathy and acceptance of
people, but you will have the key to altering your own negative patterns.
These entries will show you that by confronting your deepest fears about
mortality, you can open yourself up to the truly awesome nature of life,
appreciating every moment that remains to you for absorbing its sublimity.
The entries have been culled from five of my books, and from part of the
book I am currently working on, The Law of the Sublime; from interviews
and talks over the years; and from blog posts and online essays I have
written. At the end of each entry, I share the title and the chapter of the book
the entries come from, so that you can deepen your study on any specific
idea. Each month has a specific title and subtheme, and begins with a short
essay. These essays illustrate the connection of the ideas in my books to my
own experiences, the hardships that I have encountered, and the realistic
lessons I have derived from them.
This book can be read in a pick-and-choose manner, skipping around as
you desire, fitting the ideas to your own issues at this particular moment in
your life. But it is best to read The Daily Laws from cover to cover,
beginning with whichever date the book happens to land in your hands. In
this way the book will immerse you in each subject, infiltrating your mind
and helping you develop the essential habit of seeing things as they are. As
part of this habit, it’s best to take notes as often as you can, relating the
entries to your own experiences past and present. And it’s even better to
occasionally put some of the ideas into practice and reflect on the real-
world experiences that ensue.
Finally, consider The Daily Laws as a kind of bildungsroman. The
bildungsroman—from the German meaning a “development” or “education
novel”—was a literary genre that began in the eighteenth century and
continues into the present. In these stories, the protagonists, often quite
young, enter life full of naive notions. The author takes them on a journey
through a land teeming with miscreants, rogues, and fools. Slowly, the
protagonists learn to shed themselves of their various illusions as the real
world educates them. And they come to see that reality is infinitely more
interesting and richer than all the fantasies they had been fed on. They
emerge enlightened, battle-tested, and wise beyond their years.
The Daily Laws will take you, the protagonist, on a similar journey
through a land full of dangerous and toxic types of people, helping you shed
your illusions and hardening you for the battles ahead so that you may find
solace and pleasure in seeing people and the world in their true light.
We are not provided with wisdom, we must discover it for ourselves, after a journey
through the wilderness which no one else can take for us. . . . The lives that you admire, the
attitudes that seem noble to you are not the result of training at home, by a father, or by
masters at school, they have sprung from beginnings of a very different order, by reaction
from the influence of everything evil or commonplace that prevailed round about them.
They represent a struggle and a victory.
—marcel proust

January
Your Life’s Task
planting the seeds for mastery
All of us are born unique. This uniqueness is marked genetically in our
DNA. We are a one-time phenomenon in the universe—our exact genetic
makeup has never occurred before nor will it ever be repeated. For all of us,
this uniqueness first expresses itself in childhood through certain primal
inclinations. They are forces within us that come from a deeper place than
conscious words can express. They draw us to certain experiences and away
from others. As these forces move us here or there, they influence the
development of our minds in very particular ways. Let us state it in the
following way: At your birth a seed is planted. That seed is your
uniqueness. It wants to grow, transform itself, and flower to its full
potential. It has a natural, assertive energy to it. Your Life’s Task is to bring
that seed to flower, to express your uniqueness through your work. You
have a destiny to fulfill. The stronger you feel and maintain it—as a force, a
voice, or in whatever form—the greater your chance for fulfilling this Life’s
Task and achieving mastery. The month of January is all about discovering
and developing your Life’s Task, your purpose, what you were put here to
do.
I had known from a very young age—perhaps the age of eight—that I
wanted to become a writer. I had a tremendous love of books and of words.
I thought at first, when I was young, that I would be a novelist, but after
graduating university, I had to make a living, and I realized being a novelist
was too impractical. And so, living in New York, I drifted into journalism
as a way to at least make a living. Then one day, after several years of
working as a writer and editor, I was having lunch with a man who had just
edited an article I had written for a magazine. After downing his third
martini, he finally admitted to me why he had asked me to lunch. “You
should seriously consider a different career,” he told me. “You are not
writer material. Your work is too undisciplined. Your style is too bizarre.
Your ideas—they’re just not relatable to the average reader. Go to law
school, Robert. Go to business school. Spare yourself the pain.”
At first, these words were like a punch in the stomach. But in the months
to come, I realized something about myself. I’d entered a career that didn’t
suit me, and my work reflected this incompatibility. I had to get out of
journalism. This realization initiated a period of wandering in my life. I
traveled all across Europe. I worked every conceivable job. I did
construction work in Greece, taught English in Barcelona, worked as a hotel
receptionist in Paris and a tour guide in Dublin, served as a trainee for an
English company making television documentaries. I tried writing novels
and plays. I wandered back to Los Angeles, California, where I was born
and raised. I worked in a detective agency, among other odd jobs. I entered
the film business working as an assistant to a director, as a researcher, story
developer, and screenwriter. In these long years of wandering, I had totaled
some sixty different jobs. By the year 1995, my parents (God bless them)
were beginning to get seriously worried about their son. I was thirty-six
years old, and I seemed lost and unable to settle into anything. I too had
moments of great doubt and even depression, but I did not really feel lost.
Something inside kept pushing and guiding me.
I was searching and exploring, I was hungry for experiences, and I was
continuously writing. That same year, while in Italy for yet another job, I
met a man there named Joost Elffers—a packager and producer of books.
One day while we were walking along the quais of Venice, Joost asked me
if I had any ideas for a book.
Suddenly, seemingly out of nowhere, an idea just gushed out of me. I
told Joost that I was constantly reading books on history and the stories that
I read of Julius Caesar and the Borgias and Louis XIV, these were the exact
same stories that I had personally witnessed with my own eyes in all my
different jobs, only less bloody. People want power and they want to
disguise this wanting of power. And so, they play games. They covertly
manipulate and intrigue, all the while presenting a nice even saintly front. I
would expose these games.
As I was improvising this pitch to him, which would eventually become
my first book, The 48 Laws of Power, I felt something click inside me. I felt
this tremendous sense of excitement welling up. It felt natural. It felt like
destiny. When I saw that he was excited, I became even more excited. He
said that he loved the idea and that he would pay me to live while I wrote
half the book and then he would try to sell it to a publisher, himself being
the packager, designer, and producer of it. When I returned home to Los
Angeles and began working on The 48 Laws, I knew that this was my one
chance in life, my one avenue of escaping all the years of wandering. So, I
went all in. I put every single ounce of energy I had into it, because either I
would make this book a success, or I would end up a failure in life. And I
poured into this book all the lessons I had learned, all my training as a
writer, all the discipline I’d gained from journalism, all the good and bad
experiences I had accumulated in my sixty different jobs, all the horrible
bosses that I had dealt with. And my pent-up excitement in writing the book
could be felt by the reader and, much to my surprise, and beyond anything
I’d imagined, the book had tremendous success.
Now looking back on all this some twenty-five years later, I realized that
that thing that was pushing and guiding me (that I mentioned earlier) was a
sense of purpose, a sense of destiny. It was like this voice inside of me
whispering, “Don’t give up. Keep trying. Keep trying.” This voice, which
had first appeared to me as a child, was guiding me toward my Life’s Task.
It took many years, many experiments, many mistakes, and obstacles, but it
kept me advancing and oddly hopeful.
And now, many books later, I remain dedicated to that task. Like every
person, I still need that sense of purpose to guide me, day in and day out.
Each book I write has to feel like it’s part of that destiny, like it was meant
to happen. And this sense of purpose I’ve had for my whole life that
became so much clearer twenty-five years ago is what I believe has guided
me through all the hard moments in my life. And I think it could do that for
anybody, once you sense it within you, once you search for it.
The real lesson here is that it took me a long time to get there, with many
twists and turns. And so, it can come even later in life—in your thirties or
forties, or beyond. But my existence forever changed the moment I
embraced my Life’s Task.

JANUARY 1
Discover Your Calling
Everyone holds his fortune in his own hands, like a sculptor the raw material he will fashion
into a figure. But it’s the same with that type of artistic activity as with all others: We are
merely born with the capability to do it. The skill to mold the material into what we want must
be learned and attentively cultivated.
—johann wolfgang von goethe
You possess a kind of inner force that seeks to guide you toward your Life’s
Task—what you are meant to accomplish in the time that you have to live.
In childhood this force was clear to you. It directed you toward activities
and subjects that fit your natural inclinations, that sparked a curiosity that
was deep and primal. In the intervening years, the force tends to fade in and
out as you listen more to parents and peers, to the daily anxieties that wear
away at you. This can be the source of your unhappiness—your lack of
connection to who you are and what makes you unique. The first move
toward mastery is always inward—learning who you really are and
reconnecting with that innate force. Knowing it with clarity, you will find
your way to the proper career path and everything else will fall into place. It
is never too late to start this process.
Daily Law: Mastery is a process and discovering your calling is the starting point.
Mastery, I: Discover Your Calling—The Life’s Task

JANUARY 2
Reconnect with Your Childhood Obsession
When Marie Curie, the future discoverer of radium, was four years old she
wandered into her father’s study and stood transfixed before a glass case
that contained all kinds of laboratory instruments for chemistry and physics
experiments. She would return to that room again and again to stare at the
instruments, imagining all sorts of experiments she could conduct with
these tubes and measuring devices. Years later, when she entered a real
laboratory for the first time and did some experiments herself, she
reconnected immediately with her childhood obsession; she knew she had
found her vocation.
Daily Law: You were obsessed with it as a child for a reason. Reconnect with it.
Mastery, I: Discover Your Calling—The Life’s Task

JANUARY 3
The Voice
The way to recover the meaning of life and the worthwhileness of life is to recover the power
of experience, to have impulse voices from within, and to be able to hear these impulse voices
from within.
—abraham maslow
From the time I was young, I was entranced with words. I can remember in
the fourth grade the teacher did this activity where she put up the word
carpenter, and she asked us to come up with as many words as we could
with just those letters. “Ant,” “pet,” “car,” et cetera. And I just thought,
“Wow! You mean you can take letters like this and recombine them into
words?” I was entranced. These childhood attractions are hard to put into
words. Abraham Maslow called it “impulse voices.” He noticed that
children know exactly what they like and dislike from a very early age. It is
extremely human and powerful. You had those impulse voices too. You
hated this kind of activity and you loved that other one. You didn’t like
math but you were drawn to words. You were exhilarated by certain kinds
of books and fell promptly asleep with other kinds. The importance of
recognizing these early inclinations is that they are clear indications of an
attraction that is not infected by the desires of other people. They are not
something embedded in you by your parents, which come with a more
superficial connection, something more verbal and conscious. Coming
instead from somewhere deeper, these inclinations can only be your own,
reflections of your unique chemistry.
Daily Law: Do something today that you used to love doing as a kid. Try to reconnect
with your impulse voices.
Robert Greene in conversation at Live Talks Los Angeles, February 11, 2019

JANUARY 4
It Is Already within You
Sooner or later something seems to call us onto a particular path. You may remember this
something as a signal calling in childhood when an urge out of nowhere, a fascination, a
peculiar turn of events struck like an annunciation: This is what I must do, this is what I’ve got
to have. This is who I am.
—james hillman
As you become more sophisticated, you often lose touch with these signals
from your primal core. They can be buried beneath all of the other subjects
you have studied. Your power and future can depend on reconnecting with
this core and returning to your origins. You must dig for signs of such
inclinations in your earliest years. Look for its traces in visceral reactions to
something simple; a desire to repeat an activity that you never tired of; a
subject that stimulated an unusual degree of curiosity; feelings of power
attached to particular actions. It is already there within you. You have
nothing to create; you merely need to dig and refine what has been buried
inside of you all along. If you reconnect with this core at any age, some
element of that primitive attraction will spark back to life, indicating a path
that can ultimately become your Life’s Task.
Daily Law: Ask someone who recalls your childhood what they remember about your
interests. Get reacquainted with those early passions.
Mastery, I: Discover Your Calling—The Life’s Task

JANUARY 5
Know What You’re Drawn to and Immerse
Yourself in It
The contemporary anthropologist-linguist Daniel Everett grew up on the
California-Mexico border, in a cowboy town. From a very early age, he
found himself drawn to the Mexican culture around him. Everything about
it fascinated him—the sound of the words spoken by the migrant workers,
the food, the manners that were so different from the Anglo world. He
immersed himself as much as he could in their language and culture. This
would transform into a lifelong interest in the Other—the diversity of
cultures on the planet and what that means about our evolution.
Daily Law: What’s something you’ve always felt a pull toward? Dive deep into it today.
Mastery, I: Discover Your Calling—The Life’s Task

JANUARY 6
Change Is the Law
In dealing with your career and its inevitable changes, you must think in the
following way: You are not tied to a particular position; your loyalty is not
to a career or a company. You are committed to your Life’s Task, to giving
it full expression. It is up to you to find it and guide it correctly. It is not up
to others to protect or help you. You are on your own. Change is inevitable,
particularly in such a revolutionary moment as ours. Since you are on your
own, it is up to you to foresee the changes going on right now in your
profession. You must adapt your Life’s Task to these circumstances. You do
not hold on to past ways of doing things, because that will ensure you will
fall behind and suffer for it. You are flexible and always looking to adapt. If
change is forced upon you, you must resist the temptation to overreact or
feel sorry for yourself. Before he became the great boxing trainer, Freddie
Roach was forced to retire from boxing. He instinctively found his way
back to the ring because he understood that what he loved was not boxing
per se, but competitive sports and strategizing. Thinking in this way, he
could adapt his inclinations to a new direction within boxing. Like Roach,
you don’t want to abandon the skills and experience you have gained, but to
find a new way to apply them. Your eye is on the future, not the past. Often
such creative readjustments lead to a superior path for us—we are shaken
out of our complacency and forced to reassess where we are headed.
Daily Law: Adapt your inclinations. Avoid having rigid goals and dreams. Change is the
law.
Mastery, I: Discover Your Calling—The Life’s Task

JANUARY 7
Money and Success
For many people, the pursuit of money and status can supply them with
plenty of motivation and focus. Such types would consider figuring out
their calling in life a monumental waste of time and an antiquated notion.
But in the long run this philosophy often yields the most impractical of
results. We all know the effects of “hyperintention”: If we want and need
desperately to sleep, we are less likely to fall asleep. If we absolutely must
give the best talk possible at some conference, we become hyperanxious
about the result, and the performance suffers. If we desperately need to find
an intimate partner or make friends, we are more likely to push them away.
If instead we relax and focus on other things, we are more likely to fall
asleep or give a great talk or charm people. The most pleasurable things in
life occur as a result of something not directly intended and expected. When
we try to manufacture happy moments, they tend to disappoint us. The
same goes for the dogged pursuit of money and success. Many of the most
successful, famous, and wealthy individuals do not begin with an obsession
with money and status. One prime example would be Steve Jobs, who
amassed quite a fortune in his relatively short life. He actually cared very
little for material possessions. His singular focus was on creating the best
and most original designs, and when he did so, good fortune followed him.
Daily Law: Concentrate on maintaining a high sense of purpose, and the success will
flow to you naturally.
The Laws of Human Nature, 13: Advance with a Sense of Purpose—The Law of
Aimlessness

JANUARY 8
Occupy Your Own Niche
As a child growing up in Madras, India, in the late 1950s, V. S.
Ramachandran knew he was different. In his loneliness he would often
wander along the beach, and soon he became fascinated by the incredible
variety of seashells that washed up on shore. He began to collect them and
study the subject in detail. Soon he was drawn to the strangest varieties of
seashells, such as the Xenophora, an organism that collects discarded shells
and uses them for camouflage. In a way, he was like the Xenophora—an
anomaly. In nature, these anomalies often serve a larger evolutionary
purpose—they can lead to the occupation of new ecological niches, offering
a greater chance of survival. Over the years, he transferred this boyhood
interest into other subjects—human anatomical abnormalities, peculiar
phenomena in chemistry, and so on. He went to medical school then
became a professor in visual psychology at the University of California at
San Diego. He became intrigued by the phenomenon of phantom limbs—
people who have had an arm or leg amputated and yet still feel a paralyzing
pain in the missing limb. He proceeded to conduct experiments on phantom
limb subjects. These experiments led to some exciting discoveries about the
brain itself, as well as a novel way to relieve such patients of their pain.
Studying anomalous neurological disorders would be the subject to which
he could devote the rest of his life. It was as if he had come full circle to the
days of collecting the rarest forms of seashells.
Daily Law: Embrace your strangeness. Identify what makes you different. Fuse those
things together and become an anomaly.
Mastery, I: Discover Your Calling—The Life’s Task

JANUARY 9
Find Inspiration from Your Heroes
As a young boy growing up in North Carolina, John Coltrane felt different
and strange. He was much more serious than his schoolmates; he
experienced emotional and spiritual longings he did not know how to
verbalize. He drifted into music more as a hobby, taking up the saxophone
and playing in his high school band. Then a few years later he saw the great
jazz saxophonist Charlie “Bird” Parker perform live, and the sounds Parker
produced touched Coltrane to the core. Something primal and personal
came through Parker’s saxophone, a voice from deep within. Coltrane
suddenly saw the means for expressing his uniqueness and giving a voice to
his own spiritual longings. He began to practice the instrument with such
intensity that within a decade he transformed himself into perhaps the
greatest jazz artist of his era. You must understand the following: In order to
master a field, you must love the subject and feel a profound connection to
it. Your interest must transcend the field and border on the religious. For
Coltrane, it was not music but giving voice to powerful emotions.
Daily Law: Are there people whose work affects you in a powerful way? Analyze this
and use them as models.
Mastery, I: Discover Your Calling—The Life’s Task

JANUARY 10
Embrace Your Weirdness
The most courageous act is still to think for yourself.
—coco chanel
What do we say about masters? “They’re one of a kind.” There’s never
been a Steve Jobs ever before. There’s never been a Warren Buffett. There’s
never been an Albert Einstein. They’re unique. They embraced what made
them different. Yes, it comes with some pain. With my books, particularly
The 48 Laws of Power, you might hate it, you might think it’s satanic, but I
can guarantee you’ve never read or seen a book that looks like it. The
sections I created, the opening paragraphs, the quotes on the sides, the
shapes—the book reflects me and my weirdness. The publisher was
frightened by it. They wanted a more conventional book. And I said, “No. I
know I’ve never published anything before, but I’m sticking to what I have
here.” I stuck to what was weird and strange about me.
Daily Law: Always stick to what makes you weird, odd, strange, different. That’s your
source of power.
Podcast Interview. Curious with Josh Peck. December 4, 2018

JANUARY 11
What Makes You Feel More Alive?
Sometimes an inclination becomes clear through a particular activity that
brings with it a feeling of heightened power. As a child, Martha Graham felt
intensely frustrated by her inability to make others understand her in a deep
way; words seemed inadequate. Then one day, she saw her first dance
performance. The lead dancer had a way of expressing certain emotions
through movement; it was visceral, not verbal. She started dance lessons
soon thereafter and immediately understood her vocation. Only when
dancing could she feel alive and expressive. Years later she would go on to
invent a whole new form of dance and revolutionize the genre.
Daily Law: Do something that makes you feel at the peak of your being today.
Mastery, I: Discover Your Calling—The Life’s Task

JANUARY 12
The Obstacle Is the Way
Some people do not become aware of inclinations or future career paths in
their childhood, but instead are made painfully aware of their limitations.
They are not good at what others seem to find easy or manageable. The idea
of a calling in life is alien to them. In some cases, they internalize the
judgments and criticisms of others, and come to see themselves as
essentially deficient. If they are not careful, this can become a self-fulfilling
prophecy. Nobody faced this fate more powerfully than Temple Grandin. In
1950, at the age of three, Temple Grandin was diagnosed with autism. A
doctor had suggested she be institutionalized for the rest of her life.
Through the help of speech therapists, she was able to avoid such a fate and
attend regular school. She slowly developed an intense interest in animals
and in autism itself. This led to a career in the sciences. With her
exceptional reasoning powers, she has been able to throw light on the
phenomenon of autism and explain it in a way no one else has been able to.
Somehow, she had managed to overcome all of the seemingly
insurmountable obstructions in her path and find her way to the Life’s Task
that suited her to perfection. When you confront your limitations, you are
moved to respond in some way that is creative. And as it was for Temple
Grandin, it may be in a way that no one else has done or even thought of
before.
Daily Law: Confront one of your limitations—one of the obstructions in your path—
today. Break beyond it, climb over it, think your way around it. Don’t run from it. It was
created for you.
Mastery, I: Discover Your Calling—The Life’s Task

JANUARY 13
Master the Small Things
When you are faced with deficiencies instead of strengths and inclinations,
this is the strategy you must assume: Ignore your weaknesses and resist the
temptation to be more like others. Instead, direct yourself toward the small
things you are good at. Do not dream or make grand plans for the future,
but instead concentrate on becoming proficient at these simple and
immediate skills. This will bring you confidence and become a base from
which you can expand to other pursuits. Proceeding in this way, step by
step, you will hit upon your Life’s Task. Your Life’s Task does not always
appear to you through some grand or promising inclination. It can appear in
the guise of your deficiencies, making you focus on the one or two things
that you are inevitably good at. Working at these skills, you learn the value
of discipline and see the rewards you get from your efforts. Like a lotus
flower, your skills will expand outward from a center of strength and
confidence. Do not envy those who seem to be naturally gifted; it is often a
curse, as such types rarely learn the value of diligence and focus, and they
pay for this later in life. This strategy applies as well to any setbacks and
difficulties we may experience. In such moments, it is generally wise to
stick to the few things we know and do well, and to reestablish our
confidence.
Daily Law: When in doubt, focus on the things you know you do well. Expand outward
from the center.
Mastery, I: Discover Your Calling—The Life’s Task

JANUARY 14
Avoid the False Path
At the center of your being you have the answer; you know who you are and you know what
you want.
—lao tzu
A false path in life is generally something we are attracted to for the wrong
reasons—money, fame, attention, and so on. If it is attention we need, we
often experience a kind of emptiness inside that we are hoping to fill with
the false love of public approval. Because the field we choose does not
correspond with our deepest inclinations, we rarely find the fulfillment that
we crave. Our work suffers for this, and the attention we may have gotten in
the beginning starts to fade—a painful process. If it is money and comfort
that dominate our decision, we are most often acting out of anxiety and the
need to please our parents. They may steer us toward something lucrative
out of care and concern, but lurking underneath this can be something else
—perhaps a bit of envy that we have more freedom than they had when
they were young. Your strategy must be twofold: First, to realize as early as
possible that you have chosen your career for the wrong reasons, before
your confidence takes a hit. And second, to actively rebel against those
forces that have pushed you away from your true path. Scoff at the need for
attention and approval—they will lead you astray. Feel some anger and
resentment at the parental forces that want to foist upon you an alien
vocation. It is a healthy part of your development to follow a path
independent of your parents and to establish your own identity. Let your
sense of rebellion fill you with energy and purpose.
Daily Law: If you’re on the false path, get off. Find energy in rebellion.
Mastery, I: Discover Your Calling—The Life’s Task

JANUARY 15
Let a Sense of Purpose Guide You
Just as a well-filled day brings blessed sleep, so a well-employed life brings blessed death.
—leonardo da vinci
What we lack most in the modern world is a sense of a larger purpose to our
lives. In the past, it was organized religion that often supplied this. But most
of us now live in a secularized world. We human animals are unique—we
must build our own world. We do not simply react to events out of
biological scripting. But without a sense of direction provided to us, we
tend to flounder. We don’t know how to fill up and structure our time. There
seems to be no defining purpose to our lives. We are perhaps not conscious
of this emptiness, but it infects us in all kinds of ways. Feeling that we are
called to accomplish something is the most positive way for us to supply
this sense of purpose and direction. It is a religious-like quest for each of us.
This quest should not be seen as selfish or antisocial. It is in fact connected
to something much larger than our individual lives. Our evolution as a
species has depended on the creation of a tremendous diversity of skills and
ways of thinking.
Daily Law: Think back on the moments when you felt deeply and personally connected
to an activity. Think about the pleasure it brought you. In such activities are signs of
your true purpose.
Mastery, I: Discover Your Calling—The Life’s Task

JANUARY 16
There Are No Superior Callings
Keep in mind that your contribution to the culture can come in many forms.
You don’t have to become an entrepreneur or figure largely on the world’s
stage. You can do just as well operating as one person in a group or
organization, as long as you retain a strong point of view that is your own
and use this to gently exert your influence. Your path can involve physical
labor and craft—you take pride in the excellence of the work, leaving your
particular stamp on the quality. It can be raising a family in the best way
possible. In any event, you will want to go as far as you can in cultivating
your uniqueness and the originality that goes with it. In a world full of
people who seem largely interchangeable, you cannot be replaced. You are
one of a kind. Your combination of skills and experience is not replicable.
That represents true freedom and the ultimate power we humans can
possess.
Daily Law: No calling is superior to another. What matters is that it be tied to a personal
need and inclination, and that your energy moves you toward improvement and
continuous learning from experience.
The Laws of Human Nature, 13: Advance with a Sense of Purpose—The Law of
Aimlessness

JANUARY 17
The True Source of Creativity
You must alter your very concept of creativity and try to see it from a new
angle. Most often, people associate creativity with something intellectual, a
particular way of thinking. The truth is that creative activity is one that
involves the entire self—our emotions, our levels of energy, our characters,
and our minds. To make a discovery, to invent something that connects with
the public, to fashion a work of art that is meaningful, inevitably requires
time and effort. This often entails years of experimentation, various
setbacks and failures, and the need to maintain a high level of focus. You
must have patience and faith that what you are doing will yield something
important. You could have the most brilliant mind, teeming with knowledge
and ideas, but if you choose the wrong subject or problem to attack, you can
run out of energy and interest. In such a case all of your intellectual
brilliance will lead to nothing.
Daily Law: Work at what connects to you emotionally and ideas will come to you.
Mastery, V: Awaken the Dimensional Mind—The Creative-Active

JANUARY 18
Stop Being So Nice
Everyone carries a shadow, and the less it is embodied in the individual’s conscious life, the
blacker and denser it is.
—carl jung
You pay a greater price for being so nice and deferential than for
consciously showing your Shadow. First, to follow the latter path you must
begin by respecting your own opinions more and those of others less,
particularly when it comes to your areas of expertise, to the field you have
immersed yourself in. Trust your native genius and the ideas you have come
up with. Second, get into the habit in your daily life of asserting yourself
more and compromising less. Do this under control and at opportune
moments. Third, start caring less what people think of you. You will feel a
tremendous sense of liberation. Fourth, realize that at times you must offend
and even hurt people who block your path, who have ugly values, who
unjustly criticize you. Use such moments of clear injustice to bring out your
Shadow and show it proudly. Fifth, feel free to play the impudent, willful
child who mocks the stupidity and hypocrisy of others. Finally, flout the
very conventions that others follow so scrupulously.
Daily Law: Keep in mind that power lies in asserting your uniqueness, even if that
offends some people along the way. Study your Shadow side today.
The Laws of Human Nature, 9: Confront Your Dark Side—The Law of Repression

JANUARY 19
Listen to Your Inner Authority
You are here not merely to gratify your impulses and consume what others
have made but to make and contribute as well, to serve a higher purpose. To
serve this higher purpose, you must cultivate what is unique about you.
Stop listening so much to the words and opinions of others, telling you who
you are and what you should like and dislike. Judge things and people for
yourself. Question what you think and why you feel a certain way. Know
yourself thoroughly—your innate tastes and inclinations, the fields that
naturally attract you. Work every day on improving those skills that mesh
with your unique spirit and purpose. Add to the needed diversity of culture
by creating something that reflects your uniqueness. Embrace what makes
you different. Not following this course is the real reason you feel
depressed at times. Moments of depression are a call to listen again to your
inner authority.
Daily Law: Reflect on those moments in life when you were active (followed your own
path) and those moments when you were passive (followed what others wanted).
Compare the emotions you experienced.
The Laws of Human Nature, 15: Make Them Want to Follow You—The Law of Fickleness

JANUARY 20
See Mastery as Salvation
The misery that oppresses you lies not in your profession but in yourself! What man in the
world would not find his situation intolerable if he chooses a craft, an art, indeed any form of
life, without experiencing an inner calling?
—johann wolfgang von goethe
The world is teeming with problems, many of them of our own creation. To
solve them will require a tremendous amount of effort and creativity.
Relying on genetics, technology, magic, or being nice and natural will not
save us. We require the energy not only to address practical matters, but
also to forge new institutions and orders that fit our changed circumstances.
We must create our own world or we will die from inaction. We need to
find our way back to the concept of mastery that defined us as a species so
many millions of years ago. This is not mastery for the purpose of
dominating nature or other people, but for determining our fate. The
passive-ironic attitude is not cool or romantic, but pathetic and destructive.
You are setting an example of what can be achieved as a Master in the
modern world. You are contributing to the most important cause of all—the
survival and prosperity of the human race, in a time of stagnation. And you
must convince yourself of the following: people get the mind and quality of
brain that they deserve through their actions in life.
Daily Law: You must see your attempt at attaining mastery as something extremely
necessary and positive.
Mastery, I: Discover Your Calling—The Life’s Task

JANUARY 21
Depending on Others Is Misery
There is nothing worse than feeling dependent on other people. Dependency
makes you vulnerable to all kinds of emotions—betrayal, disappointment,
frustration—that play havoc with your mental balance. Being self-reliant is
critical. To make yourself less dependent on others and so-called experts,
you need to expand your repertoire of skills. And you need to feel more
confident in your own judgment. Understand: we tend to overestimate other
people’s abilities—after all, they’re trying hard to make it look as if they
knew what they were doing—and we tend to underestimate our own. You
must compensate for this by trusting yourself more and others less. It is
important to remember, though, that being self-reliant does not mean
burdening yourself with petty details. You must be able to distinguish
between small matters that are best left to others and larger issues that
require your attention and care.
Daily Law: It is simple: depending on others is misery; depending on yourself is power.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 3: Amidst the Turmoil of Events, Do Not Lose Your
Presence of Mind—The Counterbalance Strategy

JANUARY 22
Use Resistance and Negative Spurs
Every negative is a positive. The bad things that happen to me, I somehow make them good.
—50 cent
The key to success in any field is first developing skills in various areas,
which you can later combine in unique and creative ways. But the process
of doing so can be tedious and painful, as you become aware of your
limitations and relative lack of skill. Most people, consciously or
unconsciously, seek to avoid tedium, pain, and any form of adversity. They
try to put themselves in places where they will face less criticism and
minimize their chances of failure. You must choose to move in the opposite
direction. You want to embrace negative experiences, limitations, and even
pain as the perfect means of building up your skill levels and sharpening
your sense of purpose.
Daily Law: Embrace negative experiences. When was the last time you failed, felt
embarrassed, got criticized? What were you doing? What did the experience teach you?
The Laws of Human Nature, 13: Advance with a Sense of Purpose—The Law of
Aimlessness

JANUARY 23
Create a Ladder of Descending Goals
Operating with long-term goals will bring you tremendous clarity and
resolve. These goals—a project or business to create, for instance—can be
relatively ambitious, enough to bring out the best in you. The problem,
however, is that they will also tend to generate anxiety as you look at all
you have to do to reach them from the present vantage point. To manage
such anxiety, you must create a ladder of smaller goals along the way,
reaching down to the present. Such objectives are simpler the further down
the ladder you go, and you can realize them in relatively short time frames,
giving you moments of satisfaction and a sense of progress. Always break
tasks into smaller bites. Each day or week you must have microgoals. This
will help you focus and avoid entanglements or detours that will waste your
energy. At the same time, you want to continually remind yourself of the
larger goal, to avoid losing track of it or getting too mired in details.
Periodically return to your original vision and imagine the immense
satisfaction you will have when it comes to fruition. This will give you
clarity and inspire you forward. You will also want a degree of flexibility
built into the process. At certain moments you reassess your progress and
adjust the various goals as necessary, constantly learning from experience
and adapting and improving your original objective.
Daily Law: Remember that what you are after is a series of practical results and
accomplishments, not a list of unrealized dreams and aborted projects. Working with
smaller, embedded goals will keep you moving in such a direction.
The Laws of Human Nature, 13: Advance with a Sense of Purpose—The Law of
Aimlessness

JANUARY 24
Combine Your Fascinations
If you are young and just starting out in your career, you will want to
explore a relatively wide field related to your inclinations—for instance, if
your affinity is words and writing, try all the different types of writing until
you hit upon the right fit. If you are older and have more experience, you
will want to take the skills you have already developed and find a way to
adapt them more in the direction of your true calling. Steve Jobs, as one
example, merged his two great fascinations: technology and design.
Daily Law: Keep in mind that your calling could be combining several fields that
fascinate you. Keep the process open ended; your experience will instruct you as to the
way.
The Laws of Human Nature, 13: Advance with a Sense of Purpose—The Law of
Aimlessness

JANUARY 25
Change Yourself from within, Little by Little
We humans tend to fixate on what we can see with our eyes. It is the most
animal part of our nature. When we look at the changes in other people’s
lives, we see the good luck that someone had in meeting a person with all of
the right connections and the funding. We see the project that brings the
money and the attention. In other words, we see the visible signs of
opportunity and success in our own lives but we are grasping at an illusion.
What really allows for such dramatic changes are the things that occur
inside a person. The slow accumulation of knowledge and skills, the
incremental improvements in work habits, and the ability to withstand
criticism. Any change in people’s fortunes is merely the visible
manifestation of all of that deep preparation over time. By essentially
ignoring this internal invisible aspect, we fail to change anything
fundamental within ourselves. And so in a few years’ time we reach our
limits. Yet again we grow frustrated, we crave change, we grab at
something quick and superficial and we remain prisoners forever of these
recurring patterns in our lives. The answer is to reverse this perspective:
Stop fixating on what other people are saying and doing. Stop fixating on
the money, the connections, the outward appearance of things. Instead look
inward, focus on the smaller internal changes that lay the groundwork for a
much larger change in fortune. It is the difference between grasping at an
illusion and immersing yourself in reality. And reality is what will liberate
and transform you.
Daily Law: What would you work on if no one was looking? If money were no object?
TED Talk, “The Key to Transforming Yourself,” October 23, 2013

JANUARY 26
Avoid the Counterforces to Mastery
What weakens that force within us, what makes you not feel it or even
doubt its existence, is the degree to which you have succumbed to another
force in life—social pressures to conform. These counterforces can be very
powerful. You want to fit into a group. Unconsciously, you might feel that
what makes you different is embarrassing or painful. Your parents often act
as a counterforce as well. They may seek to direct you to a career path that
is lucrative and comfortable. If these counterforces become strong enough,
you can lose complete contact with your uniqueness, with who you really
are. Your inclinations and desires become modeled on those of others. This
can set you off on a very dangerous path. You end up choosing a career that
does not really suit you. Your desire and interest slowly wane and your
work suffers for it. You come to see pleasure and fulfillment as something
that comes from outside your work. Because you are increasingly less
engaged in your career, you fail to pay attention to changes going on in the
field—you fall behind the times and pay a price for this. At moments when
you must make important decisions, you flounder or follow what others are
doing because you have no sense of inner direction or radar to guide you.
You have broken contact with your destiny as formed at birth. At all cost
you must avoid such a fate.
Daily Law: The process of following your Life’s Task all the way to mastery can
essentially begin at any point in life. The hidden force within you is always there and
ready to be engaged, but only if you can silence the noise from others.
Mastery, I: Discover Your Calling—The Life’s Task

JANUARY 27
The Real Secret
The hunger for the magical shortcuts and simple formulas for success has
been a constant throughout history. But in the end all of this searching is
centered on something that doesn’t exist. And while you lose yourself in
these endless fantasies, you ignore the one real power that you actually
possess. And unlike magic or simplistic formulas, we can see the material
effects of this power in history—the great discoveries and inventions, the
magnificent buildings and works of art, the technological prowess we
possess, all works of the masterful mind. This power brings to those who
possess it the kind of connection to reality and the ability to alter the world
that the mystics and magicians of the past could only dream of. Over the
centuries, people have placed a wall around mastery. They have called it
genius and have thought of it as inaccessible. They have seen it as the
product of privilege, inborn talent, or just the right alignment of the stars.
They have made it seem as if it were as elusive as magic. But that wall is
imaginary. This is the real secret: the brain that we possess is the work of
six million years of development, and more than anything else, this
evolution of the brain was designed to lead us to mastery, the latent power
within us all.
Daily Law: Work to create the kind of mind you desire. Unleashing the masterful mind
within, you will be at the vanguard of those who are exploring the extended limits of
human willpower.
Mastery, Introduction

JANUARY 28
The Path Is Not Linear
You begin by choosing a field or position that roughly corresponds to your
inclinations. This initial position offers you room to maneuver and
important skills to learn. You don’t want to start with something too lofty,
too ambitious—you need to make a living and establish some confidence.
Once on this path you discover certain side routes that attract you, while
other aspects of this field leave you cold. You adjust and perhaps move to a
related field, continuing to learn more about yourself, but always expanding
off your skill base. You take what you do for others and make it your own.
Eventually, you will hit upon a particular field, niche, or opportunity that
suits you perfectly. You will recognize it when you find it because it will
spark that childlike sense of wonder and excitement; it will feel right. Once
found, everything will fall into place. You will learn more quickly and more
deeply. Your skill level will reach a point where you will be able to claim
your independence from within the group you work for and move out on
your own. In a world in which there is so much we cannot control, this will
bring you the ultimate form of power. You will determine your
circumstances. As your own Master, you will no longer be subject to the
whims of tyrannical bosses or scheming peers.
Daily Law: You must see your career or vocational path more as a journey with twists
and turns rather than a straight line.
Mastery, I: Discover Your Calling—The Life’s Task

JANUARY 29
Become Who You Are
Some 2,600 years ago the ancient Greek poet Pindar wrote, “Become who
you are by learning who you are.” What he meant is the following: You are
born with a particular makeup and tendencies that mark you as a piece of
fate. It is who you are to the core. Some people never become who they are;
they stop trusting in themselves; they conform to the tastes of others, and
they end up wearing a mask that hides their true nature.
Daily Law: If you allow yourself to learn who you really are by paying attention to that
voice and force within you, then you can become what you were fated to become—an
individual, a Master.
Mastery, I: Discover Your Calling—The Life’s Task

JANUARY 30
Trust the Process
Let us say we are learning the piano. In the beginning, we are outsiders.
When we first study the piano, the keyboard looks rather intimidating—we
don’t understand the relationships between the keys, the chords, the pedals,
and everything else that goes into creating music. Although we might enter
with excitement about what we can learn, we quickly realize how much
hard work there is ahead of us. The great danger is that we give in to
feelings of boredom, impatience, fear, and confusion. We stop observing
and learning. The process comes to a halt. If, on the other hand, we manage
these emotions and allow time to take its course, something remarkable
begins to take shape. As we continue to observe and follow the lead of
others, we gain clarity, learning the rules and seeing how things work and
fit together. If we keep practicing, we gain fluency; basic skills are
mastered, allowing us to take on newer and more exciting challenges. We
begin to see connections that were invisible to us before. We slowly gain
confidence in our ability to solve problems or overcome weaknesses
through sheer persistence. At a certain point, we move from student to
practitioner. Instead of just learning how others do things, we bring our own
style and individuality into play. As years go by and we remain faithful to
this process, yet another leap takes place—to mastery. The keyboard is no
longer something outside of us; it is internalized and becomes part of our
nervous system, our fingertips. We have learned the rules so well that we
can now be the ones to break or rewrite them.
Daily Law: Trust the process—time is the essential ingredient of mastery. Use it to your
advantage.
Mastery, Introduction

JANUARY 31
The Source of All Power
Do not try to bypass the work of discovering your Life’s Task or imagine
that it will simply come to you naturally. Although it may come to a few
people early in life or in a lightning-bolt moment, for most of us it requires
continual introspection and effort. Experimenting with the skills and options
related to your personality and inclinations is not only the single most
essential step in developing a high sense of purpose and attaining mastery, it
is perhaps the most important step in life in general.
Daily Law: Knowing in a deep way who you are, your uniqueness, will make it that
much easier to avoid all of life’s other pitfalls.
The Laws of Human Nature, 13: Advance with a Sense of Purpose—The Law of
Aimlessness

February
The Ideal Apprenticeship
transforming yourself
In the stories of the greatest masters, past and present, we can inevitably
detect a phase in their lives in which all of their future powers were in
development, like the chrysalis of a butterfly. This part of their lives—a
largely self-directed apprenticeship that lasts some five to ten years—
receives little attention because it does not contain stories of great
achievement or discovery. Often in their Apprenticeship Phase, these types
are not yet much different from anyone else. Under the surface, however,
their minds are transforming in ways we cannot see but contain all of the
seeds of their future success. A close examination of their lives reveals a
pattern that transcends their various fields, indicating a kind of Ideal
Apprenticeship for mastery. You must see yourself as following in their
footsteps. You are on a voyage in which you will craft your own future. It is
the time of youth and adventure—of exploring the world with an open mind
and spirit. In fact, whenever you must learn a new skill or alter your career
path later in life, you reconnect with that youthful, adventurous part of
yourself. You constantly look for challenges, pushing yourself past your
comfort zone. You use difficulty as a way to measure your progress. This is
the spirit you must adopt and see your apprenticeship as a kind of journey
in which you will transform yourself, rather than as a drab indoctrination
into the work world. The month of February will help you transform
yourself through the Ideal Apprenticeship.
When I was twenty-two years old, I had an experience that taught me
lessons that I’ve applied throughout my life. I had just graduated from
university, and I decided that I was going to wander around Europe for a
while and practice the languages that I had learned in school. I was eager to
show off my language skills (French, German, Spanish, Italian). I traveled
all over the continent, and then ended up in Paris. I fell in love with the
place. I decided I wanted to try and stay for a while. But there was a
problem: the French that I had learned over several years in university was
woefully inadequate. The Parisians spoke so quickly I could barely
understand a word. And when I tried to mutter something and bungled the
French, they were actually quite unfriendly.
In all those years of studying French, I had not learned basic expressions
for the simple things that one needed when one traveled, like how to order
food in restaurants, etc. All of these problems made me rather shy and made
me want to stay in my hotel room or keep to myself. But then I made a key
decision. I was lonely and really wanted to stay in Paris, and to do so it was
critical that I learned the language at a high level. So, I forced myself out of
the hotel room. I made myself speak every single day with Parisians for
several hours. As much as I could, I spoke no English and did not hang out
with other Americans. Every time I interacted with Parisians, I listened to
them carefully and noticed any words or expressions I did not understand. I
asked questions. I took notes. I absorbed very deeply all of their phrases and
their intonations and their gestures. I met a French girl that I wanted to date,
and now I had to try even harder to master the language.
Soon my hard work at the language was paying off. I got a job working
in a hotel as a receptionist. I was becoming more fluent by the day. I could
converse with everyday people; I was meeting Parisians and my circle of
acquaintances was expanding. I learned in this way that the Parisians were
not unfriendly at all. I was invited into their homes and could feel what it
was like to have grown up in that magical city.
Sometimes I would make mistakes and people would make fun of me or
laugh. I decided never to take this personally. Even when I made a mistake,
I would actually make fun of myself in the process. The Parisians
appreciated my self-deprecating humor and my effort and my love of their
language. After a year and a half in Paris, I emerged with a solid command
of French, which I still have, and some very memorable adventures.
It was an immensely satisfying experience. And it taught me several
lessons. The first is that when you want to learn something, motivation is
absolutely key. At the university, during those two or three years of
studying French, the stakes were not high enough for me to learn. The only
thing was to get a good grade, but my life or my happiness or my work did
not depend on it. There in Paris, it was sink or swim. I had to learn. I had to
get a job and meet people. Because of this high motivation factor, my brain
absorbed information at a much higher rate. I learned more in one month
than in two or three years of university French because I was so excited.
I also learned the importance of the intensity of your focus, of being
immersed in something. Practicing every single day for hours upon hours,
having the language ringing in my ear, dreaming in French, my attention
was intense and focused. And because of that, I learned rapidly.
But the most important lesson of all was that you really learn in this
world by doing things, by practice. Not by reading books or taking tutorials.
You need to be out on the street, interacting with people, trying things out,
learning from your mistakes, not being afraid to make mistakes or be
ridiculed.
This lesson has served me well in everything I’ve attempted. It gave me
confidence that I could master anything with this basic pattern. When I had
to write my first book, I was under a lot of stress to make it a success, but
my experience in Paris helped guide me. I had learned the importance of
going at it every day, being disciplined and excited at the same time. I had
learned the value of intense focus, and that the more books I wrote the
easier it would become. I applied the same thing to doing interviews. You
learn by doing, over and over, practicing and practicing. And from this, you
slowly get a pleasure, a joy from the process itself and from mastering
something. And that joy and that pleasure stays with you for your whole
life. It is embedded in your brain.
If you want to write a book, write it. If you want to be a musician, make
music. If you want to start a business, go ahead and start it. Don’t be afraid
of making mistakes or failing; you learn best through failures. Find
someone who is a master at music or at business and attach yourself to
them. Get an education at their feet, doing whatever tasks they assign you.
Immerse yourself in the world or the industry that you wish to master. This
is better than all the books or courses you could read or take in the world—
learning by doing.

FEBRUARY 1
Submit to Reality
We receive three educations, one from our parents, one from our school masters, and one from
the world. The third contradicts all that the first two teach us.
—baron de montesquieu
After your formal education, you enter the most critical phase in your life—
a practical education known as The Apprenticeship. Every time you change
careers or acquire new skills, you reenter this phase of life. The goal of The
Apprenticeship is not to make money. It’s not to get fame or to get attention
or to get some cushy position with a nice title. The goal of an
apprenticeship is to literally transform yourself. You enter the
apprenticeship as someone who’s essentially naive. We all do. You’re
someone who doesn’t yet have the skills that are necessary. You’re probably
someone who’s a little bit impatient. And in the end, you are going to
transform yourself into someone who’s skilled, who’s realistic, who
understands the political nature of people, and who learns the rules that
govern your field. You’re going to develop patience and a solid work ethic.
I call it reality. The reality is: in your field, for hundreds of years, people
have been devising rules, procedures, and practices that have been passed
through tradition. Medicine would be an easy example, but it pertains to
every field. These rules and procedures represent reality, and you don’t
have any connection to it when you first enter the field. Your goal is
literally to submit. In the deepest sense of the word, you submit to this
reality. You recognize that you’re starting over and you’re going to immerse
yourself in it, so that eventually you’re going to be the one who actually
rewrites those rules—like all masters do.
Daily Law: Learning how to learn is the most important skill to acquire.
Robert Greene, full address on Mastery to the Oxford Union Society, December 12, 2012

FEBRUARY 2
What the Mentor Needs
In 2006, I met a nineteen-year-old named Ryan Holiday. He was a fan of
my books and offered to be my research assistant. I had the worst luck
hiring researchers before him. The problem was they did not understand
how I thought. One of the first things that became clear with Ryan was that
he understood my way of thinking, the kind of books I like, the kind of
stories I look for. Long before he met me, he put in the time. Just wanting to
figure out my process, he had read the books that I cited in the bibliography
to find the original sources I used. He reverse engineered how my books
were made. He understood what I was looking for. Ryan put in the work to
know what would actually help me. He saved me time. Then, I had a
problem with my internet presence. Ryan said he could improve it. He
helped me create my website. He had real internet skills. For me, as
someone who was in his late forties at the time, I didn’t know the internet
that well. He took a problem off my hands. And because Ryan knew he
wanted to be a writer, I could help him hone his researching and writing
skills. I taught him how a book was made soup to nuts. I taught him the
notecard method I created and mastered, which he used to eventually
become a highly successful writer himself.
The mentor-apprentice relationship is a very mutually beneficial
relationship. When you are in the inferior position and you are looking for a
favor from someone who is powerful, you have to get outside of yourself
and think of their needs. Obviously, mentors have a lot to give you. But,
more important, you have to have something to give them.
Daily Law: Find a master to apprentice under, but instead of thinking about how much
they can give you, think about how you can help them with their work.
Podcast interview, Curious with Josh Peck, December 4, 2018

FEBRUARY 3
You Have One Goal
Wisdom is not a product of schooling but of the lifelong attempt to acquire it.
—albert einstein
The principle is simple and must be engraved deeply in your mind: the goal
of an apprenticeship is not money, a good position, a title, or a diploma, but
rather the transformation of your mind and character—the first
transformation on the way to mastery. You must choose places of work and
positions that offer the greatest possibilities for learning. Practical
knowledge is the ultimate commodity and is what will pay you dividends
for decades to come—far more than the paltry increase in pay you might
receive at some seemingly lucrative position that offers fewer learning
opportunities. This means that you move toward challenges that will
toughen and improve you, where you will get the most objective feedback
on your performance and progress. You do not choose apprenticeships that
seem easy and comfortable.
Daily Law: Practical knowledge is the ultimate commodity. Evaluate opportunities using
one criterion: the greatest possibility for learning.
Mastery, II: Submit to Reality—The Ideal Apprenticeship

FEBRUARY 4
Value Learning above Everything Else
As you progress in life, you will become addicted to the fat paycheck and it
will determine where you go, how you think, and what you do. Eventually,
the time that was not spent on learning skills will catch up with you, and the
fall will be painful. Instead, you must value learning above everything else.
This will lead you to all of the right choices. You will opt for the situation
that will give you the most opportunities to learn, particularly with hands-
on work. You will choose a place that has people and mentors who can
inspire and teach you. A job with mediocre pay has the added benefit of
training you to get by with less—a valuable life skill. You must never
disdain an apprenticeship with no pay. In fact, it is often the height of
wisdom to find the perfect mentor and offer your services as an assistant for
free. Happy to exploit your cheap and eager spirit, such mentors will often
divulge more than the usual trade secrets. In the end, by valuing learning
above all else, you will set the stage for your creative expansion, and the
money will soon come to you.
Daily Law: Get one good piece of advice or guidance today from a master of your
profession or of life.
Mastery, II: Submit to Reality—The Ideal Apprenticeship

FEBRUARY 5
Accumulate Skills
There is much to be known, life is short, and life is not life without knowledge.
—baltasar gracián
Your main goal in the Apprenticeship Phase must be to learn and
accumulate as many real-life skills as possible, particularly in areas that
personally excite and stimulate you. If, later in life, your career path
changes or your skills are less relevant, you will know how to adapt,
adjusting the skills you have and knowing how to learn more. Mastery was
once an arduous process because the necessary information to attain skills
was not something that was shared. If your interest was in the sciences your
only hope was to be in the right social class that would allow you to attend
the only universities that trained scientists. Now, with the internet, these
walls around information have been shattered. You must take supreme
advantage of the opportunities the internet now offers for accumulating
skills, through various online resources.
Daily Law: Acquiring a set of skills is the key to navigating a turbulent work world. The
ability to later combine these skills is the best path to mastery.
Robert Greene, “Five Key Elements for a New Model of Apprenticeship,” The New York
Times, February 26, 2013

FEBRUARY 6
Consider Yourself a Builder
No matter your field, you must think of yourself as a builder, using actual
materials and ideas. You are producing something tangible in your work,
something that affects people in some direct, concrete way. To build
anything well—a house, a political organization, a business, or a film—you
must understand the building process and possess the necessary skills. For
all of this, you must go through a careful apprenticeship. You cannot make
anything worthwhile in this world unless you have first developed and
transformed yourself.
Daily Law: Like a builder, develop the highest standards, and the patience for the step-
by-step process.
Mastery, II: Submit to Reality—The Ideal Apprenticeship

FEBRUARY 7
The Only Shortcut to Mastery
Freedom consists not in refusing to recognize anything above us, but in respecting something
which is above us; for, by respecting it, we raise ourselves to it, and, by our very
acknowledgement, prove that we bear within ourselves what is higher, and are worthy to be on
a level with it.
—johann wolfgang von goethe
Life is short, and your time for learning and creativity is limited. Without
any guidance, you can waste valuable years trying to gain knowledge and
practice from various sources. Instead, you must follow the example set by
Masters throughout the ages and find the proper mentor. The mentor-
protégé relationship is the most efficient and productive form of learning.
The right mentors know where to focus your attention and how to challenge
you. Their knowledge and experience become yours. They provide
immediate and realistic feedback on your work, so you can improve more
rapidly. Through an intense person-to-person interaction, you absorb a way
of thinking that contains great power and can be adapted to your individual
spirit. Choose the mentor who best fits your needs and connects to your
Life’s Task. Once you have internalized their knowledge, you must move
on and never remain in their shadow. Your goal is always to surpass your
mentors in mastery and brilliance.
Daily Law: Choosing the right mentor is like being able to choose your own parents; the
wrong choice is fatal.
Mastery, III: Absorb the Master’s Power—The Mentor Dynamic

FEBRUARY 8
The Perfect Mentor
Sometime in the late 1960s, V. S. Ramachandran, a medical student at a
college in Madras, came upon a book called Eye and Brain, written by an
eminent professor of neuropsychology, Richard Gregory. The book excited
him—the style of writing, the anecdotes, the provocative experiments he
recounted. Inspired by the book, Ramachandran did his own experiments on
optics, and soon realized that he was better suited for the field than
medicine. In 1974 he was admitted into the PhD Program at Cambridge
University, in visual perception. He began to feel gloomy and alone in a
strange country. Then one day Richard Gregory himself, a professor at
Bristol University, came to Cambridge to give a lecture. Ramachandran was
mesmerized. Gregory performed thought-provoking demonstrations of his
ideas on stage; he had a flair for drama and a great sense of humor. “This is
what science should be like,” Ramachandran thought. He went up after the
talk and introduced himself. They had an instant rapport. He mentioned to
Gregory an optical experiment he had been pondering, and the professor
was intrigued. He invited Ramachandran to visit Bristol and to stay in his
home, where they could try out his idea together. Ramachandran took up
the offer, and from the moment he saw Gregory’s house he knew he had
found his mentor—it was like something out of Sherlock Holmes, full of
Victorian instruments, fossils, and skeletons. Gregory was precisely the
kind of eccentric Ramachandran could identify with. Soon he was
commuting to Bristol regularly for experiments. He had found a lifelong
mentor to inspire and guide him, and over the years he would come to adapt
much of Gregory’s style of speculation and experiment.
Daily Law: What to look for: Whose work inspires you? Whose style excites you? Who
do you want to be like in ten years?
Mastery, III: Absorb the Master’s Power—The Mentor Dynamic

FEBRUARY 9
Redefine Pleasure
One can have no smaller or greater mastery than mastery of oneself.
—leonardo da vinci
When you practice and develop any skill you transform yourself in the
process. You reveal to yourself new capabilities that were previously latent,
that are exposed as you progress. You develop emotionally. Your sense of
pleasure becomes redefined. What offers immediate pleasure comes to seem
like a distraction, an empty entertainment to help pass the time. Real
pleasure comes from overcoming challenges, feeling confidence in your
abilities, gaining fluency in skills, and experiencing the power this brings.
You develop patience. Boredom no longer signals the need for distraction,
but rather the need for new challenges to conquer.
Daily Law: See the fruits of discipline and skill as the richest pleasures of all.
Mastery, II: Submit to Reality—The Ideal Apprenticeship

FEBRUARY 10
Learn from Everything
A person of sharp observation and sound judgment rules over things, not they him. . . . There
is nothing he cannot discover, notice, grasp, understand.
—baltasar gracián
Every task you are given, no matter how menial, offers opportunities to
observe this world at work. No detail about the people within it is too
trivial. Everything you see or hear is a sign for you to decode. Over time,
you will begin to see and understand more of the reality that eluded you at
first. For instance, a person whom you initially thought had great power
ended up being someone with more bark than bite. Slowly, you begin to see
behind the appearances. As you amass more information about the rules and
power dynamics of your new environment, you can begin to analyze why
they exist, and how they relate to larger trends in the field. You move from
observation to analysis, honing your reasoning skills, but only after months
of careful attention.
Daily Law: Approach every task, even the most menial, the same: as an opportunity to
observe and amass information about your environment.
Mastery, II: Submit to Reality—The Ideal Apprenticeship

FEBRUARY 11
Enter the Cycle of Accelerated Returns
That which we persist in doing becomes easier to do, not that the nature of the thing has
changed but that our power to do has increased.
—ralph waldo emerson
In an activity such as riding a bicycle, we all know that it is easier to watch
someone and follow their lead than to listen to or read instructions. The
more we do it, the easier it becomes. Even with skills that are primarily
mental, such as computer programming or speaking a foreign language, it
remains the case that we learn best through practice and repetition—the
natural learning process. We learn a foreign language by actually speaking
it as much as possible, not by reading books and absorbing theories. The
more we speak and practice, the more fluent we become. Once you take this
far enough, you enter a cycle of accelerated returns in which the practice
becomes easier and more interesting, leading to the ability to practice for
longer hours, which increases your skill level, which in turn makes practice
even more interesting. Reaching this cycle is the goal you must set for
yourself.
Daily Law: Everything worth doing has a learning curve. When it gets hard, remember
the goal: reaching the cycle of accelerated returns.
Mastery, II: Submit to Reality—The Ideal Apprenticeship

FEBRUARY 12
Learn by Doing
The problem with formal education is that it instills in us a passive
approach to learning. We read books, take tests, or maybe write essays.
Much of the process involves absorbing information. But in the real world,
you learn best by doing, by actively trying your hand at the task. The great
sushi master chef Eiji Ichimura began his work in restaurants as a
dishwasher some forty-two years ago. His desire was to become a sushi
chef, but nobody would tell him how it was done or give him direct
instruction—it was a jealously guarded secret. He had to develop his skills
by watching carefully, and then practicing the same techniques over and
over. He would practice in off hours, going over the most intricate motions
of the knife. Through such endless labor he turned himself into a master
chef.
Daily Law: The brain is designed to learn through constant repetition and active, hands-
on involvement. Through such practice and persistence, any skill can be mastered. Pick a
skill to acquire and begin to practice.
Robert Greene, “Five Key Elements for a New Model of Apprenticeship,” The New York
Times, February 26, 2013

FEBRUARY 13
How to Learn Quickly and Deeply
People who cling to their delusions find it difficult, if not impossible, to learn anything worth
learning: A people under the necessity of creating themselves must examine everything, and
soak up learning the way the roots of a tree soak up water.
—james baldwin
When you enter a new environment, your task is to learn and absorb as
much as possible. For that purpose you must try to revert to a childlike
feeling of inferiority—the feeling that others know much more than you and
that you are dependent upon them to learn and safely navigate your
apprenticeship. You drop all of your preconceptions about an environment
or field, any lingering feelings of smugness. You have no fears. You interact
with people and participate in the culture as deeply as possible. You are full
of curiosity. Assuming this sensation of inferiority, your mind will open up
and you will have a hunger to learn. This position is of course only
temporary. You are reverting to a feeling of dependence, so that within five
to ten years you can learn enough to finally declare your independence and
enter full adulthood.
Daily Law: Revert to a childlike dependence. Today, act like those you interact with
know much more than you.
Mastery, II: Submit to Reality—The Ideal Apprenticeship

FEBRUARY 14
Move Toward Resistance
By nature, we humans shrink from anything that seems possibly painful or
overtly difficult. We bring this natural tendency to our practice of any skill.
Once we grow adept at some aspect of this skill, generally one that comes
more easily to us, we prefer to practice this element over and over. Our skill
becomes lopsided as we avoid our weaknesses. This is the path of amateurs.
To attain mastery, you must adopt what we shall call Resistance Practice.
The principle is simple—you go in the opposite direction of all of your
natural tendencies when it comes to practice. First, you resist the temptation
to be nice to yourself. You become your own worst critic; you see your
work as if through the eyes of others. You recognize your weaknesses,
precisely the elements you are not good at. Those are the aspects you give
precedence to in your practice. You find a kind of perverse pleasure in
moving past the pain this might bring. Second, you resist the lure of easing
up on your focus. You train yourself to concentrate in practice with double
the intensity, as if it were the real thing times two. In devising your own
routines, you become as creative as possible. In this way, you develop your
own standards for excellence, generally higher than those of others. Soon
enough you will see the results of such practice, and others will marvel at
the apparent ease in which you accomplish your deeds.
Daily Law: Invent exercises that work upon your weaknesses. Give yourself arbitrary
deadlines to meet certain standards, constantly pushing yourself past perceived limits.
Mastery, II: Submit to Reality—The Ideal Apprenticeship

FEBRUARY 15
Concentrated Practice Cannot Fail
For the things we have to learn before we can do them, we learn by doing them. . . . Men
become builders by building and lyreplayers by playing the lyre.
—aristotle
Although it might seem that the time necessary to master the requisite skills
and attain a level of expertise would depend on the field and your own
talent level, those who have researched the subject repeatedly come up with
the number of 10,000 hours. This seems to be the amount of quality practice
time that is needed for someone to reach a high level of skill and it applies
to composers, chess players, writers, and athletes, among others. This
number has an almost magical or mystical resonance to it. It means that so
much practice time—no matter the person or the field—leads to a
qualitative change in the human brain. The mind has learned to organize
and structure large amounts of information. With all of this tacit knowledge,
it can now become creative and playful with it. Although the number of
hours might seem high, it generally adds up to seven to ten years of
sustained, solid practice—roughly the period of a traditional apprenticeship.
In other words, concentrated practice over time cannot fail but produce
results.
Daily Law: Put in an hour of concentrated practice today, and tomorrow, and the next
day, and the day after that.
Mastery, III: Absorb the Master’s Power—The Mentor Dynamic

FEBRUARY 16
Love the Detailed Work
Aaron Rodgers, the quarterback for the Green Bay Packers, had to spend
his first three years as an understudy to one of the best, Brett Favre. It
meant little or no opportunities to showcase himself during a real game. For
those years, all he did was practice and watch. He’d later say, “Those first
three years were critical to my success.” It taught him patience and
humility. He spent that time honing every possible skill a quarterback could
need—hand-eye coordination, finger dexterity, footwork, throwing
mechanics. Not exciting stuff. He taught himself to watch from the sidelines
with complete attention, absorbing as many lessons as possible. All of this
not only elevated his skill level but also caught the attention of his coaches,
who were very impressed by his work ethic and his ability to learn.
Through those years, he was able to master his impatience and elevate his
game. In essence, Rodgers had taught himself to love the detailed work
itself, and once you develop that there is no stopping you.
Daily Law: Master the details and the rest will fall into place.
Robert Greene, “Five Key Elements for a New Model of Apprenticeship,” The New York
Times, February 26, 2013

FEBRUARY 17
The Painful Truth
It’s like chopping down a huge tree of immense girth. You won’t accomplish it with one swing
of your axe. If you keep chopping away at it, though, and do not let up, eventually, whether it
wants to or not, it will suddenly topple down.
—zen master hakuin ekaku
Einstein began his serious thought experiments at the age of sixteen. Ten
years later he came up with his first revolutionary theory of relativity. It is
impossible to quantify the time he spent honing his theoretical skills in
those ten years but is not hard to imagine him working three hours a day on
this particular problem, which would yield more than 10,000 hours after a
decade. There are no shortcuts or ways to bypass the Apprenticeship Phase.
It is the nature of the human brain to require such lengthy exposure to a
field, which allows for complex skills to become deeply embedded and
frees the mind up for real creative activity. The very desire to find shortcuts
makes you eminently unsuited for any kind of mastery. There is no possible
reversal to this process.
Daily Law: There’s no bypassing the Apprenticeship Phase. Rid yourself of the desire to
find shortcuts.
Mastery, II: Submit to Reality—The Ideal Apprenticeship

FEBRUARY 18
Two Kinds of Failure
A thinker sees his own actions as experiments and questions—as attempts to find out
something. Success and failure are for him answers above all.
—friedrich nietzsche, the gay science
There are two kinds of failure. The first comes from never trying out your
ideas because you are afraid, or because you are waiting for the perfect
time. This kind of failure you can never learn from, and such timidity will
destroy you. The second kind comes from a bold and venturesome spirit. If
you fail in this way, the hit that you take to your reputation is greatly
outweighed by what you learn. Repeated failure will toughen your spirit
and show you with absolute clarity how things must be done. In fact, it is a
curse to have everything go right on your first attempt. You will fail to
question the element of luck, making you think that you have the golden
touch. When you do inevitably fail, it will confuse and demoralize you past
the point of learning. In any case, to apprentice as an entrepreneur you must
act on your ideas as early as possible, exposing them to the public, a part of
you even hoping that you’ll fail. You have everything to gain.
Daily Law: Act boldly on one of your ideas today.
Mastery, III: Absorb the Master’s Power—The Mentor Dynamic

FEBRUARY 19
Choose Time
After graduating from the Zurich Polytechnic in 1900, twenty-one-year-old
Albert Einstein found his job prospects extremely meager. He had
graduated near the bottom of the class, almost certainly nullifying any
chance to obtain a teaching position. Happy to be away from the university,
he now planned to investigate, on his own, certain problems in physics that
had haunted him for several years. It would be a self-apprenticeship in
theorizing and thought experiments. But in the meantime, he would have to
make a living. He had been offered a job in his father’s dynamo business in
Milan as an engineer, but such work would not leave him any free time. A
friend could land him a well-paid position in an insurance company, but that
would stultify his brain and sap his energy for thinking. Then, a year later,
another friend mentioned a job opening up in the Swiss Patent Office in
Bern. The pay was not great, the position was at the bottom, the hours were
long, and the work consisted of the rather mundane task of looking over
patent applications, but Einstein leaped at the chance. It was everything he
wanted. His task would be to analyze the validity of patent applications,
many of which involved aspects of science that interested him. The
applications would be like little puzzles or thought experiments; he could
try to visualize how the ideas would actually translate into inventions.
Working on them would sharpen his reasoning powers. After several
months on the job, he became so good at this mental game that he could
finish his work in two or three hours, leaving him the rest of the day to
engage in his own thought experiments. In 1905 he published his first
theory of relativity, much of the work having been done while he was at his
desk in the patent office.
Daily Law: Time is the critical variable. Take one thing off your plate today to make
more time for your Life’s Task.
Mastery, II: Submit to Reality—The Ideal Apprenticeship

FEBRUARY 20
Understand How the Brain Works
To the extent that we believe we can skip steps, avoid the process,
magically gain power through political connections or easy formulas, or
depend on our natural talents, we move against this grain and reverse our
natural powers. We become slaves to time—as it passes we grow weaker,
less capable, trapped in some dead-end career. We become captive to the
opinions and fears of others. Rather than the mind connecting us to reality,
we become disconnected and locked in a narrow chamber of thought. The
human that depended on focused attention for its survival now becomes the
distracted scanning animal, unable to think in depth, yet unable to depend
on instincts. It is the height of stupidity to believe that in the course of your
short life, your few decades of consciousness, you can somehow rewire the
configurations of your brain through technology and wishful thinking,
overcoming the effect of six million years of development. To go against
the grain might bring temporary distraction, but time will mercilessly
expose your weakness and impatience.
Daily Law: Put your faith in learning, not technology.
Mastery, Introduction: The Evolution of Mastery

FEBRUARY 21
Create the Need for You
Make people depend on you. More is to be gained from such dependence than courtesy. He
who has slaked his thirst, immediately turns his back on the well, no longer needing it.
—baltasar gracián
Many of the great condottieri of Renaissance Italy suffered the same fate:
they won battle after battle for their employers only to find themselves
banished, imprisoned, or executed. The problem was not ingratitude; it was
that there were so many other condottieri as able and valiant as they were.
They were replaceable. Nothing was lost by killing them. Meanwhile, the
older among them had grown powerful themselves, and wanted more and
more money for their services. How much better, then, to do away with
them and hire a younger, cheaper mercenary. Such is the fate (to a less
violent degree, one hopes) of those who do not make others dependent on
them. Sooner or later someone comes along who can do the job as well as
they can—someone younger, fresher, less expensive, less threatening.
Necessity rules the world. People rarely act unless compelled to. If you
create no need for yourself, then you will be done away with at the first
opportunity.
Daily Law: Strive to be the only one who can do what you do and make the fate of those
who hire you so entwined with yours that they cannot possibly get rid of you.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 11: Learn to Keep People Dependent on You

FEBRUARY 22
Absorb Purposeful Energy
Coco Chanel began life from a position of great weakness—an orphan with
little or no resources in life. She realized in her early twenties that her
calling was to design clothes and to start her own apparel line. She
desperately needed guidance, however, particularly when it came to the
business side. She looked for people who could help her find her way. At
the age of twenty-five she met the perfect target, a wealthy older English
businessman named Arthur “Boy” Capel. She latched on to him with great
vehemence. He was able to instill in her the confidence that she could
become a famous designer. He taught her about business in general. He
offered her tough criticisms that she could accept because of her deep
respect for him. He helped guide her in her first important decisions in
setting up her business. From him she developed a very honed sense of
purpose that she retained her entire life. Without his influence, her path
would have been too confusing and difficult. Later in life, she kept
returning to this strategy. She found other men and women who had skills
she lacked or needed to strengthen—social graciousness, marketing, a nose
for cultural trends—and developed relationships that allowed her to learn
from them. In this case, you want to find people who are pragmatic and not
merely those who are charismatic or visionaries. You want their practical
advice, and to absorb their spirit of getting things done. If possible, collect
around you a group of people from different fields, as friends or associates,
who have similar energy. You will help elevate one another’s sense of
purpose. Do not settle for virtual associations or mentors.
Daily Law: Make a list of the people in your life who live with purpose. Prioritize
spending more time with them.
The Laws of Human Nature, 13: Advance with a Sense of Purpose—The Law of
Aimlessness

FEBRUARY 23
Never Enough Knowledge
As a child, Napoleon Bonaparte found himself drawn to games of strategy
and to books that presented examples of leadership in action. Entering a
military academy, he was not focused on a military career and fitting into
the system. Instead, he had an obsessive need to learn as much as he could
about all aspects of the military arts. He read voraciously. The extent of his
knowledge impressed his superiors. At a very early age he was given an
unusual amount of responsibility. He learned quickly how to keep his cool,
derive the right lessons from his experiences, and recover from mistakes.
By the time he was given greater responsibilities on the battlefield, he had
gone through an apprenticeship that was double or triple the intensity of his
peers. Being so young, ambitious, and disdainful of authority, when he was
given leadership positions he proceeded to effect the greatest revolution in
military history, changing the size and shape of armies, singlehandedly
introducing maneuver into battle, and so on. At the endpoint of his
development, he came to possess a remarkable feel for battle and the overall
shape of a campaign. In his case, this became known as his infamous coup
d’oeil, his ability to assess a situation with a glance of his eye. This made
his lieutenants and rivals imagine that he possessed mystical powers.
Daily Law: Find the deepest pleasure in absorbing knowledge and information. Feel like
you never have enough.
powerseductionandwar.com, October 1, 2012

FEBRUARY 24
Surpass Your Master
Poor is the apprentice who does not surpass his Master.
—leonardo da vinci
It is often a curse to learn under someone so brilliant and accomplished—
your own confidence becomes crushed as you struggle to follow all of their
great ideas. Many apprentices become lost in the shadow of their illustrious
mentors and never amount to anything. Because of his ambition, the pianist
Glenn Gould found his way to the only real solution to this dilemma. He
would listen to all of his mentor Alberto Guerrero’s ideas about music and
try them out. In the course of playing, he would subtly alter these ideas to
suit his inclinations. This would make him feel that he had his own voice.
As the years went by, he made this differentiation between himself and his
instructor more pronounced. Because he was so impressionable, over the
course of the apprenticeship he had unconsciously internalized all of the
important ideas of his mentor, but through his own active engagement he
had managed to adapt them to his individuality. In this way, he could learn
and yet incubate a creative spirit that would help set him apart from
everyone else once he left Guerrero.
Daily Law: Beware the illustrious mentor’s shadow. Try out their ideas but always
transfigure them and differentiate yourself. Your goal is to surpass them.
Mastery, III: Absorb the Master’s Power—The Mentor Dynamic

FEBRUARY 25
Keep Expanding Your Horizons
The reality of the Apprenticeship Phase is no one is really going to help you
or give you direction. In fact, the odds are against you. If you desire an
apprenticeship, if you want to learn and set yourself up for mastery, you
have to do it yourself, and with great energy. When you enter this phase,
you generally begin at the lowest position. Your access to knowledge and
people is limited by your status. If you are not careful, you will accept this
status and become defined by it, particularly if you come from a
disadvantaged background. Instead, you must struggle against any
limitations and continually work to expand your horizons. (In each learning
situation you will submit to reality, but that reality does not mean you must
stay in one place.) Reading books and materials that go beyond what is
required is always a good starting point. Being exposed to ideas in the wide
world, you will tend to develop a hunger for more and more knowledge;
you will find it harder to remain satisfied in any narrow corner, which is
precisely the point. The people in your field, in your immediate circle, are
like worlds unto themselves—their stories and viewpoints will naturally
expand your horizons and build up your social skills. Mingle with as many
different types of people as possible. Those circles will slowly widen. Any
kind of outside schooling will add to the dynamic.
Daily Law: Be relentless in your pursuit for expansion. Whenever you feel like you are
settling into some circle, force yourself to shake things up and look for new challenges.
Mastery, II: Submit to Reality—The Ideal Apprenticeship

FEBRUARY 26
Venture Outside Your Comfort Zone
Our vanity, our passions, our spirit of imitation, our abstract intelligence, our habits have long
been at work, and it is the task of art to undo this work of theirs, making us travel back in the
direction from which we have come to the depths where what has really existed lies unknown
within us.
—marcel proust
As Leonardo da Vinci progressed in his studio work for Verrocchio, he
began to experiment and to assert his own style. He found to his surprise
that the Master was impressed with his inventiveness. For Leonardo, this
indicated that he was near the end of his apprenticeship. Most people wait
too long to take this step, generally out of fear. It is always easier to learn
the rules and stay within your comfort zone. Often you must force yourself
to initiate such actions or experiments before you think you are ready. You
are testing your character, moving past your fears, and developing a sense
of detachment to your work—looking at it through the eyes of others. You
are getting a taste for the next phase in which what you produce will be
under constant scrutiny.
Daily Law: Try the thing you don’t think you’re quite ready for.
Mastery, II: Submit to Reality—The Ideal Apprenticeship

FEBRUARY 27
Establish Your Own Style
The distance you establish from your predecessor often demands some
symbolism, a way of advertising itself publicly. Louis XIV, for example,
created such symbolism when he rejected the traditional palace of the
French kings and built his own palace of Versailles. King Philip II of Spain
did the same when he created his center of power, the palace of El Escorial,
in what was then the middle of nowhere. But Louis carried the game
further: He would not be a king like his father or earlier ancestors. He
would not wear a crown or carry a scepter or sit on a throne. He would
establish a new kind of imposing authority with symbols and rituals of its
own. Louis made his ancestors’ rituals into laughable relics of the past.
Follow his example: Never let yourself be seen as following your
predecessor’s path. If you do you will never surpass him. You must
physically demonstrate your difference, by establishing a style and
symbolism that sets you apart.
Daily Law: Follow the master’s example, not his path. Demonstrate your difference.
Establish your own style.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 41: Avoid Stepping into a Great Man’s Shoes

FEBRUARY 28
To the Master Goes the Knife
One repays a teacher badly if one remains only a pupil.
—friedrich nietzsche
In Spanish they say al maestro cuchillada—“to the Master goes the knife.”
It is a fencing expression, referring to the moment when the young and
agile pupil becomes skillful enough to cut his Master. But this also refers to
the fate of most mentors who inevitably experience the rebellion of their
protégés, like the cut from a sword. In our culture, we tend to venerate those
who seem rebellious or at least strike the pose. But rebellion has no
meaning or power if it occurs without something solid and real to rebel
against. The mentor, or father figure, gives you just such a standard from
which you can deviate and establish your own identity. You internalize the
important and relevant parts of their knowledge, and you apply the knife to
what has no bearing on your life. It is the dynamic of changing generations,
and sometimes the father figure has to be killed in order for the sons and
daughters to have space to discover themselves. You will probably have
several mentors in your life, like stepping-stones along the way to mastery.
At each phase of life you must find the appropriate teachers, getting what
you want out of them, moving on, and feeling no shame for this. It is the
path your own mentor probably took and it is the way of the world.
Daily Law: Internalize the important and relevant parts of the Master’s knowledge.
Apply the knife to everything else.
Mastery, III: Absorb the Master’s Power—The Mentor Dynamic

FEBRUARY 29
Take the Hacker Approach
Each age tends to create a model of apprenticeship that is suited to the
system of production that prevails at the time. We are now in the computer
age, and it is the hacker approach to programming that may offer the most
promising model for this new age. The model goes like this: You want to
learn as many skills as possible, following the direction that circumstances
lead you to, but only if they are related to your deepest interests. Like a
hacker, you value the process of self-discovery. You avoid the trap of
following one set career path. You are not sure where this will all lead, but
you are taking full advantage of the openness of information, all of the
knowledge about skills now at our disposal. You see what kind of work
suits you and what you want to avoid at all cost. You move by trial and
error. You are not wandering about because you are afraid of commitment,
but because you are expanding your skill base and your possibilities. At a
certain point, when you are ready to settle on something, ideas and
opportunities will inevitably present themselves to you. When that happens,
all of the skills you have accumulated will prove invaluable. You will be the
master at combining them in ways that are unique and suited to your
individuality.
Daily Law: In this new age, those who follow a rigid, singular path in their youth often
find themselves in a career dead end in their forties or overwhelmed with boredom. The
wide-ranging apprenticeship will yield the opposite—expanding possibilities.
Mastery, II: Submit to Reality—The Ideal Apprenticeship

March
The Master at Work
activating skills and attaining mastery
In moving toward mastery, you are bringing your mind closer to reality and
to life itself. Anything that is alive is in a continual state of change and
movement. The moment that you rest, thinking that you have attained the
level you desire, a part of your mind enters a phase of decay. You lose your
hard-earned creativity and others begin to sense it. This is a power and
intelligence that must be continually renewed or it will die. Your whole life,
therefore, must be treated as a kind of apprenticeship to which you
continually apply your learning skills. The month of March will teach you
how to activate your skills and internalize the knowledge necessary for a
life of mastery.
When I began writing my fifth book, Mastery, several years ago, something
very strange and exciting occurred. This was a particularly difficult and
complicated book to write. First of all, I had done my usual research:
reading several hundred books, taking thousands of note cards on them,
structuring them into various chapters, etc. But in addition, I had read a lot
of books on science, which I had never done before—books examining the
nature of the human brain—to give Mastery more of a scientific foundation.
And that added yet another layer of difficulty to the writing. Furthermore, I
had also interviewed six or seven contemporary masters to give the book a
more up-to-date feel. Incorporating the science and the interviews into
Mastery made it a particularly challenging project. And so, when I began
the actual writing process, it was very slow going with the first couple of
chapters; it took longer than usual to get into a flow.
And then chapter by chapter, week by week, month by month, I started
to gain a little bit of momentum. And then by the fifth chapter, something
unexpected happened. The fifth chapter is about the creative process itself.
And the idea is that once you do enough work on a project, enough
preparation, and you’ve had all of these months of experience delving into
the subject, you often reach a state of creativity where ideas come to you
out of nowhere. And suddenly this was happening to me. After all my
research and all the preparation, by the time I had reached chapter five,
ideas for that chapter were coming to me while I was taking a shower, while
I was taking a walk. I was even dreaming about the book and ideas were
coming to me in my sleep, confirming what I was writing about.
And this made me very surprised and very inspired. And then I came to
chapter six, which is about mastery itself—the final chapter. The idea is that
even further along in the process, you start to have a very intuitive feel for
the subject. It’s almost as if the book or the project is living inside of you.
You can compare it to a chess master where the chessboard feels like it is
inside his brain, inside his body, and he can feel what comes next. I felt that
the book was living inside of me and that I had what I call a fingertip feel
for what I should be writing. There was this sort of fast-paced, intuitive
series of ideas that would come to me out of nowhere. And this was an
incredible experience, an incredible feeling—a feeling of great power.
I’m not claiming that I’m special, that I’m some sort of genius, or
particularly gifted or talented. In fact, the whole point of the book is to
demythologize our concept of genius and creativity. We tend to think that it
is something you were born with, something in your DNA, some special
way that you’re wired. And I wanted to prove that it was actually a product
of hard work and discipline, that when you practice something for so many
months or years, you can reach this high level of creativity and mastery.
And the writing of the book literally confirmed my idea. And because it is a
function of relentless dedication, boring into a problem, it is an exhilarating
experience that almost anyone can have, if they follow the pattern I have
laid out.
It doesn’t mean that if you spend years studying something, creative
powers will inevitably come to you. You must have a certain intensity to
your focus, as well as a love for the work itself that animates the final
product. And it also depends on years of prior labor in the Apprenticeship
Phase, which I had gone through in writing four other books.
There are no shortcuts to the creative process; drugs and alcohol are
more of a hindrance. The very impatience that drives you to desire shortcuts
makes you unsuited for mastery. But if you trust the process and take it as
far as you can, you will be amazed at the results.

MARCH 1
Awaken the Dimensional Mind
Learning never exhausts the mind.
—leonardo da vinci
As you accumulate more skills and internalize the rules that govern your
field, your mind will want to become more active, seeking to use this
knowledge in ways that are more suited to your inclinations. What will
impede this natural creative dynamic from flourishing is not a lack of talent,
but your attitude. Feeling anxious and insecure, you will tend to turn
conservative with your knowledge, preferring to fit into the group and
sticking to the procedures you have learned. Instead, you must force
yourself in the opposite direction. As you emerge from your apprenticeship,
you must become increasingly bold. Instead of feeling complacent about
what you know, you must expand your knowledge to related fields, giving
your mind fuel to make new associations between different ideas. You must
experiment and look at problems from all possible angles. As your thinking
grows more fluid, your mind will become increasingly dimensional, seeing
more and more aspects of reality. In the end, you will turn against the very
rules you have internalized, shaping and reforming them to suit your spirit.
Such originality will bring you to the heights of power.
Daily Law: Expand your knowledge to related fields. Pick an auxiliary skill and start
practicing.
Mastery, V: Awaken the Dimensional Mind—The Creative-Active

MARCH 2
Get to the Inside
When I’m asked how I define mastery or what phrase guides me in my own
life or in writing a book, I say, “It’s getting to the inside.” I’m always trying
to move to the inside of things. On the outside, things look a certain way—
kind of dead, because you’re just seeing the appearances. When you get to
the inside, you see the heart beating, you understand it, you get the reality.
When you start learning to play chess or the piano, for instance, you’re on
the outside. You just see the exterior, visual, surfaces of things. And you’re
learning the rules or the basics. And it’s very slow and tedious. You don’t
really have an understanding. It’s all kind of confusing, a blur. Eventually,
though, if you stick with it, you worm your way to the inside of it. And
you’re feeling the thing come alive. The chessboard or the piano is no
longer a physical object, it’s in you. You’ve internalized it. You no longer
have to think of the keys; the keys are in your head. That is mastery. Sports
are a great example. We say of the masters in soccer, “It’s as if they have
eyes in the back of their head.” No, they are on the inside of the game itself.
Or great quarterbacks talk about with each year of experience, “It’s as if the
game slows down.” No, they are moving closer and closer to the inside.
You could say the same thing of scientists, writers, actresses, et cetera—the
masters know the thing from the inside out, not the outside in.
Daily Law: If you work hard, you will make your way to the inner circle of knowledge.
That is the end goal of mastery: an inside-out understanding.
“Robert Greene: Mastery and Research,” Finding Mastery: Conversations with Michael
Gervais, January 25, 2017

MARCH 3
Cultivate the Craftsman Ethic
The great masters, including contemporary ones, all manage to retain the
craftsman spirit. What motivates them is not money, fame, or a high
position, but making the perfect work of art, designing the best building,
discovering some new scientific law, mastering their craft. This helps them
to not get too caught up in the ups and downs of their career. It is the work
that matters. And in the end, these masters end up making more money and
become more famous by cultivating this spirit. Steve Jobs personified this
craftsman ethic. He inherited it from his father, a man who loved to build
things with his hands, and the love of perfection, for making something just
right, is an attitude he transferred to the design of products for Apple. That’s
the master’s goal: to make things well and to feel pride in it.
Daily Law: Retain the craftsman spirit. Keep in mind: the work is the only thing that
matters.
Robert Greene, “Five Key Elements for a New Model of Apprenticeship,” The New York
Times, February 26, 2013

MARCH 4
The Creative Process
Because the creative process is an elusive subject and one for which we
receive no training, we often go quite wrong. From masters throughout the
ages, we can discern an elemental pattern and principles that have wide
application. First, it is essential to build into the creative process an initial
period that is open-ended. You give yourself time to dream and wander, to
start out in a loose and unfocused manner. In this period, you allow the
project to associate itself with certain powerful emotions, ones that
naturally come out of you as you focus on your ideas. It is always easy to
tighten up your ideas later, and to make your project increasingly realistic
and rational. Second, it is best to have wide knowledge of your field and
other fields, giving your brain more possible associations and connections.
Third, to keep this process alive, you must never settle into complacency, as
if your initial vision represents the endpoint. You must cultivate profound
dissatisfaction with your work and the need to constantly improve your
ideas, along with a sense of uncertainty—you are not exactly sure where to
go next, and this uncertainty drives the creative urge and keeps it fresh.
Finally, you must come to embrace slowness as a virtue in itself. When it
comes to creative endeavors, time is always relative. Whether your project
takes months or years to complete, you will always experience a sense of
impatience and a desire to get to the end. The single greatest action you can
take for acquiring creative power is to reverse this natural impatience.
Daily Law: Imagine yourself years in the future looking back at the work you have done.
From that future vantage point, the extra months and years you devoted to the process
will not seem painful or laborious at all. Time is your greatest ally.
Mastery, V: Awaken the Dimensional Mind—The Creative-Active

MARCH 5
Look Wider and Think Further Ahead
In any competitive environment in which there are winners or losers, the
person who has the wider, more global perspective will inevitably prevail.
The reason is simple: such a person will be able to think beyond the
moment and control the overall dynamic through careful strategizing. Most
people are perpetually locked in the present. Their decisions are overly
influenced by the most immediate event; they easily become emotional and
ascribe greater significance to a problem than it should have in reality.
Moving toward mastery will naturally bring you a more global outlook, but
it is always wise to expedite the process by training yourself early on to
continually enlarge your perspective. You can do so by always reminding
yourself of the overall purpose of the work you are presently engaged in
and how this meshes with your long-term goals. In dealing with any
problem, you must train yourself to look at how it inevitably connects to a
larger picture. If your work is not having the desired effect, you must look
at it from all angles until you find the source of the problem. You must not
merely observe the rivals in your field but dissect and uncover their
weaknesses. “Look wider and think further ahead” must be your motto.
Through such mental training, you will smooth the path to mastery while
separating yourself ever further from the competition.
Daily Law: The person with the more global perspective wins. Expand your gaze.
Mastery, VI: Fuse the Intuitive with the Rational—Mastery

MARCH 6
The Gift of Our Original Mind
We all possess an inborn creative force that wants to become active. This is
the gift of our Original Mind, which reveals such potential. The human
mind is naturally creative, constantly looking to make associations and
connections between things and ideas. It wants to explore, to discover new
aspects of the world, and to invent. To express this creative force is our
greatest desire, and the stifling of it the source of our misery. What kills the
creative force is not age or a lack of talent, but our own spirit, our own
attitude. We become too comfortable with the knowledge we have gained.
We grow afraid of entertaining new ideas and the effort that this requires.
To think more flexibly entails a risk—we could fail and be ridiculed. We
prefer to live with familiar ideas and habits of thinking, but we pay a steep
price for this: our minds go dead from the lack of challenge and novelty; we
reach a limit in our field and lose control over our fate because we become
replaceable.
Daily Law: Do what the mind wants to do—explore, entertain, and embrace new ideas.
Mastery, V: Awaken the Dimensional Mind—The Creative-Active

MARCH 7
Keep the Mind Moving
When we were children, our minds never stopped. We were open to new
experiences and absorbed as much of them as possible. We learned fast,
because the world around us excited us. When we felt frustrated or upset,
we would find some creative way to get what we wanted and then quickly
forget the problem as something new crossed our path. Our minds were
always moving, and they are always excited and curious. The Greek thinker
Aristotle thought that life was defined by movement. What does not move
is dead. What has speed and mobility has more possibilities, more life. We
all start off with the mobile mind, but as we get older, the mind gets more
and more immobile. You may think that what you’d like to recapture from
your youth is your looks, your physical fitness, your simple pleasures, but
what you really need is the fluidity of mind you once possessed. Whenever
you find your thoughts revolving around a particular subject or idea—an
obsession, a resentment—force them past it. Distract yourself with
something else. Like a child, find something new to be absorbed by,
something worthy of concentrated attention. Do not waste time on things
you cannot change or influence. Just keep moving.
Daily Law: Respond to the moment. Thought to thought, task to task, topic to topic—let
the mind be fluid.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 2: Do Not Fight the Last War—The Guerrilla-War-of-
the-Mind Strategy

MARCH 8
Retain Your Sense of Wonder
Youth is happy because it has the capacity to see beauty. Anyone who keeps the ability to see
beauty never grows old.
—franz kafka
After we pass through a rigorous apprenticeship and begin to flex our
creative muscles, we cannot help but feel satisfaction in what we have
learned and how far we have progressed. We naturally begin to take for
granted certain ideas we have learned and developed. Slowly, we stop
asking the same kinds of questions that plagued us earlier on. We already
know the answers. We feel ever so superior. Unknown to ourselves, the
mind slowly narrows and tightens as complacency creeps into the soul, and
although we may have achieved public acclaim for our past work, we stifle
our own creativity and never get it back. Fight this downhill tendency as
much as you can by upholding the value of active wonder. Constantly
remind yourself of how little you truly know, and of how mysterious the
world remains.
Daily Law: Reality is infinitely mysterious. Let it continually fill you with awe. Remind
yourself of how much more you still can learn.
Mastery, V: Awaken the Dimensional Mind—The Creative-Active

MARCH 9
Impatience Is Your Enemy
Patience is bitter, but its fruit is sweet.
—aristotle
The greatest impediment to creativity is your impatience, the almost
inevitable desire to hurry up the process, express something, and make a
splash. What happens in such a case is that you do not master the basics;
you have no real vocabulary at your disposal. What you mistake for being
creative and distinctive is more likely an imitation of other people’s style, or
personal rantings that do not really express anything. Audiences, however,
are hard to fool. They feel the lack of rigor, the imitative quality, the urge to
get attention, and they turn their backs, or give the mildest praise that
quickly passes. The best route is to love learning for its own sake. Anyone
who would spend ten years absorbing the techniques and conventions of
their field, trying them out, mastering them, exploring and personalizing
them, would inevitably find their authentic voice and give birth to
something unique and expressive.
Daily Law: Take the long view. By being patient and following the process, individual
expression will flow out of you naturally.
Mastery, V: Awaken the Dimensional Mind—The Creative-Active

MARCH 10
Knowledge Is Your Superior
What makes the difference between an outstandingly creative person and a less creative one is
not any special power, but greater knowledge (in the form of practiced expertise) and the
motivation to acquire and use it. This motivation endures for long periods, perhaps shaping
and inspiring a whole lifetime.
—margaret a. boden
To negate the ego you must adopt a kind of humility toward knowledge.
The great scientist Michael Faraday expressed this attitude in the following
way: Scientific knowledge is constantly progressing. The greatest theories
of the time are eventually disproven or altered at some future point. The
human mind is simply too weak to have a clear and perfect vision of reality.
The idea or theory that you are currently formulating, that seems so fresh
and alive and truthful, will almost certainly be shot down or ridiculed in a
few decades or centuries. (We tend to laugh at people prior to the twentieth
century who did not yet believe in evolution and who saw the world as only
6,000 years old, but imagine how people will be laughing at us for the naive
beliefs we hold in the twenty-first century!) And so it is best to keep this in
mind and not grow too fond of your ideas or too certain of their truth.
Daily Law: Knowledge is always progressing. Don’t let your ego fool you. You are always
knowledge’s inferior.
Mastery, V: Awaken the Dimensional Mind—The Creative-Active

MARCH 11
Intensity of Focus
To many of those who knew Marcel Proust as a young man, he seemed the
least likely person ever to attain mastery, because on the surface he
appeared to waste so much valuable time. All he ever seemed to do was
read books, take walks, write interminable letters, attend parties, sleep
during the day, and publish frothy society articles. But under the surface
was an intensity of attention. He did not simply read books—he took them
apart, rigorously analyzed them, and learned valuable lessons to apply to his
own life. All of this reading implanted in his brain various styles that would
enrich his own writing style. He did not merely socialize—he strained to
understand people at their core and to uncover their secret motivations. He
did not just analyze his own psychology but went so deeply into the various
levels of consciousness he found within himself that he developed insights
about the functioning of memory that foreshadowed many discoveries in
neuroscience. He even used the death of his mother to intensify his
development. With her gone, he would have to write himself out of his
depression and find a way to re-create the feelings between them in the
book he was to write. As he later described it, all of these experiences were
like seeds, and once he had started his great novel In Search of Lost Time,
he was like a gardener tending and cultivating the plants that had taken root
so many years before.
Daily Law: It is not your studies that will bear fruit but the intensity of your attention.
Mastery, VI: Fuse the Intuitive with the Rational—Mastery

MARCH 12
Perfect Yourself through Failure
Henry Ford had one of those minds that was naturally attuned to the
mechanical. He had the power of most great inventors—the ability to
visualize the parts and how they functioned together. If he had to describe
how something worked, Ford would inevitably take a napkin and sketch out
a diagram rather than use words. With this type of intelligence, his
apprenticeships on machines were easy and fast. But when it came to mass-
producing his inventions, he had to confront the fact that he did not have the
requisite knowledge. He needed an additional apprenticeship in becoming a
businessman and entrepreneur. Fortunately, working on machines had
developed in him a kind of practical intelligence, patience, and way of
solving problems that could be applied to anything. When a machine
malfunctions, you do not take it personally or grow despondent. It is in fact
a blessing in disguise. Such malfunctions generally show you inherent flaws
and means of improvement. You simply keep tinkering until you get it right.
The same should apply to an entrepreneurial venture. Mistakes and failures
are precisely your means of education. They tell you about your own
inadequacies. It is hard to find out such things from people, as they are
often political with their praise and criticisms. Your failures also permit you
to see the flaws of your ideas, which are only revealed in the execution of
them. You learn what your audience really wants, the discrepancy between
your ideas and how they affect the public.
Daily Law: Malfunctions are a means of education. They are trying to tell you
something. You must listen.
Mastery, II: Submit to Reality—The Ideal Apprenticeship

MARCH 13
Creative Endurance
In contemplating work on Mastery, I realized it presented quite a challenge.
I had known from previous books that near the end of the writing process I
could often become so exhausted that the writing could suffer. I believe
many writers tend to peter out halfway through their projects, overwhelmed
by the complexity and the lack of organization of their material. I decided to
treat it like a marathon and to find a way to build up endurance for the long
slog. So I decided to up my exercise routine. I normally exercise every day,
but I would increase the times and distances ever so slightly. At a certain
point I knew I would reach a plateau in which I did not feel any more tired
with these increases. I would stay at the plateau level for the entire length of
the project. In sports such as long-distance cycling, this kind of training
helps build up endurance levels. It is better to stay at the plateau for a
period of time rather than keep increasing the workout. I wanted to see if
this would translate to more consistent energy levels in my work.
In the last few months, when the looming deadline made me work even
harder than before, I noticed that I was considerably calmer, better able to
handle the stress, and that I had reservoirs of energy to draw upon for the
long hours. I came to the conclusion that the mind and the body are so
intertwined that it is impossible to separate out their effects on us. Feeling
energized influences our mood, which influences our work in very direct
ways. And feeling confused or disorganized in our work can have a terrible
effect on us physically as well.
Daily Law: Creating anything worthwhile is like a marathon, and you must train for it.
HuffPost, November 15, 2012

MARCH 14
Immerse Yourself in the Details
When Leonardo da Vinci wanted to create a whole new style of painting,
one that was more lifelike and emotional, he engaged in an obsessive study
of details. He spent endless hours experimenting with forms of light hitting
various geometrical solids, to test how light could alter the appearance of
objects. He devoted hundreds of pages in his notebooks to exploring the
various gradations of shadows in every possible combination. He gave this
same attention to the folds of a gown, the patterns in hair, the various
minute changes in the expression of a human face. When we look at his
work we are not consciously aware of these efforts on his part, but we feel
how much more alive and realistic his paintings are, as if he had captured
reality.
In general, try approaching a problem or idea with a much more open
mind. Let your study of the details guide your thinking and shape your
theories. Think of everything in nature, or in the world, as a kind of
hologram—the smallest part reflecting something essential about the whole.
Immersing yourself in details will combat the generalizing tendencies of the
brain and bring you closer to reality.
Daily Law: Uncover the secret to any reality by uncovering the details.
Mastery, V: Awaken the Dimensional Mind—The Creative-Active

MARCH 15
Make Your Work Come to Life
Leonardo da Vinci’s hunger to get at the core of life by exploring its details
drove him into elaborate research on human and animal anatomy. He
wanted to be able to draw a human or a cat from the inside out. He
personally dissected cadavers, sawing through bones and skulls, and he
religiously attended autopsies so that he could see as closely as possible the
structure of muscles and nerves. His anatomical drawings were far in
advance of anything of his time for their realism and accuracy. In your own
work you must follow the Leonardo path. Most people don’t have the
patience to absorb their minds in the fine points and minutiae that are
intrinsically part of their work. They are in a hurry to create effects and
make a splash; they think in large brush strokes. Their work inevitably
reveals their lack of attention to detail—it doesn’t connect deeply with the
public, and it feels flimsy. You must see whatever you produce as
something that has a life and presence of its own. Seeing your work as
something alive, your path to mastery is to study and absorb these details in
a universal fashion, to the point at which you feel the life force and can
express it effortlessly in your work.
Daily Law: See your work as a living thing. Your task is to bring it alive and make others
feel this.
Mastery, VI: Fuse the Intuitive with the Rational—Mastery

MARCH 16
Alter Your Perspective
The lesson is simple—what constitutes true creativity is the openness and
adaptability of our spirit. When we see or experience something we must be
able to look at it from several angles, to see other possibilities beyond the
obvious ones. We imagine that the objects around us can be used and co-
opted for different purposes. We do not hold on to our original idea out of
sheer stubbornness, or because our ego is tied up with its rightness. Instead,
we move with what presents itself to us in the moment, exploring and
exploiting different branches and contingencies. We thus manage to turn
feathers into flying material. The difference then is not in some initial
creative power of the brain, but in how we look at the world and the fluidity
with which we can reframe what we see.
Daily Law: Creativity and adaptability are inseparable. Look at things today from every
possible angle.
Mastery, V: Awaken the Dimensional Mind—The Creative-Active

MARCH 17
These Powers Can’t Come Cheaply
To create a meaningful work of art or to make a discovery or invention
requires great discipline, self-control, and emotional stability. It requires
mastering the forms of your field. Drugs and madness only destroy such
powers. Do not fall for the romantic myths and clichés that abound in
culture about creativity—offering us the excuse or panacea that such
powers can come cheaply. When you look at the exceptionally creative
work of Masters, you must not ignore the years of practice, the endless
routines, the hours of doubt, and the tenacious overcoming of obstacles
these people endured.
Daily Law: Creative energy is the fruit of the Master’s efforts and nothing else. Do not
fall for the romantic myths.
Mastery, V: Awaken the Dimensional Mind—The Creative-Active

MARCH 18
The Power of Desire and Determination
When I was younger, I worked at a publisher’s house in New York. One of
the people we published was Toni Morrison. It was her first novel. I’ll never
forget the story. Toni Morrison worked as an editor at this publication
house. She worked until 6 or 7 p.m. then took the train home to where she
lived in Connecticut. She was raising two children. She would go home,
cook them meals, put them to bed, and at 11 p.m. she would sit down and
write. And that’s how she wrote her first novel. That’s the kind of energy
and determination you have to have. I always thought that was superhuman.
I know I could never do that, but look at who she became. It’s because she
wanted it so badly.
Daily Law: To rise to the level of mastery requires intense dedication. You have to really
want it. What would make you have such commitment and dedication?
Robert Greene in conversation at Live Talks Los Angeles, February 11, 2019

MARCH 19
The Deadening Dynamic
Perhaps the greatest impediment to human creativity is the natural decay
that sets in over time in any kind of medium or profession. In the sciences
or in business, a certain way of thinking or acting that once had success
quickly becomes a paradigm, an established procedure. As the years go by,
people forget the initial reason for this paradigm and simply follow a
lifeless set of techniques. In the arts, someone establishes a style that is new
and vibrant, speaking to the particular spirit of the times. It has an edge
because it is so different. Soon imitators pop up everywhere. It becomes a
fashion, something to conform to, even if the conformity appears to be
rebellious and edgy. This can drag on for ten, twenty years; it eventually
becomes a cliché, pure style without any real emotion or need. Nothing in
culture escapes this deadening dynamic. This problem, however, sets up a
tremendous opportunity for creative types. The process goes as follows:
You begin by looking inward. You have something you want to express that
is unique to yourself and related to your inclinations. You must be sure it is
not something that is sparked by some trend or fashion, but that it comes
from you and is real. Perhaps it is a sound you are not hearing in music, a
type of story not being told, a type of book that does not fit into the usual
tidy categories. Let the idea, the sound, the image take root in you. Sensing
the possibility of a new language or way of doing things, you must make
the conscious decision to play against the very conventions that you find
dead and want to get rid of.
Daily Law: People are dying for the new, for what expresses the spirit of the time in an
original way. By creating something new you will create your own audience and attain
the ultimate position of power in culture.
Mastery, V: Awaken the Dimensional Mind—The Creative-Active

MARCH 20
The Master’s Brain
We can now say with confidence that the brain is an extraordinarily plastic biological system
that is in a state of dynamic equilibrium with the external world. Even its basic connections are
being constantly updated in response to changing sensory demands.
—v. s. ramachandran
Something happens neurologically to the brain that is important for you to
understand. When you start something new, a large number of neurons in
the frontal cortex (the higher, more conscious command area of the brain)
are recruited and become active, helping you in the learning process. The
brain has to deal with a large amount of new information, and this would be
stressful and overwhelming if only a limited part of the brain were used to
handle it. The frontal cortex even expands in size in this initial phase, as we
focus hard on the task. But once something is repeated often enough, it
becomes hardwired and automatic, and the neural pathways for this skill are
delegated to other parts of the brain, farther down the cortex. Those neurons
in the frontal cortex that we needed in the initial stages are now freed up to
help in learning something else, and the area goes back to its normal size. In
the end, an entire network of neurons is developed to remember this single
task, which accounts for the fact that we can still ride a bicycle years after
we first learned how to do so. If we were to take a look at the frontal cortex
of those who have mastered something through repetition, it would be
remarkably still and inactive as they performed the skill. All of their brain
activity is occurring in areas that are lower down and require much less
conscious control.
Daily Law: The more skills you learn, the richer the landscape of the brain. It’s up to
you.
Mastery, II: Submit to Reality—The Ideal Apprenticeship

MARCH 21
The Universal Master
Johann Wolfgang von Goethe’s mastery was not over this subject or that
one, but in the connections between them, based on decades of deep
observation and thinking. Goethe epitomized what was known in the
Renaissance as the Ideal of the Universal Man—a person so steeped in all
forms of knowledge that his mind grows closer to the reality of nature itself
and sees secrets that are invisible to most people. Today some might see a
person such as Goethe as a quaint relic of the eighteenth century, and his
ideal of unifying knowledge as a Romantic dream, but in fact the opposite
is the case, and for one simple reason: the design of the human brain—its
inherent need to make connections and associations—gives it a will of its
own. Although this evolution might take various twists and turns in history,
the desire to connect will win out in the end because it is so powerfully a
part of our nature and inclination. Aspects of technology now offer
unprecedented means to build connections between fields and ideas. In any
way possible, you should strive to be a part of this universalizing process,
extending your own knowledge to other branches, further and further out.
The rich ideas that will come from such a quest will be their own reward.
Daily Law: Extend your knowledge further and further, leading to wide-ranging
connections.
Mastery, VI: Fuse the Intuitive with the Rational—Mastery

MARCH 22
On Meditation
All of humanity’s problems stem from man’s inability to sit quietly in a room alone.
—blaise pascal
Often, writers begin with an exciting idea, which is reflected in the energy
of the first chapters. Then, they get somewhat lost in the material. The
organization of the book falls apart. They start to repeat the same ideas. The
last few chapters do not have the same verve of the opening ones. It is hard
to maintain one’s enthusiasm, energy, and freshness over the course of
months and years that a book requires. To help me avoid such a fate, I
practice forty minutes of Zen meditation (known as zazen) every morning.
In this form of meditation (referred to as shikantaza) the main goal is to
learn how to empty the mind, develop superior powers of focus (joriki), and
gain access to more unconscious, intuitive forms of thinking. Meditation
has significantly improved my ability to concentrate when reading or taking
notes. The nuisances that years ago used to get under my skin are now
largely ignored or forgotten. I have developed patience in dealing with the
drudgery of practice and am better able to handle petty criticisms. From
early on I could see how this routine was helping me in several ways and I
have since meditated every day in the morning. If you are feeling restless
on your path to mastery or find that little things often aggravate and distract
you from your life’s work, I recommend you take up meditation.
Daily Law: The Master’s mind must be able to concentrate on one thing for a long
period of time. Develop such habits.
powerseductionandwar.com, September 4, 2014

MARCH 23
Listen to Your Frustration
The composer Richard Wagner had worked so hard on his opera Das
Rheingold that he became completely blocked. Beyond frustration, he took
a long walk in the woods, lay down, and fell asleep. In a sort of half dream,
he felt himself sinking in swiftly flowing water. The rushing sounds formed
into musical chords. He awoke, terrified by a feeling of drowning. He
hurried home and noted down the chords of his dream, which seemed to
perfectly conjure up the sound of rushing water. These chords became the
prelude of the opera, a leitmotif that runs throughout it, and one of the most
astonishing pieces he had ever written. Similar stories are so common as to
indicate something essential about the brain and how it reaches certain
peaks of creativity. We can explain this pattern in the following way: If we
remained as excited as we were in the beginning of our project, maintaining
that intuitive feel that sparked it all, we would never be able to take the
necessary distance to look at our work objectively and improve upon it.
Losing that initial verve causes us to work and rework the idea. It forces us
to not settle too early on an easy solution. The mounting frustration and
tightness that comes from single-minded devotion to one problem or idea
will naturally lead to a breaking point. We realize we are getting nowhere.
Such moments are signals from the brain to let go, for however long a
period necessary, and most creative people consciously or unconsciously
accept this.
Daily Law: Walk away when you’re blocked. Do something else. The brain will
eventually lead you back.
Mastery, V: Awaken the Dimensional Mind—The Creative-Active

MARCH 24
The Mind as a Muscle
Think of the mind as a muscle that naturally tightens up over time unless it
is consciously worked upon. What causes this tightening is twofold. First,
we generally prefer to entertain the same thoughts and ways of thinking
because they provide us with a sense of consistency and familiarity.
Sticking with the same methods also saves us a lot of effort. We are
creatures of habit. Second, whenever we work hard at a problem or idea,
our minds naturally narrow their focus because of the strain and effort
involved. This means that the further we progress on our creative task, the
fewer alternative possibilities or viewpoints we tend to consider. This
tightening process afflicts all of us, and it is best to admit that you share in
this flaw. The only antidote is to enact strategies to loosen up the mind and
let in alternative ways of thinking. This is not only essential for the creative
process but is also immensely therapeutic for our psyches. Stimulating your
brain and senses from all directions will help unlock your natural creativity
and help revive your original mind.
Daily Law: Don’t get comfortable. Take risks. Change. Try learning about a field you
don’t know anything about. Or stepping into a viewpoint you’ve never considered.
Mastery, V: Awaken the Dimensional Mind—The Creative-Active

MARCH 25
Cultivate Negative Capability
The ability to endure and even embrace mysteries and uncertainties is what
the poet John Keats called “negative capability.” All Masters possess this
Negative Capability, and it is the source of their creative power. This
quality allows them to entertain a broader range of ideas and experiment
with them, which in turn makes their work richer and more inventive.
Throughout his career, Mozart never asserted any particular opinions about
music. Instead, he absorbed the styles he heard around himself and
incorporated them into his own voice. Late in his career, he encountered for
the first time the music of Johann Sebastian Bach—a kind of music very
different from his own, and in some ways more complex. Most artists
would grow defensive and dismissive of something that challenged their
own principles. Instead, Mozart opened his mind up to new possibilities,
studying Bach’s use of counterpoint for nearly a year and absorbing it into
his own vocabulary. This gave his music a new and surprising quality. This
might seem like some kind of poetic conceit, but in fact cultivating
Negative Capability will be the single most important factor in your success
as a creative thinker. The need for certainty is the greatest disease the mind
faces.
Daily Law: Develop the habit of suspending the need to judge everything that crosses
your path. Consider and even momentarily entertain viewpoints opposite to your own,
seeing how they feel. Do anything to break up your normal train of thinking and your
sense that you already know the truth.
Mastery, V: Awaken the Dimensional Mind—The Creative-Active

MARCH 26
Pay Attention to Negative Cues
In the Arthur Conan Doyle story “Silver Blaze,” Sherlock Holmes solves a
crime by paying attention to what did not happen—the family dog had not
barked. This meant that the murderer must have been someone the dog
knew. What this story illustrates is how the average person does not
generally pay attention to what we shall call “negative cues”: what should
have happened but did not. It is our natural tendency to fixate on positive
information, to notice only what we can see and hear. It takes a creative
type such as Holmes to think more broadly and rigorously, pondering the
missing information in an event, visualizing this absence as easily as we see
the presence of something. For centuries, doctors considered diseases
exclusively as something stemming from outside the body attacking it—a
contagious germ, a draft of cold air, miasmic vapors, and so on. Treatment
depended on finding drugs of some sort that could counteract the harmful
effects of these environmental agents of disease. Then, in the early
twentieth century, the biochemist Frederick Gowland Hopkins, studying the
effects of scurvy, had the idea to reverse this perspective. What caused the
problem in this particular disease, he speculated, was not what was
attacking from the outside, but what was missing from within the body
itself—in this case what came to be known as vitamin C. Thinking
creatively, he did not look at what was present but precisely at what was
absent in order to solve the problem. This led to his groundbreaking work
on vitamins, and completely altered our concept of health.
Daily Law: The ability to loosen our mind, to alter our perspective, is a function of our
imagination. Learn to imagine more possibilities than you generally consider. Avoid
fixating only on what is present. Ponder what is absent.
Mastery, V: Awaken the Dimensional Mind—The Creative-Active

MARCH 27
The Power of Peak Experiences
The person in peak-experiences feels himself, more than other times, to be the responsible,
active, creating center of his activities and of his perceptions. He feels more like a prime-
mover, more self-determined (rather than caused, determined, helpless, dependent, passive,
weak, bossed). He feels himself to be his own boss, fully responsible, fully volitional, with
more free-will than at other times, master of his fate, an agent.
—abraham maslow
Perhaps the greatest difficulty you will face in maintaining a high and
consistent sense of purpose is the level of commitment that is required over
time and the sacrifices that go with this. You have to handle many moments
of frustration, boredom, and failure, and the endless temptations in our
culture for more immediate pleasures. Benefits are often not immediately
apparent. And as the years pile up, you can face burnout. To offset this
tedium, you need to have moments of flow in which your mind becomes so
deeply immersed in the work that you are transported beyond your ego. You
experience feelings of profound calmness and joy. The psychologist
Abraham Maslow called these “peak experiences”—once you have them,
you are forever changed. You will feel the compulsion to repeat them. The
more immediate pleasures the world offers will pale in comparison. And
when you feel rewarded for your dedication and sacrifices, your sense of
purpose will be intensified.
Daily Law: Get into a flow state today. Rid yourself of the distractions and cheap
pleasures. Lose yourself in the work.
The Laws of Human Nature, 8: Change Your Circumstances by Changing Your Attitude—
The Law of Self-sabotage

MARCH 28
Move Beyond Intellect
Through intense absorption in a particular field over a long period of time,
masters come to understand all of the parts involved in what they are
studying. They reach a point where all of this has become internalized and
they are no longer seeing the parts, but gain an intuitive feel for the whole.
They literally see or sense the dynamic. In the living sciences, we have the
example of Jane Goodall, who studied chimpanzees in the wilds of East
Africa for years as she lived among them. Interacting with them constantly,
she reached a point where she began to think like a chimpanzee and could
see elements of their social life that no other scientist had come close to
fathoming. She gained an intuitive feel for not only how they functioned as
individuals but as a group, which is an inseparable part of their lives. She
made discoveries about the social life of chimpanzees that forever altered
our conception of the animal, and that are no less scientific for depending
on this deep level of intuition.
Daily Law: Over time, Masters gain an intuitive feel for the whole of their field. It’s an
excitement and joy that awaits you if you are patient.
Mastery, VI: Fuse the Intuitive with the Rational—Mastery

MARCH 29
Fuse the Intuitive with the Rational, A
Albert Einstein called the intuitive or metaphoric mind a sacred gift. He added that the rational
mind was a faithful servant. It is paradoxical that in the context of modern life we have begun
to worship the servant and defile the divine.
—bob samples, the metaphoric mind
All of us have access to a higher form of intelligence, one that can allow us
to see more of the world, to anticipate trends, to respond with speed and
accuracy to any circumstance. This intelligence is cultivated by deeply
immersing ourselves in a field of study and staying true to our inclinations,
no matter how unconventional our approach might seem to others. Through
such intense immersion over many years we come to internalize and gain an
intuitive feel for the complicated components of our field. When we fuse
this intuitive feel with rational processes, we expand our minds to the outer
limits of our potential and are able to see into the secret core of life itself.
We then come to have powers that approximate the instinctive force and
speed of animals, but with the added reach that our human consciousness
brings us.
Daily Law: This power is what our brains were designed to attain, and we will be
naturally led to this type of intelligence if we follow our inclinations to their ultimate
ends.
Mastery, VI: Fuse the Intuitive with the Rational—Mastery

MARCH 30
Fuse the Intuitive with the Rational, B
The great chess master Bobby Fischer spoke of being able to think beyond
the various moves of his pieces on the chessboard; after a while he could
see “fields of forces” that allowed him to anticipate the entire direction of
the match. For the pianist Glenn Gould, he no longer had to focus on notes
or parts of the music he was playing, but instead saw the entire architecture
of the piece and could express it. Albert Einstein suddenly was able to
realize not just the answer to a problem, but a whole new way of looking at
the universe, contained in a visual image he intuited. In all of these
instances, these practitioners of various skills described a sensation of
seeing more. All of us have access to this higher form of intelligence, one
that can allow us to see more of the world, to anticipate trends, to respond
with speed and accuracy to any circumstance. In moving through these
various steps, with an intense energy, you must have faith that these
intuitive powers will come to you over time. The ability to sense the overall
dynamic in any situation, to foresee problems and solutions before anyone
else will bring you to the heights of power.
Daily Law: If you keep to the path, these powers of mastery will come to you.
Mastery, VI: Fuse the Intuitive with the Rational—Mastery

MARCH 31
Connect to Your Destiny
Do not talk about giftedness, inborn talents! One can name great men of all kinds who were
very little gifted. They acquired greatness, became “geniuses”. . . . [T]hey allowed themselves
time for it.
—friedrich nietzsche
As you must know by now, mastery is not a question of genetics or luck,
but of following your natural inclinations and the deep desire that stirs you
from within. Everyone has such inclinations. This desire within you is not
motivated by egotism or sheer ambition for power, both of which are
emotions that get in the way of mastery. It is instead a deep expression of
something natural, something that marked you at birth as unique. In
following your inclinations and moving toward mastery, you make a great
contribution to society, enriching it with discoveries and insights, and
making the most of the diversity in nature and among human society. It is in
fact the height of selfishness to merely consume what others create and to
retreat into a shell of limited goals and immediate pleasures. Alienating
yourself from your inclinations can only lead to pain and disappointment in
the long run, and a sense that you have wasted something unique. This pain
will be expressed in bitterness and envy, and you will not recognize the true
source of your depression. Your true self does not speak in words or banal
phrases. Its voice comes from deep within you, from the substrata of your
psyche, from something embedded physically within you. It emanates from
your uniqueness, and it communicates through sensations and powerful
desires that seem to transcend you. You cannot ultimately understand why
you are drawn to certain activities or forms of knowledge. This cannot
really be verbalized or explained. It is simply a fact of nature.
Daily Law: In following this voice you realize your own potential and satisfy your
deepest longings to create and express your uniqueness. It exists for a purpose, and it is
your Life’s Task to bring it to fruition.
Mastery, VI: Fuse the Intuitive with the Rational—Mastery

April
The Perfect Courtier
playing the game of power
The game of power is a game of constant duplicity most resembling the
power dynamic that existed in the scheming world of the old aristocratic
court. Throughout history, a court has always formed itself around the
person in power—king, queen, emperor, leader. The courtiers who filled
this court were in an especially delicate position: They had to serve their
masters, but if they seemed to fawn, if they curried favor too obviously, the
other courtiers around them would notice and would act against them.
Meanwhile, the court was supposed to represent the height of civilization
and refinement. This was the courtier’s dilemma: While appearing the very
paragon of elegance, they had to outwit and thwart their own opponents in
the subtlest of ways. Life in the court was a never-ending game that
required constant vigilance and tactical thinking. It was civilized war. Today
we face a peculiarly similar paradox to that of the courtier: Everything must
appear civilized, decent, democratic, and fair. But if we play by those rules
too strictly, if we take them too literally, we are crushed by those around us
who are not so foolish. As the great Renaissance diplomat and courtier
Niccolò Machiavelli wrote, “Any man who tries to be good all the time is
bound to come to ruin among the great number who are not good.” The
court imagined itself the pinnacle of refinement, but underneath its
glittering surface a cauldron of dark emotions—greed, envy, lust, hatred—
boiled and simmered. Our world today similarly imagines itself the pinnacle
of fairness, yet the same ugly emotions still stir within us, as they have
forever. The game is the same. The month of April will teach you how to
play the game of power as the perfect courtier.
When you enter the real world, you are suddenly blindsided by this whole
realm that exists. It is like our dirty little secret. People will talk about their
sex lives. But nobody talks about all the power games that are constantly
going on in the world. So, I want to interject my own personal story from
when I got out of college and was suddenly confronted with this real world.
I had graduated with a background in Classics, ancient Greek and Latin.
I was immersed in studying philosophy and literature and languages. And
so, when I started working, essentially in magazines, with my first job at
Esquire, I had no idea of how things operated in the real world, and I was
very much shocked by all the egos, the insecurities, the game playing, and
the political stuff. It really kind of disturbed and upset me. I can remember,
when I was about twenty-six or twenty-seven years old, one particular job
that affected me deeply.
I am not going to tell you which job this was. I don’t want you googling
it and figuring out who I’m talking about. But, basically, the job was that I
had to find stories that would then be put into a documentary series, and I
was judged on how many good stories I found. I am a very competitive
person, and I was doing better than anybody else there at the job. I was
finding more stories that ended up getting produced, and I told myself,
“Isn’t that the whole point?” We are trying to produce a show. We are trying
to get work done, and I was more than holding up my fair share.
Suddenly I found that my superior made it very clear that she wasn’t
happy with me. I was doing something wrong, she was displeased, and yet I
couldn’t figure out what it was.
I tried to put myself in her shoes. And I’m thinking, “What is it that I’m
doing that might be displeasing her? I am clearly producing in my work.”
And I figured out, well, maybe it is because I’m not involving her in what
I’m doing, in my ideas. Maybe I need to run them by her. I need to involve
her more so she feels like she is a part of the research that I am doing.
I would then go into her office and I would tell her where my ideas were
coming from. I was trying to engage with her, assuming that was the
problem. Well, that didn’t seem to work. She was still clearly unhappy with
me. Maybe she simply didn’t like me. So, I thought, going further, “Well,
maybe I’m not being friendly enough with her. Maybe I need to be nice to
her. Maybe I need to go in and not talk about work, but just talk, and be
nice.”
Okay. So that was strategy number two. I started doing that. She still
seemed really cold. I figured, all right, she hates me. That’s just life. Not
everybody can love you. That must be it. I’ll just continue doing my job.
Then one day we are having a meeting in which we are discussing our
ideas, and my mind was elsewhere, and she suddenly interrupts and says,
“Robert, you have an attitude problem.”
“What?”
“You’re not listening to people here.”
“I’m listening.” I got a little defensive. I produce. I work hard, I said.
You are going to judge me about how wide my eyes are open and how I’m
listening to people? She goes, “No. You have a problem here.”
“I’m sorry. I don’t think I do.”
Anyway, over the course of the next few weeks she just started torturing
me about my supposed attitude. And, of course, naturally, I developed an
attitude. I started resenting her. A couple weeks later I quit, because I just
hated it. I probably quit a week before they were going to fire me anyway. I
went home, and over the course of several weeks I thought really deeply
about it. What happened here? What did I do wrong? I mean, she just didn’t
like me? I think I’m a likable person.
Finally, after much analysis, I came to the conclusion that I had violated
a law of power ten years before I ever wrote the book. Law 1: Never
Outshine the Master. I had gone into this environment thinking that what
mattered was doing a great job and showing how talented I was. But, in
doing that, I had made this woman, my superior, insecure that maybe I was
after her job or that I was better than she was. And I would make her look
bad because the great ideas were coming from me and not from her. It
wasn’t really her fault. I had violated Law 1. And when you violate Law 1,
you are going to suffer for it, because you are touching on a person’s ego
and their insecurities. That is the worst thing you can do, and that is what
had happened.
In reflecting on this, it became a turning point in my life. I said, “I’m
never going to let this happen again. And I’m never going to take things
personally and get emotional.” Because that is what happened. I basically
reacted emotionally to her coldness and antagonism and developed an
attitude. Never again. I’m a writer. I’m going to look at these jobs that I get
with some distance. I am going to become a master observer of the game of
power. I am going to watch these people as if they were mice in a
laboratory, and I’m the scientist.
This suddenly allowed me to not only observe the power games going
on in the many different kinds of jobs I’ve had, but also, in having this
distance and looking at the world like this, suddenly I had power. I wasn’t
emotionally entangled, and I could deal with things much more easily. Out
of such a perspective, I developed The 48 Laws of Power. What I decided in
The 48 Laws is that this is the reality we must all deal with—we are social
creatures, we live in environments where there are all kinds of complicated
networks, and we are, in a way, defined by how we handle these
environments, this reality.

APRIL 1
Never Outshine the Master
Avoid outshining the master. All superiority is odious, but the superiority of a subject over his
prince is not only stupid, it is fatal.
—baltasar gracián
In your desire to please and impress, do not go too far in displaying your
talents or you might accomplish the opposite—inspire fear and insecurity.
Everyone has insecurities. When you show yourself in the world and
display your talents, you naturally stir up all kinds of resentment, envy, and
other manifestations of insecurity. This is to be expected. You cannot spend
your life worrying about the petty feelings of others. With those above you,
however, you must take a different approach: When it comes to power,
outshining the master is perhaps the worst mistake of all. Make your
masters appear more brilliant than they are, and you will attain the heights
of power. If your ideas are more creative than your master’s, ascribe them
to him, in as public a manner as possible. Make it clear that your advice is
merely an echo of his advice. If you surpass your master in wit, it is okay to
play the role of the court jester, but do not make him appear cold and surly
by comparison. If you are naturally more sociable and generous than your
master, be careful not to be the cloud that blocks his radiance from others.
He must appear as the sun around which everyone revolves, radiating
power and brilliance, the center of attention.
Daily Law: Always make those above you feel comfortably superior.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 1: Never Outshine the Master

APRIL 2
Make the Master Feel Glorious and Superior
Like all Renaissance scientists, Galileo depended on the generosity of great
rulers to support his research. No matter how great the discovery, however,
his patrons usually paid him with gifts, not cash. This made for a life of
constant insecurity and dependence. In 1610, he hit on a new strategy when
he discovered the moons of Jupiter. Galileo turned his discovery into a
cosmic event honoring the Medicis’ greatness. The Medicis made Galileo
their official court philosopher and mathematician, with a full salary.
Scientists are not spared the vagaries of court life and patronage. They too
must serve masters who hold the purse strings. And their great intellectual
powers can make the master feel insecure, as if he were only there to supply
the funds—an ugly, ignoble job. The producer of a great work wants to feel
he is more than just the provider of the financing. He wants to appear
creative and powerful, and also more important than the work produced in
his name. Instead of insecurity you must give him glory. Galileo did not
challenge the intellectual authority of the Medicis with his discovery or
make them feel inferior in any way; by literally aligning them with the
stars, he made them shine brilliantly among the courts of Italy. He did not
outshine the master, he made the master outshine all others.
Daily Law: Not only don’t outshine the master but make those above you shine
brilliantly.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 1: Never Outshine the Master

APRIL 3
Find Out Who Holds the Strings
Power always exists in concentrated forms. In any organization it is
inevitable for a small group to hold the strings. And often it is not those
with the titles. In the game of power, only the fool flails about without
fixing his target. You must find out who controls the operations, who is the
real director behind the scenes. As Richelieu discovered at the beginning of
his rise to the top of the French political scene during the early seventeenth
century, it was not King Louis XIII who decided things, it was the king’s
mother. And so he attached himself to her, and catapulted through the ranks
of the courtiers, all the way to the top. It is enough to strike oil once—your
wealth and power are assured for a lifetime.
Daily Law: When looking for sources of power to elevate you, look for those who really
control the operations. They are not always who you think. Once identified, attach
yourself to them.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 23: Concentrate Your Forces

APRIL 4
Know When to Take and Give Credit
Be sure you know when letting other people share the credit serves your
purpose. It is especially important to not be greedy when you have a master
above you. President Richard Nixon’s historic visit to the People’s Republic
of China was originally his idea, but it might never have come off but for
the deft diplomacy of Henry Kissinger. Nor would it have been as
successful without Kissinger’s skills. Still, when the time came to take
credit, Kissinger adroitly let Nixon take the lion’s share. Knowing that the
truth would come out later, he was careful not to jeopardize his standing in
the short term by hogging the limelight. Kissinger played the game
expertly: He took credit for the work of those below him while graciously
giving credit for his own labors to those above. That is the way to play the
game.
Daily Law: Take credit from those below you. Give credit to those above.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 7: Get Others to Do the Work for You, but Always Take the
Credit

APRIL 5
Remake Yourself into a Character of Power
In 1832 a publisher accepted Aurore Dupin Dudevant’s first major novel,
Indiana. She had chosen to publish it under a pseudonym, “George Sand,”
and all of Paris assumed this impressive new writer was male. Dudevant
had sometimes worn men’s clothes before creating “George Sand”; now, as
a public figure, she exaggerated the image. She added long men’s coats,
gray hats, heavy boots, and dandyish cravats to her wardrobe. She smoked
cigars and in conversation expressed herself like a man, unafraid to
dominate the conversation or to use a saucy word. This strange
“male/female” writer fascinated the public. But those who knew Sand well
understood that her male persona protected her from the public’s prying
eyes. Out in the world, she enjoyed playing the part to the extreme; in
private she remained herself. She also realized that the character of “George
Sand” could grow stale or predictable, and to avoid this she would every
now and then dramatically alter the character she had created; she began
meddling in politics, leading demonstrations, inspiring student rebellions.
No one would dictate to her the limits of the character she had created.
Long after she died, and after most people had stopped reading her novels,
the larger-than-life theatricality of that character has continued to fascinate
and inspire. Understand: The character you seem to have been born with is
not necessarily who you are; beyond the characteristics you have inherited,
your parents, your friends, and your peers have helped to shape your
personality. The Promethean task of the powerful is to take control of the
process, to stop allowing others that ability to limit and mold them.
Daily Law: Remake yourself into a character of power. Working on yourself like clay
should be one of your greatest and most pleasurable life tasks. It makes you, in essence,
an artist—an artist creating yourself.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 25: Re-create Yourself

APRIL 6
Seem Dumber Than Your Mark
Know how to make use of stupidity: The wisest man plays this card at times. There are
occasions when the highest wisdom consists in appearing not to know—you must not be
ignorant but capable of playing it.
—baltasar gracián
If you are ambitious yet find yourself low in the hierarchy, this trick can be
useful: Appearing less intelligent than you are, even a bit of a fool, is the
perfect disguise. Look like a harmless pig and no one will believe you
harbor dangerous ambitions. They may even promote you since you seem
so likable and subservient. Intelligence is the obvious quality to downplay,
but why stop there? Taste and sophistication rank close to intelligence on
the vanity scale; make people feel they are more sophisticated than you are
and their guard will come down. An air of complete naiveté can work
wonders.
Daily Law: In general, always make people believe they are smarter and more
sophisticated than you are. They will keep you around because you make them feel
better about themselves, and the longer you are around, the more opportunities you will
have to deceive them.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 21: Play a Sucker to Catch a Sucker—Seem Dumber Than
Your Mark

APRIL 7
Do Not Be the Court Cynic
Wax, a substance naturally hard and brittle, can be made soft by the application of a little
warmth, so that it will take any shape you please. In the same way, by being polite and
friendly, you can make people pliable and obliging, even though they are apt to be crabbed and
malevolent. Hence politeness is to human nature what warmth is to wax.
—arthur schopenhauer
Express admiration for the good work of others. If you constantly criticize
your equals or subordinates, some of that criticism will rub off on you,
hovering over you like a gray cloud wherever you go. People will groan at
each new cynical comment, and you will irritate them. By expressing
modest admiration for other people’s achievements, you paradoxically call
attention to your own.
Daily Law: The ability to express wonder and amazement, and seem like you mean it, is
a rare and dying talent, but one still greatly valued.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 24: Play the Perfect Courtier

APRIL 8
Master Your Emotional Responses
A sovereign should never launch an army out of anger, a leader should never start a war out of
wrath.
—sun tzu
Angry people usually end up looking ridiculous, for their response seems
out of proportion to what occasioned it. They have taken things too
seriously, exaggerating the hurt or insult that has been done to them. They
are so sensitive to slight that it becomes comical how much they take
personally. More comical still is their belief that their outbursts signify
power. The truth is the opposite: Petulance is not power, it is a sign of
helplessness. People may temporarily be cowed by your tantrums, but in the
end they lose respect for you. They also realize they can easily undermine a
person with so little self-control.
Daily Law: Displaying anger and emotion are signs of weakness; you cannot control
yourself, so how can you control anything?
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 39: Stir Up Waters to Catch Fish

APRIL 9
So Much Depends on Reputation
In the social realm, appearances are the barometer of almost all our
judgments, and you must never be misled into believing otherwise. One
false slip, one awkward or sudden change in your appearance, can prove
disastrous. This is the reason for the supreme importance of making and
maintaining a reputation that is of your own creation. That reputation will
protect you in the dangerous game of appearances, distracting the probing
eyes of others from knowing what you are really like, and giving you a
degree of control over how the world judges you—a powerful position to be
in. Reputation has a power like magic: With one stroke of its wand, it can
double your strength. It can also send people scurrying away from you.
Whether the exact same deeds appear brilliant or dreadful can depend
entirely on the reputation of the doer. Reputation therefore is a treasure to
be carefully collected and hoarded. Especially when you are first
establishing it, you must protect it strictly, anticipating all attacks on it.
Once it is solid, do not let yourself get angry or defensive at the slanderous
comments of your enemies—that reveals insecurity, not confidence in your
reputation. Take the high road instead, and never appear desperate in your
self-defense.
Daily Law: Reputation is the cornerstone of power. Through reputation alone you can
intimidate and win; once it slips, however, you are vulnerable, and will be attacked on all
sides. Never let others define it for you.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 5: So Much Depends on Reputation—Guard It with Your Life

APRIL 10
Always Say Less Than Necessary
Undutiful words of a subject do often take deeper root than the memory of ill deeds.
—sir walter raleigh
When you are trying to impress people with words, the more you say, the
more common you appear, and the less in control. Even if you are saying
something banal, it will seem original if you make it vague, open-ended,
and sphinxlike. Powerful people impress and intimidate by saying less. The
more you say, the more likely you are to say something foolish.
Daily Law: By saying less than necessary you create the appearance of meaning and
power. Also, the less you say, the less risk you run of saying something foolish, even
dangerous.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 4: Always Say Less Than Necessary

APRIL 11
Appeal to People’s Self-Interest
The shortest and best way to make your fortune is to let people see clearly that it is in their
interests to promote yours.
—jean de la bruyère
In your quest for power, you will constantly find yourself in the position of
asking for help from those more powerful than you. There is an art to
asking for help, an art that depends on your ability to understand the person
you are dealing with, and to not confuse your needs with theirs. Most
people never succeed at this, because they are completely trapped in their
own wants and desires. They start from the assumption that the people they
are appealing to have a selfless interest in helping them. They talk as if their
needs mattered to these people—who probably couldn’t care less.
Sometimes they refer to larger issues: a great cause, or grand emotions such
as love and gratitude. They go for the big picture when simple, everyday
realities would have much more appeal. What they do not realize is that
even the most powerful person is locked inside needs of his own, and that if
you make no appeal to his self-interest, he merely sees you as desperate or,
at best, a waste of time.
Daily Law: When asking for anything, uncover something in your request that will
benefit the person you are asking, and emphasize it out of all proportion. They will
respond enthusiastically when they see something to be gained for themselves.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 13: When Asking for Help, Appeal to People’s Self-Interest,
Never to Their Mercy or Gratitude

APRIL 12
Use Your Enemies
Men are more ready to repay an injury than a benefit, because gratitude is a burden and
revenge a pleasure.
—tacitus
In 1971, during the Vietnam War, Henry Kissinger was the target of an
unsuccessful kidnapping attempt, a conspiracy involving, among others, the
renowned antiwar activist priests the Berrigan brothers, four more Catholic
priests, and four nuns. In private, without informing the Secret Service or
the Justice Department, Kissinger arranged a Saturday-morning meeting
with three of the alleged kidnappers. Explaining to his guests that he would
have most American soldiers out of Vietnam by mid-1972, he completely
charmed them. They gave him some “Kidnap Kissinger” buttons and one of
them remained a friend of his for years, visiting him on several occasions.
This was not just a one-time ploy: Kissinger made a policy of working with
those who disagreed with him. Colleagues commented that he seemed to
get along better with his enemies than with his friends. Whenever you can,
bury the hatchet with an enemy, and make a point of putting him in your
service.
Daily Law: As Lincoln said, you destroy an enemy when you make a friend of him.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 2: Never Put Too Much Trust in Friends

APRIL 13
Better to Be Attacked Than Ignored
Burning more brightly than those around you is a skill that no one is born
with. You have to learn to attract attention, “as surely as the lodestone
attracts iron.” At the start of your career, you must attach your name and
reputation to a quality, an image, that sets you apart from other people. This
image can be something like a characteristic style of dress, or a personality
quirk that amuses people and gets talked about. Once the image is
established, you have an appearance, a place in the sky for your star. It is a
common mistake to imagine that this peculiar appearance of yours should
not be controversial, that to be attacked is somehow bad. Nothing could be
further from the truth. To avoid being a flash in the pan, and having your
notoriety eclipsed by another, you must not discriminate between different
types of attention; in the end, every kind will work in your favor. Society
craves larger-than-life figures, people who stand above the general
mediocrity. Never be afraid, then, of the qualities that set you apart and
draw attention to you. Court controversy, even scandal. It is better to be
attacked, even slandered, than ignored. All professions are ruled by this law,
and all professionals must have a bit of the showman about them.
Daily Law: Make no distinction between kinds of attention—notoriety of any sort will
bring you power. Better to be slandered and attacked than ignored.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 6: Court Attention at All Cost

APRIL 14
View the World as a Vast Interconnected Palace
The world is dangerous and enemies are everywhere—everyone has to
protect themselves. A fortress seems the safest. But isolation exposes you to
more dangers than it protects you from—it cuts you off from valuable
information, it makes you conspicuous and an easy target. Since power is a
human creation, it is inevitably increased by contact with other people.
Instead of falling into the fortress mentality, view the world in the following
manner: It is like a vast palace of Versailles, with every room
communicating with another. You need to be permeable, able to float in and
out of different circles and mix with different types. That kind of mobility
and social contact will protect you from plotters, who will be unable to keep
secrets from you, and from your enemies, who will be unable to isolate you
from your allies. Always on the move, you mix and mingle in the rooms of
the palace, never sitting or settling in one place. No hunter can fix his aim
on such a swift-moving creature.
Daily Law: Because humans are social creatures by nature, power depends on social
interaction and circulation. To make yourself powerful, place yourself at the center of
things, make yourself more accessible, seek out old allies and make new ones, force
yourself into more and more different circles.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 18: Do Not Build Fortresses to Protect Yourself—Isolation Is
Dangerous

APRIL 15
Create a Cultlike Following
Having a large following opens up all sorts of possibilities for deception;
not only will your followers worship you, they will defend you from your
enemies and will voluntarily take on the work of enticing others to join your
fledgling cult. This kind of power will lift you to another realm: You will no
longer have to struggle or use subterfuge to enforce your will. You are
adored and can do no wrong. You might think it’s a gargantuan task to
create such a following, but in fact it is fairly simple. As humans, we have a
desperate need to believe in something, anything. This makes us eminently
gullible: We simply cannot endure long periods of doubt, or the emptiness
that comes from a lack of something to believe in. Dangle in front of us
some new cause, elixir, get-rich-quick scheme, or the latest technological
trend or art movement, and we leap as one from the water to take the bait.
Daily Law: People have an overwhelming desire to believe in something. Become the
focal point of such desire by offering them a cause, a new faith to follow. In the absence
of organized religion and grand causes, your new belief system will bring you untold
power.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 27: Play on People’s Need to Believe to Create a Cultlike
following

APRIL 16
Do Not Commit to Anyone
I would rather be a beggar and single than a queen and married.
—queen elizabeth i
It is the fool who always rushes to take sides. Do not commit to any side or
cause but yourself. By maintaining your independence, you become the
master of others—playing people against one another, making them pursue
you. If you allow people to feel they possess you to any degree, you lose all
power over them. By not committing your affections, they will only try
harder to win you over. Stay aloof and you gain the power that comes from
their attention and frustrated desire.
Daily Law: Play the Virgin Queen: give them hope but never satisfaction.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 20: Do Not Commit to Anyone

APRIL 17
Stay Above the Fray
Regard it as more courageous not to become involved in an engagement than to win in battle,
and where there is already one interfering fool, take care that there shall not be two.
—baltasar gracián
Do not let people drag you into their petty fights and squabbles. At the same
time, you cannot completely stand aside, for that would cause needless
offense. To play the game properly, you must seem interested in other
people’s problems, even sometimes appear to take their side. But while you
make outward gestures of support, you must maintain your inner energy and
sanity by keeping your emotions disengaged. No matter how hard people
try to pull you in, never let your interest in their affairs and petty squabbles
go beyond the surface. Give them gifts, listen with a sympathetic look, even
occasionally play the charmer—but inwardly keep both the friendly kings
and the perfidious tyrants at arm’s length. By refusing to commit and thus
maintaining your autonomy, you retain the initiative: your moves stay
matters of your own choosing, not defensive reactions to the push-and-pull
of those around you.
Daily Law: Always try to inwardly maintain your independence and avoid
entanglements not of your choosing.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 20: Do Not Commit to Anyone

APRIL 18
Startle the Snakes
You can sit back and read the signs or you can actively work to uncover
your enemies. In the Bible we read of David’s suspicion that his father-in-
law, King Saul, secretly wanted him dead. How could David find out? He
confided his suspicion to Saul’s son Jonathan, his close friend. Jonathan
refused to believe it, so David suggested a test. He was expected at court for
a feast. He would not go; Jonathan would attend and pass along David’s
excuse, which would be adequate but not urgent. Sure enough, the excuse
enraged Saul, who exclaimed, “Send at once and fetch him unto me—he
deserves to die!” David’s test succeeded because it was ambiguous. His
excuse for missing the feast could be read in more than one way: if Saul
meant well toward David, he would have seen his son-in-law’s absence as
no more than selfish at worst, but because he secretly hated David, he saw it
as effrontery, and it pushed him over the edge. Follow David’s example: say
or do something that can be read in more than one way, that may be
superficially polite but that could also indicate a slight coolness on your
part or be seen as subtle insult. A friend may wonder but will let it pass.
The secret enemy, though, will react with anger. Any strong emotion and
you will know that there’s something boiling under the surface.
Daily Law: As the Chinese say, beat the grass to startle the snakes.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 1: Declare War on Your Enemies—The Polarity
Strategy

APRIL 19
Tailor Your Flattery
Courtiers have to gain the attention of leaders and ingratiate themselves in
some way. The most immediate way to do this is through flattery, since
leaders inevitably have large egos and a hunger to have their high self-
opinion validated. Flattery can do wonders, but it comes with risks. If it is
too obvious, the flatterer looks desperate, and it is easy to see through the
strategy. The best courtiers know how to tailor their flattery to the particular
insecurities of the leader and to make it less direct. They focus on flattering
qualities in the leader that no one else has bothered to pay attention to but
that need extra validation. If everyone praises the leader’s business acumen
but not his or her cultural refinement, you will want to aim at the latter.
Mirroring the leader’s ideas and values, without using their exact words,
can be a highly effective form of indirect flattery.
Daily Law: Overt flattery can be effective but has its limits; it is too direct and obvious
and looks bad to other courtiers. Discreet flattery, tailored to the insecurities of your
target, is much more powerful.
The Laws of Human Nature, 14: Resist the Downward Pull of the Group—The Law of
Conformity

APRIL 20
Be Royal in Your Own Fashion
With all great deceivers there is a noteworthy occurrence to which they owe their power. In the
actual act of deception they are overcome by belief in themselves: it is this which then speaks
so miraculously and compellingly to those around them.
—friedrich nietzsche
The way you carry yourself will often determine how you are treated: in the
long run, appearing vulgar or common will make people disrespect you. For
a king respects himself and inspires the same sentiment in others. It is up to
you to set your own price. Ask for less and that is just what you will get.
Ask for more, however, and you send a signal that you are worth a king’s
ransom. Even those who turn you down respect you for your confidence,
and that respect will eventually pay off in ways you cannot imagine.
Daily Law: By acting regally and confident of your powers, you make yourself seem
destined to wear a crown.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 34: Be Royal in Your Own Fashion: Act Like a King to Be
Treated Like One

APRIL 21
Be Merciless with Your Enemies
The remnants of an enemy can become active like those of a disease or fire. Hence, these
should be exterminated completely. One should never ignore an enemy, knowing him to be
weak. He becomes dangerous in due course, like the spark of fire in a haystack.
—kautilya, third century bc.
“Crush the enemy” is a key strategic tenet of Sun Tzu, the fourth-century
BC author of The Art of War. The idea is simple: your enemies wish you ill.
There is nothing they want more than to eliminate you. If, in your struggles
with them, you stop halfway or even three-quarters of the way, out of mercy
or hope of reconciliation, you only make them more determined, more
embittered, and they will someday take revenge. They may act friendly for
the time being, but this is only because you have defeated them. They have
no choice but to bide their time.
The solution: Have no mercy. Crush your enemies as totally as they
would crush you. Ultimately the only peace and security you can hope for
from your enemies is their disappearance. It is not, of course, a question of
murder, it is a question of banishment. Sufficiently weakened and then
exiled from your court forever, your enemies are rendered harmless. And if
they cannot be banished, at least understand that they are plotting against
you, and pay no heed to whatever friendliness they feign.
Daily Law: Judge your enemies carefully, looking at their past patterns. Sometimes it is
best to convert them into an ally and neutralize them. But with others it only pays to be
merciless and crush them totally.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 15: Crush Your Enemy Totally—Learn to Keep People
Dependent on You

APRIL 22
Sow the Seeds of Doubt
It is easier to cope with a bad conscience than with a bad reputation.
—friedrich nietzsche
Doubt is a powerful weapon: Once you let it out of the bag with insidious
rumors, your opponents are in a horrible dilemma. On the one hand, they
can deny the rumors, even prove that you have slandered them. But a layer
of suspicion will remain: Why are they defending themselves so
desperately? Maybe the rumor has some truth to it? If, on the other hand,
they take the high road and ignore you, the doubts, unrefuted, will be even
stronger. If done correctly, the sowing of rumors can so infuriate and
unsettle your rivals that in defending themselves they will make numerous
mistakes. This is the perfect weapon for those who have no reputation of
their own to work from.
Daily Law: Destroy your rivals with rumors.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 5: So Much Depends on Reputation—Guard It with Your Life

APRIL 23
Fear the Power of Infection
Those misfortunates among us who have been brought down by
circumstances beyond their control deserve all the help and sympathy we
can give them. But there are others who are not born to misfortune or
unhappiness, but who draw it upon themselves by their destructive actions
and unsettling effect on others. It would be a great thing if we could raise
them up, change their patterns, but more often than not it is their patterns
that end up getting inside and changing us. You can die from someone
else’s misery—emotional states are as infectious as diseases. You may feel
you are helping the drowning man, but you are only precipitating your own
disaster. Infectors can be recognized by the misfortune they draw on
themselves, their turbulent past, their long line of broken relationships, their
unstable careers, and the very force of their character, which sweeps you up
and makes you lose your reason. Be forewarned by these signs of an
infector; learn to see the discontent in their eye. Most important of all, do
not take pity. Do not enmesh yourself in trying to help. The infector will
remain unchanged, but you will be unhinged.
Daily Law: People sometimes draw misfortune on themselves; they will also draw it on
you. Associate with the happy and fortunate instead.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 10: Infection—Avoid the Unhappy and Unlucky

APRIL 24
Avoid the False Alliance
No one can get far in life without allies. The trick, however, is to recognize
the difference between false allies and real ones. A false alliance is created
out of an immediate emotional need. It requires that you give up something
essential about yourself and makes it impossible for you to make your own
decisions. A true alliance is formed out of mutual self-interest, each side
supplying what the other cannot get alone. It does not require you to fuse
your own identity with that of a group or pay attention to everyone else’s
emotional needs. It allows you autonomy.
Daily Law: Cultivate real allies. Find those with mutual self-interests and make an
alliance.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 27: Seem to Work for the Interests of Others while
Furthering Your Own—The Alliance Strategy

APRIL 25
Enter Action with Boldness
Always set to work without misgivings on the score of imprudence.
—baltasar gracián
Most of us are timid. We want to avoid tension and conflict and we want to
be liked by all. We may contemplate a bold action, but we rarely bring it to
life. Although we may disguise our timidity as a concern for others, a desire
not to hurt or offend them, in fact it is the opposite—we are really self-
absorbed, worried about ourselves and how others perceive us. Boldness, on
the other hand, is outer-directed, and often makes people feel more at ease,
since it is less self-conscious and less repressed. And so we admire the bold,
and prefer to be around them, because their self-confidence infects us and
draws us outside our own realm of inwardness and reflection. But few are
born bold. You must practice and develop your boldness. You will often
find uses for it. The best place to begin is often the delicate world of
negotiation, particularly those discussions in which you are asked to set
your own price. How often we put ourselves down by asking for too little.
Understand: If boldness is not natural, neither is timidity. It is an acquired
habit, picked up out of a desire to avoid conflict. If timidity has taken hold
of you, then root it out. Your fears of the consequences of a bold action are
way out of proportion to reality, and in fact the consequences of timidity are
worse. Your value is lowered and you create a self-fulfilling cycle of doubt
and disaster.
Daily Law: Timidity is dangerous: Better to enter with boldness. Any mistakes you
commit through audacity are easily corrected with more audacity.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 28: Enter Action with Boldness

APRIL 26
Make Your Accomplishments Seem Effortless
A line [of poetry] will take us hours maybe; Yet if it does not seem a moment’s thought, Our
stitching and unstitching has been naught.
—“adam’s curse,” william butler yeats
In The Book of the Courtier, published in 1528, Baldassare Castiglione
describes the highly elaborate and codified manners of the perfect court
citizen. And yet, Castiglione explains, the courtier must execute these
gestures with what he calls “sprezzatura,” the capacity to make the difficult
seem easy. He urges the courtier to “practice in all things a certain
nonchalance which conceals all artistry and makes whatever one says or
does seem uncontrived and effortless.” We all admire the achievement of
some unusual feat, but if it is accomplished naturally and gracefully, our
admiration increases tenfold—“whereas . . . to labor at what one is doing
and . . . to make bones over it, shows an extreme lack of grace and causes
everything, whatever its worth, to be discounted.” Much of the idea of
sprezzatura came from the world of art. All the great Renaissance artists
carefully kept their works under wraps. Only the finished masterpiece could
be shown to the public. Michelangelo forbade even popes to view his work
in process. A Renaissance artist was always careful to keep his studios shut
to patrons and public alike, not out of fear of imitation, but because to see
the making of the works would mar the magic of their effect, and their
studied atmosphere of ease and natural beauty.
Daily Law: Your actions must seem natural and executed with ease. When you act, act as
if you could do much more. Avoid the temptation of revealing how hard you work—it
only raises questions.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 30: Make Your Accomplishments Seem Effortless

APRIL 27
Despise the Free Lunch
The powerful never forget that what is offered for free is inevitably a trick.
Friends who offer favors without asking for payment will later want
something far dearer than the money you would have paid them. The
bargain has hidden problems, both material and psychological. What has
worth is worth paying for. By paying your own way you stay clear of
gratitude, guilt, and deceit. It is also often wise to pay the full price—there
is no cutting corners with excellence.
Daily Law: Learn to pay and to pay well.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 40: Despise the Free Lunch

APRIL 28
There Is No Revenge Like Oblivion
There is no revenge like oblivion, for it is the entombment of the unworthy in the dust of their
own nothingness.
—baltasar gracián
It is tempting to want to fix our mistakes, but it is sometimes more politic to
leave them alone. In 1971, when The New York Times published the
Pentagon Papers, a group of government documents about the history of
U.S. involvement in Indochina, Henry Kissinger erupted into a volcanic
rage. Furious about the Nixon administration’s vulnerability to this kind of
damaging leak, he made recommendations that eventually led to the
formation of a group called the Plumbers to plug the leaks. This was the
unit that later broke into Democratic Party offices in the Watergate Hotel,
setting off the chain of events that led to Nixon’s downfall. In reality the
publication of the Pentagon Papers was not a serious threat to the
administration, but Kissinger’s reaction made it a big deal. In trying to fix
one problem, he created another: a paranoia for security that in the end was
much more destructive to the government. Had he ignored the Pentagon
Papers, the scandal they had created would eventually have blown over.
Instead of inadvertently focusing attention on a problem, making it seem
worse by publicizing how much concern and anxiety it is causing you, it is
often far wiser to play the contemptuous aristocrat, not deigning to
acknowledge the problem’s existence.
Daily Law: The harder we try to fix our mistakes, the worse we often make them.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 36: Disdain Things You Cannot Have—Ignoring Them Is the
Best Revenge

APRIL 29
Cultivate an Air of Unpredictability
People are always trying to read the motives behind your actions and to use
your predictability against you. Throw in a completely inexplicable move
and you put them on the defensive. Because they do not understand you,
they are unnerved, and in such a state you can easily intimidate them. Pablo
Picasso once remarked, “The best calculation is the absence of calculation.
Once you have attained a certain level of recognition, others generally
figure that when you do something, it’s for an intelligent reason. So it’s
really foolish to plot out your movements too carefully in advance. You’re
better off acting capriciously.” Humans are creatures of habit with an
insatiable need to see familiarity in other people’s actions. Your
predictability gives them a sense of control. Turn the tables: Be deliberately
unpredictable. Behavior that seems to have no consistency or purpose will
keep them off-balance. Scrambling your patterns on a day-to-day basis will
cause a stir around you and stimulate interest. People will talk about you,
ascribe motives and explanations that have nothing to do with the truth, but
that keep you constantly in their minds.
Daily Law: In the end, the more capricious you appear, the more respect you will garner.
Only the terminally subordinate act in a predictable manner. Strategically reveal your
human side.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 17: Keep Others in Suspended Terror—Cultivate an Air of
Unpredictability

APRIL 30
Never Appear Too Perfect
It takes great talent and skill to conceal one’s talent and skill.
—françois de la rochefoucauld
Sir Walter Raleigh was one of the most brilliant men at the court of Queen
Elizabeth of England. He had skills as a scientist, wrote poetry still
recognized as among the most beautiful writing of the time, was a proven
leader of men, an enterprising entrepreneur, a great sea captain, and on top
of all this was a handsome, dashing courtier who charmed his way into
becoming one of the queen’s favorites. Wherever he went, however, people
blocked his path. Eventually he suffered a terrific fall from grace, leading
even to prison and finally the executioner’s axe. Raleigh could not
understand the stubborn opposition he faced from the other courtiers. He
did not see that he had not only made no attempt to disguise the degree of
his skills and qualities, but he had imposed them on one and all, making a
show of his versatility, thinking it impressed people and won him friends. In
fact it made him silent enemies, people who felt inferior to him and did all
they could to ruin him the moment he tripped up or made the slightest
mistake. In the end, the reason he was executed was treason, but envy will
use any cover it finds to mask its destructiveness.
Daily Law: Appearing better than others is always dangerous, but most dangerous of all
is to appear to have no faults or weaknesses. Envy creates silent enemies. Defuse it by
occasionally downplaying your virtues.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 46: Never Appear Too Perfect

May
The Supposed Nonplayers of Power
recognizing toxic types and disguised power strategies
Power is a social game. To learn and master it, you must develop the ability
to study and understand people. As the great seventeenth-century thinker
and courtier Baltasar Gracián wrote: “Many people spend time studying the
properties of animals or herbs; how much more important it would be to
study those of people, with whom we must live or die!” To be a master
player you must also be a master psychologist. You must recognize
motivations and see through the cloud of dust with which people surround
their actions. Some people, for instance, believe they can opt out of the
game by behaving in ways that have nothing to do with power. You must
beware of such people, for while they express such opinions outwardly,
they are often among the most adept players at power. They are what I call
“supposed nonplayers.” They utilize strategies that cleverly disguise the
nature of the manipulation involved. The month of May will teach you how
to recognize the supposed nonplayers and other toxic types you’ll want try
to keep your distance from.
I once counted that I had some sixty different jobs before I wrote The 48
Laws of Power.
I tried a lot of different things and in those experiences I saw every kind
of power-hungry person you could imagine. Every kind of manipulator that
is out there. I saw them. I saw their maneuvers. I saw how they thought.
And then I began working in Hollywood as an assistant to various
directors. That’s where I started to see some particularly hardcore
Machiavellian tactics used on actors and producers, and I’d think, “Wow,
that reminds me of Cesare Borgia in the Renaissance. That reminds me of
what Napoleon did. That reminds me of that line from Gracián.”
I was building up this catalog of experiences. I didn’t know what would
come of it.
Then when I was thirty-six, I was working yet another new job in Italy,
and one day one of my colleagues on this job, a book packager and designer
named Joost Elffers, asked me out of the blue if I had any ideas for a book.
Interested in the prospect, I improvised several ideas, one of which would
turn into The 48 Laws of Power.
I told Joost that, in my experience, power has not changed. We live in a
very politically correct world where film directors and producers project the
image of being the nicest, most liberal, most progressive people on the
planet. But behind closed doors, they turn into raging manipulators who
will do anything to get exactly what they want.
Power is timeless. People may not be beheaded for making mistakes;
instead they’ll be summarily fired. Law 1 in The 48 Laws of Power, for
instance, is “Never Outshine the Master”—in the old days, Nicolas Fouquet
outshone Louis XIV, and he was thrown in prison for the rest of his life.
Now, you’re simply let go without knowing why. It’s just a different form
of punishment. The game is the same.
There are three types of people in this world in dealing with this game.
There are, what I call, the deniers, the people who deny this reality exists.
They almost want to pretend that we are descended from angels and not
from primates. They imagine that what I am talking about here is just
cynical. These laws don’t really exist. These hardcore tactics may be used,
but only by the nastiest and least moral people out there.
Among these deniers, you will find two types. You will find people who
are genuinely disturbed by the politicking aspect of human nature. They
don’t want any kind of job in which they have to do that. Because they
refuse to understand the game, they find themselves slowly marginalized.
They are fine with such a fate. They are never going to assume a position of
great responsibility anyway because it involves all this game-playing, and
that’s okay.
The other branch of the deniers are the people that are the passive-
aggressors—those who consciously don’t want to admit that they ever
engage in manipulation, but unconsciously are playing all kinds of games.
In several of my books, I describe the many different varieties of these
passive-aggressive warriors. These types, the supposed nonplayers, are
often the most slippery and dangerous of all.
The second type of person besides the deniers are those who love this
Machiavellian part of our nature and revel in it. They are master
manipulators, con artists, and outright aggressors. They have no problem
handling this part of the game. In fact, they love it. This type of person,
which usually you will find one or two in any office or group, can get pretty
far, but eventually they are tripped up in life because they are too
Machiavellian. They don’t understand that there is a whole other side to the
game, which requires empathy, cooperation, and seducing people into
working with you. They are too tied to their egos to see the limits of the
games they are playing and so they inevitably go too far and experience a
fall from power. There is a wall they can never get past.
The third type is what I call the radical realist. This is what I’m
promulgating in my books, and it goes as follows.
The desire for power is part of our nature. It is a part of how we evolved
over millions of years. There is no point in denying our nature. It is who we
are. And not only are we not going to deny it, but we are going to accept
that this is the human being that we are, the product of evolution.
There is nothing wrong with the fact that in this world people are
playing political games. There is nothing wrong with the fact that there are
seducers and con artists. It is the Human Comedy since the beginning of
recorded history. It is just reality, the world as it is. Let’s stop fighting it.
With such acceptance, it is not that we love it and want to go out in the
world and play all these nasty games. It is that we understand they exist. If,
occasionally, we have to use the laws in playing offense or defense, we’re
okay with that, within reason. Most often it is the case that other people are
practicing them on us, and it is better to understand what they’re up to than
to live in the dream world of our angelic nature.
And so we understand the laws of power. We understand what people
are up to, so they can’t easily hurt us. We learn how to recognize in advance
the truly toxic narcissists, aggressors, and passive aggressors, the
nonplayers, before getting too emotionally enmeshed in their dramas. And
armed with such an attitude and with such knowledge we are prepared to go
to battle in the game of life. Instead of being blindsided by the
manipulators, we have calmness, power, and the freedom that comes with
awareness of the laws.

MAY 1
Everyone Is a Player in the Game
Courts are, unquestionably, the seats of politeness and good breeding; were they not so, they
would be the seats of slaughter and desolation. Those who now smile upon and embrace,
would affront and stab, each other, if manners did not interpose.
—lord chesterfield
You can recognize supposed nonplayers by the way they flaunt their moral
qualities, their piety, their exquisite sense of justice. But since all of us
hunger for power, and almost all of our actions are aimed at gaining it, the
nonplayers are merely throwing dust in our eyes, distracting us from their
power plays. If you observe them closely, you will see in fact that they are
often the ones most skillful at indirect manipulation, even if some of them
practice it unconsciously. And they greatly resent any publicizing of the
tactics they use every day.
Daily Law: The world is like a giant scheming court and we are all trapped inside it.
There is no opting out of the game. Everyone is playing.
The 48 Laws of Power, Preface

MAY 2
Take on the Toxic Types
Aggressive, envious, and manipulative people don’t usually announce
themselves as such. They have learned to appear charming in initial
encounters, to use flattery and other means of disarming us. When they
surprise us with their ugly behavior, we feel betrayed, angry, and helpless.
They create constant pressure, knowing that in doing so they overwhelm
our minds with their presence, making it doubly hard to think straight or
strategize. Your greatest defense against them is to identify them in
advance. Either you will steer clear of them or, foreseeing their
manipulative actions, you will not be blindsided and thus will be better able
to maintain your emotional balance. You will learn to mentally cut them
down to size and focus on the glaring weaknesses and insecurities behind
all of their bluster. You will not fall for their myth, and this will neutralize
the intimidation they depend on. You will scoff at their cover stories and
elaborate explanations for their selfish behavior. Your ability to stay calm
will infuriate them and often push them into overreaching or making a
mistake.
Daily Law: Come to appreciate these encounters as a chance to hone your skills of self-
mastery. Outsmarting just one of these types will give you a great deal of confidence that
you can handle the worst in human nature.
The Laws of Human Nature, Introduction

MAY 3
Judge Them on Their Behavior, Not on Their
Words
Character is destiny.
—heraclitus
You need to train yourself to pay less attention to the words that people say
and greater attention to their actions. People will say all kinds of things
about their motives and intentions; they are used to dressing things up with
words. Their actions, however, say much more about what is going on
underneath the surface. If they present a harmless front but have acted
aggressively on several occasions, give the knowledge of that aggression
much greater weight than the surface they present. In a similar vein, you
should take special note of how people respond to stressful situations—
often the mask they wear in public falls off in the heat of the moment.
When looking for cues to observe, be sensitive to any kind of extreme
behavior on their part—for instance, a blustery front, an overly friendly
manner, a constant penchant for jokes. You will often notice that they wear
this like a mask to hide the opposite. They are blustery because they are
inwardly very insecure; they are overly friendly because they are secretly
ambitious and aggressive; or they joke to hide a mean-spiritedness. What
might seem like small issues—chronically being late, insufficient attention
to detail, not returning favors—are signs of something deeper about their
character. Nothing is too small to notice.
Daily Law: What you want is a picture of a person’s character over time. Restrain from
the natural tendency to judge right away, and let the passage of time reveal more and
more about who people are.
Mastery, IV: See People as They Are—Social Intelligence

MAY 4
The Appearance of Naiveté
He who poses as a fool is not a fool.
—baltasar gracián
Those who claim to be nonplayers may affect an air of naiveté, to protect
them from the accusation that they are after power. Beware, however, for
the appearance of naiveté can be an effective means of deceit. And even
genuine naiveté is not free of the snares of power. Children may be naive in
many ways, but they often act from an elemental need to gain control over
those around them. Children suffer greatly from feeling powerless in the
adult world, and they use any means available to get their way. Genuinely
innocent people may still be playing for power, and are often horribly
effective at the game, since they are not hindered by reflection.
Daily Law: Those who make a show or display of innocence are often the least innocent
of all.
The 48 Laws of Power, Preface

MAY 5
Be Careful Whom You Offend
In the fifth-century BC, Ch’ung-erh, the prince of Ch’in (in present-day
China), had been forced into exile. He lived modestly—even, sometimes, in
poverty—waiting for the time when he could return home and resume his
princely life. Once he was passing through the state of Cheng, where the
ruler, not knowing who he was, treated him rudely. Years later, the prince
was finally able to return home, his circumstances greatly changed. He did
not forget who had been kind to him, and who had been insolent, during his
years of poverty. Least of all did he forget his treatment at the hands of the
ruler of Cheng. At his first opportunity he assembled a vast army and
marched on Cheng, taking eight cities, destroying the kingdom, and sending
the ruler into an exile of his own. Never assume that the person you are
dealing with is weaker or less important than you are. A man who is of little
importance and means today can be a person of power tomorrow. We forget
a lot in our lives, but we rarely forget an insult.
Daily Law: Swallow the impulse to offend, even if the other person seems weak. The
satisfaction is meager compared to the danger that someday he or she will be in a
position to hurt you.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 19: Know Who You’re Dealing with—Do Not Offend the
Wrong Person

MAY 6
See Through the False Front
One who is good at combating the enemy fools it with inscrutable moves, confuses it with
false intelligence, makes it relax by concealing one’s strength . . . deafens its ears by jumbling
one’s orders and signals, blinds its eyes by converting one’s banners and insignias, . . .
confounds its battle plan by providing distorted facts.
—tou bi fu tan
The false front is the oldest form of military deception. It originally
involved making the enemy believe that one was weaker than in fact was
the case. A leader would feign a retreat, say, baiting a trap for the enemy to
rush into, luring it into an ambush. This was a favorite tactic of Sun Tzu’s.
The appearance of weakness often brings out people’s aggressive side,
making them drop strategy and prudence for an emotional and violent
attack. When Napoleon found himself outnumbered and in a vulnerable
strategic position before the Battle of Austerlitz, he deliberately showed
signs of being panicked, indecisive, and scared. The enemy armies
abandoned their strong position to attack him and rushed into a trap. It was
his greatest victory. In general, as advocated since the days of ancient
China, nonplayers present a face to the world that promises the opposite of
what they are actually planning.
Daily Law: Never take appearances for reality.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 23: Weave a Seamless Blend of Fact and Fiction—
Misperception Strategies

MAY 7
The Subtle-Superiority Strategy
A friend, colleague, or employee is chronically late, but he or she always
has a ready excuse that is logical, along with an apology that seems sincere.
Or similarly, such individuals forget about meetings, important dates, and
deadlines, always with impeccable excuses at hand. If this behavior repeats
often enough, your irritation will increase, but if you try to confront them,
they very well might try to turn the tables by making you seem uptight and
unsympathetic. It is not their fault, they say—they have too much on their
mind, people are pressuring them, they are temperamental artists who can’t
keep on top of so many irritating details, they are overwhelmed. They may
even accuse you of adding to their stress. You must understand that at the
root of this is the need to make it clear to themselves and to you that they
are in some way superior. If they were to say in so many words that they
felt superior to you, they would incur ridicule and shame. They want you to
feel it in subtle ways, while they are able to deny what they are up to.
Putting you in the inferior position is a form of control, in which they get to
define the relationship. You must pay attention to the pattern more than the
apologies. They are not really sorry.
Daily Law: If this is chronic behavior, you must not get angry or display overt irritation
—passive aggressors thrive on getting a rise out of you. Instead, stay calm and subtly
mirror their behavior, calling attention to what they are doing, and inducing some shame
if possible.
The Laws of Human Nature, 16: See the Hostility Behind the Friendly Facade—The Law
of Aggression

MAY 8
Look at Their Past
The most significant indicator of people’s character comes through their
actions over time. Despite what people say about the lessons they have
learned, and how they have changed over the years, you will inevitably
notice the same actions and decisions repeating in the course of their life. In
these decisions they reveal their character. You must take notice of any
salient forms of behavior—disappearing when there is too much stress, not
completing an important piece of work, turning suddenly belligerent when
challenged, or, conversely, suddenly rising to the occasion when given
responsibility. With this fixed in your mind, you do some research into their
past. You look at other actions you have observed that fit into this pattern,
now in retrospect. You pay close attention to what they do in the present.
You see their actions not as isolated incidents but as parts of a compulsive
pattern. If you ignore the pattern it is your own fault.
Daily Law: When choosing people to work and associate with, do not be mesmerized by
their reputation or taken in by the surface image they try to project. Instead, train
yourself to look deep within them, to their past actions, to see their character.
The Laws of Human Nature, 4: Determine the Strength of People’s Character—The Law of
Compulsive Behavior

MAY 9
See Through the Emotional Outburst
If a person explodes with anger at you (and it seems out of proportion to
what you did to them), you must remind yourself that it is not exclusively
directed at you—do not be so vain. The cause is much larger, goes way
back in time, involves dozens of prior hurts, and is actually not worth the
bother to understand. Instead of seeing it as a personal grudge, look at the
emotional outburst as a disguised power move, an attempt to control or
punish you cloaked in the form of hurt feelings and anger. This shift of
perspective will let you play the game of power with more clarity and
energy.
Daily Law: Instead of overreacting and becoming ensnared in people’s emotions, turn
their loss of control to your advantage: you keep your head while they are losing theirs.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 3: Conceal Your Intentions

MAY 10
Don’t Mistake Extra Conviction for Truth
We humans are by nature quite gullible. We want to believe in certain
things—that we can get something for nothing; that we can easily regain or
rejuvenate our health thanks to some new trick, perhaps even cheat death;
that most people are essentially good and can be trusted. This propensity is
what deceivers and manipulators thrive on. It would be immensely
beneficial for the future of our species if we were all less gullible, but we
cannot change human nature. Instead, the best we can do is to learn to
recognize certain telltale signs of an attempt at deception and maintain our
skepticism as we examine the evidence further. The most clear and common
sign comes when people assume an extra-animated front. When they smile
a lot, seem more than friendly, and even are quite entertaining, it is hard for
us to not be drawn in and lower ever so slightly our resistance to their
influence. Similarly, if people are trying to cover something up, they tend to
become extra vehement, righteous, and chatty. They are playing on the
conviction bias—if I deny or say something with so much gusto, with an air
of being a victim, it is hard to doubt me. We tend to take extra conviction
for truth.
Daily Law: When people try to explain their ideas with so much exaggerated energy, or
defend themselves with an intense level of denial, that is precisely when you should raise
your antennae.
The Laws of Human Nature, 3: See Through People’s Masks—The Law of Role-Playing

MAY 11
The Pattern
The problem that Howard Hughes presented to all those who chose to work
with him in some capacity was that he carefully constructed a public image
that concealed the glaring weaknesses in his character. Instead of the
irrational micromanager, he could present himself as the rugged
individualist and the consummate American maverick. Most damaging of
all was his ability to portray himself as a successful businessman leading a
billion-dollar empire. In truth, he had inherited a highly profitable tool
business from his father. Over the years, the only parts of his empire that
ran substantial profits were the tool company and an earlier version of
Hughes Aircraft that he had spun out of the tool company. The many other
businesses he personally ran—his later aircraft division, his film ventures,
his hotels and real estate in Las Vegas—all lost substantial amounts that
were fortunately covered by the other two. In fact, Hughes was a terrible
businessman, and the pattern of failures that revealed this was plain for
everyone to see. But this is the blind spot in human nature: we are poorly
equipped to gauge the character of the people we deal with. Their public
image, the reputation that precedes them, easily mesmerizes us. We are
captivated by appearances. If they surround themselves with some alluring
myth, as Hughes did, we want to believe in it. Instead of determining
people’s character—their ability to work with others, to keep to their
promises, to remain strong in adverse circumstances—we choose to work
with or hire people based on their glittering résumé, their intelligence, and
their charm. But even a positive trait such as intelligence is worthless if the
person also happens to be of weak or dubious character. And so, because of
our blind spot, we suffer under the irresolute leader, the micromanaging
boss, the conniving partner. This is the source of endless tragedies in
history, our pattern as a species.
Daily Law: Ignore the front that people display, the myth that surrounds them, and
instead plumb their depths for signs of their character. This can be seen in the patterns
they reveal from their past, the quality of their decisions, how they delegate authority
and work with others, and countless other signs.
The Laws of Human Nature, 4: Determine the Strength of People’s Character—The Law of
Compulsive Behavior

MAY 12
Be Wary of the Noble Gesture
It is a world not of angels but of angles, where men speak of moral principles but act on power
principles; a world where we are always moral and our enemies always immoral.
—rules for radicals, saul d. alinsky
The noble gesture is one of the most effective smoke screens—a favorite of
the supposed nonplayer. The art dealer Joseph Duveen was once confronted
with a terrible problem. The millionaires who had paid so dearly for
Duveen’s paintings were running out of wall space, and with inheritance
taxes getting ever higher, it seemed unlikely that they would keep buying.
The solution was the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., which
Duveen helped create in 1937 by getting Andrew Mellon to donate his
collection to it. The National Gallery was the perfect front for Duveen. In
one gesture, his clients avoided taxes, cleared wall space for new purchases,
and reduced the number of paintings on the market, maintaining the upward
pressure on their prices. All this while the donors created the appearance of
being public benefactors.
Daily Law: People want to believe apparently noble gestures are genuine, for the belief is
pleasant. They rarely notice how deceptive these gestures can be.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 3: Conceal Your Intentions

MAY 13
Recognize Deep Narcissists before You Fall for
Them
You can recognize deep narcissists by the following behavior patterns: If
they are ever insulted or challenged, they have no defense, nothing internal
to soothe them or validate their worth. They generally react with great rage,
thirsting for vengeance, full of a sense of righteousness. This is the only
way they know how to assuage their insecurities. In such battles, they will
position themselves as the wounded victim, confusing others and even
drawing sympathy. They are prickly and oversensitive. Almost everything
is taken personally. They can become quite paranoid and have enemies in
all directions to point to. You can see an impatient or distant look on their
face whenever you talk about something that does not directly involve them
in some way. They immediately turn the conversation back to themselves,
with some story or anecdote to distract from the insecurity behind it. They
can be prone to vicious bouts of envy if they see others getting the attention
they feel they deserve. They frequently display extreme self-confidence.
This always helps to gain attention, and it neatly covers up their gaping
inner emptiness and their fragmented sense of self. But beware if this
confidence is ever truly put to the test. When it comes to other people in
their lives, deep narcissists have an unusual relationship that is hard for us
to understand. They tend to see others as extensions of themselves, what is
known as self-objects. People exist as instruments for attention and
validation. Their desire is to control them like they control their own arm or
leg. In a relationship, they will slowly make the partner cut off contact with
friends—there must be no competition for attention.
Daily Law: In the end, deep narcissists must have everything revolve around them. The
best solution is to get out of their way so as not to get entangled in their never-ending
dramas, and you can do so by picking up on the warning signs.
The Laws of Human Nature, 2: Transform Self-Love into Empathy—The Law of
Narcissism

MAY 14
The Grandiose Leader
The trick grandiose leaders play is to place the emphasis on their cultural
tastes, not on the actual class they come from. They may fly first class and
wear the most expensive suits, but they counteract this by seeming to have
the same culinary tastes as the public, enjoy the same movies as others, and
avoid at all costs the whiff of cultural elitism. In fact, they will go out of
their way to ridicule the elites, even though they probably depend on such
experts to guide them. They are simply just like the common folk out there,
but with a lot more money and power. The public can now identify with
them despite the obvious contradictions. But the grandiosity of this goes
beyond merely gaining more attention. These leaders become vastly
enlarged by this identification with the masses. They are not merely one
man or woman but embody an entire nation or interest group. To follow
them is to be loyal to the group itself. To criticize them is to want to crucify
the leader and betray the cause. Even in the prosaic corporate world of
business we find such religious-style identification. If you notice such
paradoxes and primitive forms of popular association, stand back and
analyze the reality of what is going on. You will find at the core something
quasi-mystical, highly irrational, and quite dangerous in that the grandiose
leader now feels licensed to do whatever he or she wants in the name of the
public.
Daily Law: A simple fact about grandiose leaders: they depend on the attention they are
given. Do not feed their egos by giving them what they crave.
The Laws of Human Nature, 11: Know Your Limits—The Law of Grandiosity

MAY 15
The Machiavellian Gift
The essence of a nonplayer’s deception is distraction. Distracting the people
they want to deceive gives them the time and space to do something their
targets won’t notice. An act of kindness, generosity, or honesty is often the
most powerful form of distraction because it disarms other people’s
suspicions. It turns them into children, eagerly lapping up any kind of
affectionate gesture. In ancient China this was called “giving before you
take”—the giving makes it hard for the other person to notice the taking.
Nonplayers know: it is a device with infinite practical uses. Perhaps the
best, though, is one of generosity. Few people can resist a gift, even from
the most hardened enemy, which is why it is often the perfect way to disarm
people. A gift brings out the child in us, instantly lowering our defenses.
When we are children, all kinds of complicated feelings about our parents
center around gifts; we see the giving of a gift as a sign of love and
approval. And that emotional element never goes away. The recipients of
gifts, financial or otherwise, are suddenly as vulnerable as children,
especially when the gift comes from someone in authority. They cannot
help opening up; their will is loosened. Beware especially of the gift that
comes out of the blue. The one that is remarkable for the fact that you have
never been given a gift like it ever before. Most likely, the gift-giver is
loosening the soil before planting their seeds.
Daily Law: Although we often view other people’s actions in the most cynical light, we
rarely see the Machiavellian element of a gift, which quite often hides ulterior motives.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 12: Use Selective Honesty and Generosity to Disarm Your
Victim

MAY 16
The Fake Traditionalist
He who desires or attempts to reform the government of a state, and wishes to have it
accepted, must at least retain the semblance of the old forms; so that it may seem to the people
that there has been no change in the institutions, even though in fact they are entirely different
from the old ones.
—niccolò machiavelli
A strategy the clever nonplayer uses to disguise change: making a loud and
public display of support for the values of the past. Renaissance Florence
had a centuries-old republic and was suspicious of anyone who flouted its
traditions. Cosimo de’ Medici made a show of enthusiastic support for the
republic, while in reality he worked to bring the city under the control of his
wealthy family. In form, the Medicis retained the appearance of a republic;
in substance, they rendered it powerless. They quietly enacted a radical
change, while appearing to safeguard tradition.
Daily Law: Don’t let the person who seems to be a zealot for tradition fool you. Notice
how unconventional they really are.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 45: Preach the Need for Change, but Never Reform Too Much
at Once

MAY 17
Deciphering the Shadow
In the course of your life you will come upon people who have very
emphatic traits that set them apart and seem to be the source of their
strength—unusual confidence, exceptional niceness and affability, great
moral rectitude and a saintly aura, toughness and rugged masculinity, an
intimidating intellect. If you look closely at them, you may notice a slight
exaggeration to these traits, as if they were performing or laying it on just a
little too thick. As a student of human nature, you must understand the
reality: the emphatic trait generally rests on top of the opposite trait,
distracting and concealing it from public view. We can see two forms of
this: Early on in life some people sense a softness, vulnerability, or
insecurity that might prove embarrassing or uncomfortable. They
unconsciously develop the opposite trait, a resilience or toughness that lies
on the outside like a protective shell. The other scenario is that a person has
a quality that they feel might be antisocial—for instance, too much
ambition or an inclination to be selfish. They develop the opposite quality,
something very prosocial. In both cases, over the years they hone and
perfect this public image. The underlying weakness or antisocial trait is a
key component of their Shadow—something denied and repressed. But as
the laws of human nature dictate, the deeper the repression, the greater the
volatility of the Shadow.
Daily Law: Be extra wary around people who display emphatic traits. It is very easy to
get caught up in the appearance and first impression. Watch for the signs and emergence
of the opposite over time.
The Laws of Human Nature, 9: Confront Your Dark Side—The Law of Repression

MAY 18
Look Beneath the Mask
Remember that people are generally trying to present the best possible front
to the world. This means concealing their possible antagonistic feelings,
their desires for power or superiority, their attempts at ingratiation, and their
insecurities. They will use words to hide their feelings and distract you from
the reality, playing on people’s verbal fixation. They will also use certain
facial expressions that are easy to put on and that people assume mean
friendliness. Your task is to look past the distractions and become aware of
those signs that leak out automatically, revealing something of the true
emotion beneath the mask.
Daily Law: Train yourself to pay no attention to the front that people display.
The Laws of Human Nature, 3: See Through People’s Masks—The Law of Role-Playing

MAY 19
Demanding Equality
Another strategy of the supposed nonplayer is to demand equality in every
area of life. Everyone must be treated alike, whatever their status and
strength. But if, to avoid the taint of power, you attempt to treat everyone
equally and fairly, you will confront the problem that some people do
certain things better than others. Treating everyone equally means ignoring
their differences, elevating the less skillful and suppressing those who
excel.
Daily Law: Many of those who demand equality across the board are actually deploying
another power strategy, redistributing people’s rewards in a way that they determine.
Judge and reward people on the quality of their work.
The 48 Laws of Power, Preface

MAY 20
The Unambitious Front
Of all the disorders of the soul, envy is the only one no one confesses to.
—plutarch
When Ivan the Terrible died, Boris Godunov knew he was the only one on
the scene who could lead Russia. But if he sought the position eagerly, he
would stir up envy and suspicion among the boyars, so he refused the
crown, not once but several times. He made people insist that he take the
throne. George Washington used the same strategy to great effect, first in
refusing to keep the position of commander in chief of the American army,
second in resisting the presidency. In both cases he made himself more
popular than ever. People cannot envy the power that they themselves have
given a person who does not seem to desire it.
Daily Law: Be most suspicious of those who seem unambitious.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 46: Never Appear Too Perfect

MAY 21
The Aggressive Pleaser
In those days force and arms did prevail; but now the wit of the fox is everywhere on foot, so
hardly a faithful or virtuous man may be found.
—queen elizabeth i
There are people who are amazingly accommodating when you first meet
them, so much so that you tend to let them into your life rather quickly.
They smile a lot. They are upbeat and always willing to help. At some
point, you may return the favor by hiring them for a job or helping them in
their careers. You will detect along the way some cracks in the veneer—
perhaps they make a somewhat critical comment out of the blue, or you
hear from friends that they have been talking about you behind your back.
Then something ugly occurs—a blowup, some act of sabotage or betrayal—
so unlike that nice, charming person you first befriended. The truth is that
these types realize early on in life that they have aggressive, envious
tendencies that are hard to control. They want power. They intuit that such
inclinations will make life hard for them. Over many years they cultivate
the opposite facade—their niceness has an almost aggressive edge. Through
this stratagem they are able to gain social power. But they secretly resent
having to play such a role and be so deferential. They can’t maintain it.
Under stress or simply worn out by the effort, they will lash out and hurt
you. They can do this well now that they know you and your weak spots.
They will, of course, blame you for what ensues.
Daily Law: Your best defense is to be wary of people who are too quick to charm and
befriend, too nice and accommodating at first. Such extreme niceness is never natural.
The Laws of Human Nature, 9: Confront Your Dark Side—The Law of Repression

MAY 22
Determine the Strength of People’s Character
Remember this: weak character will neutralize all of the other possible good
qualities a person might possess. For instance, people of high intelligence
but weak character may come up with good ideas and even do a job well,
but they will crumble under pressure, or they will not take too kindly to
criticism, or they will think first and foremost of their own agenda, or their
arrogance and annoying qualities will cause others around them to quit,
harming the general environment. There are hidden costs to working with
them or hiring them. Someone less charming and intelligent but of strong
character will prove more reliable and productive over the long run. People
of real strength are as rare as gold, and if you find them, you should respond
as if you had a discovered a treasure.
Daily Law: In gauging strength or weakness, look at how people handle stressful
moments and responsibility. Look at their patterns: what have they actually completed
or accomplished?
The Laws of Human Nature, 4: Determine the Strength of People’s Character—The Law of
Compulsive Behavior

MAY 23
Don’t Always Believe Your Eyes
The CBS News reporter Lesley Stahl had been covering the 1984
presidential campaign, and as Election Day neared, she had an uneasy
feeling. It wasn’t so much that Ronald Reagan had focused on emotions and
moods rather than hard issues. It was more that the media was giving him a
free ride; he and his election team, she felt, were playing the press like a
fiddle. She decided to assemble a news piece that would show the public
how Reagan used television to cover up the negative effects of his policies.
A senior White House official telephoned her the evening it aired: “Great
piece,” he said. “What?” asked a stunned Stahl. “Great piece,” he repeated.
“Did you listen to what I said?” she asked. “Lesley, when you’re showing
four and a half minutes of great pictures of Ronald Reagan, no one listens to
what you say. Don’t you know that the pictures are overriding your message
because they conflict with your message? The public sees those pictures
and they block your message. They didn’t even hear what you said. So, in
our minds, it was a four-and-a-half-minute free ad for the Ronald Reagan
campaign for reelection.” Most of the men who worked on communications
for Reagan had a background in marketing. They knew the importance of
telling a story crisply, sharply, and with good visuals. Each morning they
went over what the headline of the day should be, and how they could shape
this into a short visual piece, getting the president into a video opportunity.
They paid detailed attention to the backdrop behind the president in the
Oval Office, to the way the camera framed him when he was with other
world leaders, and to having him filmed in motion, with his confident walk.
The visuals carried the message better than any words could do. As one
Reagan official said, “What are you going to believe, the facts or your
eyes?”
Daily Law: Nonplayers are masters at visual effects, to distract from their
manipulations. Guard yourself by paying more attention to the content and the facts
than the form of their message.
The Art of Seduction: Soft Seduction—How to Sell Anything to the Masses

MAY 24
Easy Money
This desire to get something for nothing has been very costly to many people who have dealt
with me and with other con men. . . . When people learn—as I doubt they will—that they can’t
get something for nothing, crime will diminish and we shall all live in greater harmony.
—joseph weil
Dangling the lure of a free lunch is the con artist’s stock in trade. No man
was better at this than the most successful con artist of our age, Joseph
Weil, aka “The Yellow Kid.” The Yellow Kid learned early that what made
his swindles possible was his fellow humans’ greed. Over the years Weil
devised many ways to seduce people with the prospect of easy money. He
would hand out “free” real estate—who could resist such an offer?—and
then the suckers would learn they had to pay $25 to register the sale. Since
the land was free, it seemed worth the high fee, and the Yellow Kid would
make thousands of dollars on the phony registration. In exchange he would
give his suckers a phony deed. Other times, he would tell suckers about a
fixed horse race, or a stock that would earn 200 percent in a few weeks. As
he spun his stories he would watch the sucker’s eyes open wide at the
thought of a free lunch. Don’t let yourself get lured in by the prospect of
easy money. As the Yellow Kid said himself: greed does not pay.
Daily Law: Be suspicious of anyone dangling the lure of something for nothing. Get-rich-
quick schemes are scams. The lottery is really a tax on the mathematically illiterate.
There are no shortcuts to power.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 40: Despise the Free Lunch

MAY 25
Avoid the Drama Magnet
In anything, it is a mistake to think one can perform an action or behave in a certain way once
and no more.
—cesare pavese
They will draw you in with their exciting presence. They have unusual
energy and stories to tell. Their features are animated and they can be quite
witty. They are fun to be around, until the drama turns ugly. As children,
they learned that the only way to get love and attention that lasted was to
enmesh their parents in their troubles and problems, which had to be large
enough to engage the parents emotionally over time. This became a habit,
their way of feeling alive and wanted. Most people shrink from any kind of
confrontation, but they seem to live for it. As you get to know them better,
you hear more stories of bickering and battles in their life, but they manage
to always position themselves as the victim. You must realize that their
greatest need is to get their hooks into you by any means possible. They
will embroil you in their drama to the point that you will feel guilty for
disengaging.
Daily Law: It is best to recognize them as early as possible, before you become enmeshed
and dragged down. Examine their past for evidence of the pattern and run for the hills if
you suspect you are dealing with such a type.
The Laws of Human Nature, 4: Determine the Strength of People’s Character—The Law of
Compulsive Behavior

MAY 26
The Sincerity Ploy
A trick to be aware of comes from La Rochefoucauld, who wrote,
“Sincerity is found in very few men, and is often the cleverest of ruses—
one is sincere in order to draw out the confidence and secrets of the other.”
Daily Law: By pretending to bare their heart to you, clever nonplayers know they make
it more likely that you will reveal your own secrets. They give you a false confession in
hopes that you will give them a real one.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 14: Pose as a Friend, Work as a Spy

MAY 27
Detect Their True Motives
Knowing any man’s mainspring of motive, you have, as it were, the key to his will.
—baltasar gracián
In the Machiavellian perspective, few events in public life are rarely what
they seem to be. Power depends on appearances, on manipulating what the
public sees. On seeming good, while doing what is necessary to gain and
maintain power. Sometimes it is easy to see through the fog and pick out
people’s motives or intentions. But usually, it is quite complicated—what is
really going on, we ask ourselves? In the new media environment, the
ability to create fog and confusion has been greatly enhanced. Stories and
rumors can be planted with virtually no source behind them. The story will
spread virally. Before people begin to question the validity of story A, their
attention is distracted by something else, story B or C; in the meantime,
story A takes root in people’s minds in subtle ways. It is an added layer of
uncertainty and doubt that makes it quite easy for all kinds of insinuation
games. To decipher events that seem hard to read, I sometimes rely on a
strategy that comes from the Latin Cui bono? It was first used in this
context by Cicero and it literally translates to, “For whose good, or
benefit?” It means: when you are trying to figure out the motives behind
some murky action, look to see whom it really benefits in the end, and then
work backward. Self-interest rules the world.
Daily Law: Don’t be fooled by appearances, by what happens, by what people do and
say. Always ask: Cui bono?
powerseductionandwar.com, November 23, 2007

MAY 28
The Effective Truth
For the great majority of mankind are satisfied with appearances, as though they were realities.
—niccolò machiavelli
Machiavelli calls this “the effective truth,” and it is his most brilliant
concept, in my opinion. It works like this: People will say almost anything
to justify their actions, to give them a moral or sanctimonious veneer. The
only thing that is clear, the only way we can judge people and cut away all
this crap is by looking at their actions, the results of their actions. That is
their effective truth. Take the Pope, for instance. He will sermonize forever
about the poor, about morality, about peace, but in the meantime he presides
over the most powerful organization in the world (in Machiavelli’s time).
And his actions are basically concerned with increasing this power. The
effective truth is that the Pope is a political animal, and that his decisions
inevitably involve maintaining the Catholic Church’s preeminent place in
the world. The religious verbiage is simply a part of his political
gamesmanship, serving as a distracting device.
Daily Law: Judge people by the results of their actions and maneuvers, and not by the
stories they tell.
powerseductionandwar.com, July 28, 2006

MAY 29
Nothing Personal
A lot of people in life have terrible problems dealing with politics, with
disassociating their emotions from the work world or the realm of power.
They take everything personally. I myself had a terrible problem working in
offices, working in Hollywood, working in journalism, and so on. I’m a bit
naive, and a lot of other people are too. And basically what happens in these
situations is, because nobody trains you for these things, you get emotional
—you take what people say and do personally. The moment you get
wrapped up in the emotions of it, you’re done. You have to be able to look
at life as if it were moves on a chessboard. Marcus Aurelius has this great
quote that I’ll paraphrase: if you’re in a boxing ring and the boxer punches
you in the face, you don’t whine about the unfairness or the cruelty. No,
that’s just part of the game. I want you to see life like this: If someone does
something to you that is nasty, get control of your emotions. Don’t react.
Don’t get upset. Look at it as moves on a chessboard. They are moving you.
Don’t listen to their words, because people will say anything. Look at their
moves. Look at their maneuvers. Look at their past actions. Actions tell you
who they are, not what they say. That kind of self-control is immensely
liberating and empowering.
Daily Law: Judging people by their actions and not taking them personally will free you
up, help you keep your emotional balance.
“Robert Greene: Mastery and Research,” Finding Mastery: Conversations with Michael
Gervais, January 25, 2017

MAY 30
Everyone Wants More Power
There’s the famous line from Lord Acton that absolute power corrupts
absolutely. People quote it a lot. But Malcolm X said the opposite is also
true, namely that having power may corrupt, but having absolutely no
power corrupts absolutely. I maintain in The 48 Laws of Power that the
feeling of having no power over people and events is generally unbearable
to us—when we feel helpless we feel miserable. No one wants less power;
everyone wants more.
Daily Law: When in doubt, assume that people are doing what they are doing and saying
what they are saying because they want more power, not less.
“Robert Greene: The 48 Laws of Power,” Between the Lines with Barry Kibrick, May 15,
2015

MAY 31
Know Who You’re Dealing With
Be convinced, that there are no persons so insignificant and inconsiderable, but may, some
time or other, have it in their power to be of use to you; which they certainly will not, if you
have once shown them contempt.
—lord chesterfield
The ability to measure people is the most important skill of all in gathering
and conserving power. Without it you are blind: not only will you offend
the wrong people, you will choose the wrong types to work on and will
think you are flattering people when you are actually insulting them. Before
embarking on any move, take the measure of your mark or potential
opponent. Otherwise you will waste time and make mistakes. Study
people’s weaknesses, the chinks in their armor, their areas of both pride and
insecurity. Know their ins and outs before you even decide whether or not
to deal with them. Two final words of caution: First, in judging and
measuring your opponent, never rely on your instincts. You will make the
greatest mistakes of all if you rely on such inexact indicators. Nothing can
substitute for gathering concrete knowledge. Study and spy on your
opponent for however long it takes; this will pay off in the long run.
Second, never trust appearances. Anyone with a serpent’s heart can use a
show of kindness to cloak it; a person who is blustery on the outside is often
really a coward. Never trust the version that people give of themselves—it
is utterly unreliable.
Daily Law: What possible good can come from ignorance about other people? Learn to
tell the lions from the lambs or pay the price.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 19: Know Who You’re Dealing With—Do Not Offend the
Wrong Person

June
The Divine Craft
mastering the arts of indirection and manipulation
In Greek myths, in India’s Mahabharata cycle, in the Middle Eastern epic of
Gilgamesh, it is the privilege of the gods to use deceptive arts; a great man,
Odysseus for instance, was judged by his ability to rival the craftiness of the
gods, stealing some of their divine power by matching them in wits and
deception. Deception is a developed art of civilization and the most potent
weapon in the game of power. Deception and masquerade should not be
seen as ugly or immoral. All human interaction requires deception on many
levels, and in some ways what separates humans from animals is our ability
to lie and deceive. Outwardly, you must seem to respect the niceties, but
inwardly, unless you are a fool, you learn quickly to be prudent, and to do
as Napoleon advised: place your iron hand inside a velvet glove. If you can
master the arts of deception and indirection, learning to seduce, charm,
deceive, and subtly outmaneuver your opponents, you will attain the heights
of power. The month of June will teach you how to make people bend to
your will without their realizing what you have done. And if they do not
realize what you have done, they will neither resent nor resist you.
A few years ago, to help my mind get over the grind of writing The 33
Strategies of War, I bought a pool table. After a hard day’s work, I would
settle into the game of pool and make myself completely focus on the green
felt, the cue stick, the stripes and solids. It ended up being the perfect choice
of a diversion. Pool, it became clear to me, is all about angles. First, there
are simple angles, as you must hit the cue ball to either side when you are
not straight on. This is often not as easy as it seems. Then, there are the
angles you take when you bank the targeted ball off the sides, an entirely
new game in and of itself. This goes further with the double bank shot.
There are the angles of the combination shots, and even more slippery
combinations when you use a solid to slide off a stripe and knock in a solid.
Then there is the whole language of angles that comes into play when you
are thinking ahead and trying to keep the cue ball in solid position, working
with the open spaces of the table.
Finally, there are the abstract angles in psychological space and time:
Playing with your opponent’s mind; letting him get ahead, but putting
himself in a corner in relation to the final balls on the table; snookering him
into impossible positions (the trick bag); or seeing the entire table and how
you will run it in short order. In other words, there are layers of angles, all
more subtle and artistic as you go up the ladder and improve your game. I
am no longer a rank beginner, but I am certainly no hustler, not yet.
To play well, to raise your game, your focus must be total.
As in pool, so in life. Suckers and beginners are locked into the single-
ball-at-a-time mentality and get all excited when they knock one in on a
clever shot, but leave themselves nowhere to go. They never learn the
angles above the angles above the angles.
Then there are people who raise their game a little, who give the
appearance of knowing how to hustle, who can actually knock in a few
shots in a row. In Hollywood, I worked for some people like that. They
would let others do the work and take all the credit. One director I knew
would constantly play the game of hiring someone else to direct the pet
script he had written, someone young and eager and inexperienced. This
person would inevitably fail rather early on in the process; the director
would have to come in and rescue the situation, his goal all along. Better to
set it up that way than for him to be seen as being overly ambitious and
greedy, always insisting he direct all the projects on his plate. Similar to
how Pat Riley engineered his whole return to coaching.
But these types do not really see the whole table, or have a good
endgame mapped out. They have some angles, but not of a high order. They
never really get that far. They stir up much resentment and resistance. They
are low- to mid-level hustlers.
An acquaintance of mine who runs his own media business came to me a
few years ago with a problem: a high-level employee had leaked something
embarrassing about him to other employees. His angle in leaking this was to
get the boss’s attention and warn him about what else he might do. He was
worried the boss was planning to fire him, and so this was his warning shot
across the bow.
My advice to him was to be aware first of what the leaker was up to, and
then to not indicate any kind of negative reaction on his part. He was to
continue seeming friendly, as if nothing had happened. This was a front, a
distraction. The employee would have to focus on this and figure out what
it meant. Was the boss being coy? Did he not care? Was he trying to win
him back over? Was he intimidated? This would buy the boss time.
As we then investigated the situation, we saw more of what was going
on and a solution came to us. First, he fired two other employees who were
allies of the leaker and obvious troublemakers. A third he got transferred to
an office in a distant location. All of this was ostensibly done as a reaction
to their lack of performance and had no apparent links to the leaker in
question. The purpose was twofold: to isolate the target, make it harder for
him to conspire and stir things up; and to send an indirect warning to him
that the boss was not someone he could easily mess with.
His moves were not simple to figure out; they got the leaker’s attention
and froze him in place. As we considered the leaker’s possible reactions to
these moves and how he might ratchet it all up if he felt threatened, we
worked on a higher angle to this reaction, so that we had as many bases as
possible covered. We had mapped out a way to even checkmate him if he
maneuvered to go public with his information.
Iceberg Slim is one of my favorite authors. To Iceberg, the world is
divided between hustler and sucker. You are either one or the other. The
sucker has no angles on life, no sense of the art of indirection, and can only
make one stupid play at a time. The hustler always aims for the angles,
learns how to play them, and becomes an artist in the game.

JUNE 1
Wear the Appropriate Mask
You cannot succeed at deception unless you take a somewhat distanced
approach to yourself—unless you can be many different people, wearing
the mask that the day and the moment require. With such a flexible
approach to all appearances, including your own, you lose a lot of the
inward heaviness that holds people down. Make your face as malleable as
the actor’s, work to conceal your intentions from others, practice luring
people into traps.
Daily Law: Playing with appearances and mastering arts of deception are among the
aesthetic pleasures of life. They are also key components in the acquisition of power.
The 48 Laws of Power, Preface

JUNE 2
Use Absence to Increase Respect
If I am often seen at the theater, people will cease to notice me.
—napoleon
Today, in a world inundated with presence through the flood of images, the
game of withdrawal is powerful. We rarely know when to withdraw
anymore, and nothing seems private, so we are awed by anyone who is able
to disappear by choice. In the science of economics, the law of scarcity
gives us this truth: too much circulation makes the price go down. But by
withdrawing something from the market, you create instant value. In
seventeenth-century Holland, the upper classes wanted to make the tulip
more than just a beautiful flower—they wanted it to be a kind of status
symbol. Making the flower scarce, indeed almost impossible to obtain, they
sparked what was later called tulipomania. A single flower was now worth
more than its weight in gold. Extend the law of scarcity to your own skills.
Make what you are offering the world rare and hard to find, and you
instantly increase its value.
Daily Law: The more you are seen and heard from, the more common you appear. If you
are already established in a group, temporary withdrawal from it will make you more
talked about, even more admired. You must learn when to leave. Create value through
scarcity.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 16: Use Absence to Increase Respect and Honor

JUNE 3
Take Control of Your Image
The man who intends to make his fortune in this ancient capital of the world [Rome] must be a
chameleon susceptible of reflecting the colors of the atmosphere that surrounds him—a
Proteus apt to assume every form, every shape.
—giovanni casanova
People will tend to judge you based on your outward appearance. If you are
not careful and simply assume that it is best to be yourself, they will begin
to ascribe to you all kinds of qualities that have little to do with who you are
but correspond to what they want to see. All of this can confuse you, make
you feel insecure, and consume your attention. Internalizing their
judgments, you will find it hard to focus on your work. Your only protection
is to turn this dynamic around by consciously molding these appearances,
creating the image that suits you, and controlling people’s judgments. At
times you will find it appropriate to stand back and create some mystery
around you, heightening your presence. At other times you will want to be
more direct and impose a more specific appearance. In general, you never
settle on one image or give people the power to completely figure you out.
You are always one step ahead of the public.
Daily Law: Never let people think they have you completely figured out. Create some
mystery around you.
Mastery, IV: See People as They Are—Social Intelligence

JUNE 4
Play on People’s Instinct to Trust Appearances
Appearance and intention inevitably ensnare people when artfully used, even if people sense
that there is an ulterior intention behind the overt appearance
—yagyū munenori
Basic to an ability to deceive is a simple truth about human nature: our first
instinct is to always trust appearances. We cannot go around doubting the
reality of what we see and hear—constantly imagining that appearances
concealed something else would exhaust and terrify us. This fact makes it
relatively easy to deceive. Simply dangle an object you seem to desire, a
goal you seem to aim for, in front of people’s eyes and they will take the
appearance for reality. Once their eyes focus on the decoy, they will fail to
notice what you are really up to.
Daily Law: Hide your intentions behind a cloak of carefully constructed appearances.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 3: Conceal Your Intentions

JUNE 5
Create Dramatic Effects
At the time of Franklin Delano Roosevelt’s 1932 presidential election, the
United States was in the midst of a dire economic crisis. Banks were failing
at an alarming rate. Shortly after winning the election, Roosevelt went into
a kind of retreat. He said nothing about his plans or his cabinet
appointments. He even refused to meet the sitting president, Herbert
Hoover, to discuss the transition. By the time of Roosevelt’s inauguration,
the country was in a state of high anxiety. In his inaugural address,
Roosevelt shifted gears. He made a powerful speech, making it clear that he
intended to lead the country in a completely new direction, sweeping away
the timid gestures of his predecessors. From then on the pace of his
speeches and public decisions—cabinet appointments, bold legislation—
unfolded at an incredibly rapid rate. The period after the inauguration
became known as the “Hundred Days,” and its success in altering the
country’s mood partly stemmed from Roosevelt’s clever pacing and use of
dramatic contrast. He held his audience in suspense, then hit them with a
series of bold gestures that seemed all the more momentous because they
came from nowhere.
Daily Law: Use theatrical timing to surprise and divert. Learn to orchestrate events like
Roosevelt, never revealing all your cards at once, but unfolding them in a way that
heightens their dramatic effect.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 25: Re-create Yourself

JUNE 6
Play Your Role Well
In method acting you train yourself to be able to display the proper
emotions on command. You feel sad when your part calls for it by recalling
your own experiences that caused such emotions, or if necessary by simply
imagining such experiences. The point is that you have control. In real life
it is not possible to train ourselves to such a degree, but if you have no
control, if you are continually emoting whatever comes to you in the
moment, you will subtly signal weakness and an overall lack of self-
mastery. Learn how to consciously put yourself in the right emotional mood
by imagining how and why you should feel the emotion suitable to the
occasion or performance you are about to give. Surrender to the feeling for
the moment so that the face and body are naturally animated. Sometimes,
by actually making yourself smile or frown, you will experience some of
the emotions that go with these expressions. Just as important, train yourself
to return to a more neutral expression at a natural moment, careful to not go
too far with your emoting. Realize the following: the word personality
comes from the Latin persona, which means “mask.” In public, we all wear
masks, and this has a positive function. If we displayed exactly who we are
and spoke our minds truthfully, we would offend almost everyone and
reveal qualities that are best concealed. Having a persona, playing a role
well, actually protects us from people looking too closely at us, with all of
the insecurities that would churn up.
Daily Law: We are all actors in the theater of life and the better you play your role and
wear the proper mask, the more power you will accrue.
The Laws of Human Nature, 3: See Through People’s Masks—The Law of Role-Playing

JUNE 7
Never Impugn People’s Intelligence
The best way to be well received by all is to clothe yourself in the skin of the dumbest of
brutes.
—baltasar gracián
The feeling that someone else is more intelligent than we are is almost
intolerable. We usually try to justify it in different ways: “He only has book
knowledge, whereas I have real knowledge.” “Her parents paid for her to
get a good education. If my parents had had as much money, if I had been
as privileged . . . ” “He’s not as smart as he thinks.” Last but not least: “She
may know her narrow little field better than I do, but beyond that she’s
really not smart at all. Even Einstein was a boob outside physics.” Given
how important the idea of intelligence is to most people’s vanity, it is
critical never inadvertently to insult or impugn a person’s brain power. That
is an unforgivable sin. But if you can make this iron rule work for you, it
opens up all sorts of avenues of deception. The feeling of intellectual
superiority you give them will disarm their suspicion-muscles.
Daily Law: Subliminally reassure people that they are more intelligent than you are, or
even that you are a bit of a moron, and you can run rings around them.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 21: Play a Sucker to Catch a Sucker—Seem Dumber Than
Your Mark

JUNE 8
Distract Them from Your Real Goal
During the War of the Spanish Succession in 1711, the Duke of
Marlborough, head of the English army, wanted to destroy a key French
fort, because it protected a vital thoroughfare into France. Yet he knew that
if he destroyed it, the French would realize what he wanted—to advance
down that road. Instead, then, he merely captured the fort, and garrisoned it
with some of his troops, making it appear as if he wanted it for some
purpose of his own. The French attacked the fort and the duke let them
recapture it. Once they had it back, though, they destroyed it, figuring that
the duke had wanted it for some important reason. Now that the fort was
gone, the road was unprotected, and Marlborough could easily march into
France. Use this tactic in the following manner: hide your intentions not by
closing up (with the risk of appearing secretive and making people
suspicious) but by talking endlessly about your desires and goals—just not
your real ones. You will kill three birds with one stone: you appear friendly,
open, and trusting; you conceal your intentions; and you send your rivals on
time-consuming wild-goose chases.
Daily Law: Seem to want something in which you are actually not at all interested and
your enemies will be thrown off the scent, making all kinds of errors in their
calculations.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 3: Conceal Your Intentions

JUNE 9
Give People the Opportunity to Feel Superior
Some people will see an appeal to their self-interest as ugly and ignoble.
They actually prefer to be able to exercise charity, mercy, and justice, which
are their ways of feeling superior to you: when you beg them for help, you
emphasize their power and position. They are strong enough to need
nothing from you except the chance to feel superior. This is the wine that
intoxicates them. They are dying to fund your project, to introduce you to
powerful people—provided, of course, that all this is done in public, and for
a good cause (usually the more public, the better). Not everyone, then, can
be approached through cynical self-interest. Some people will be put off by
it, because they don’t want to seem to be motivated by such things. They
need opportunities to display their good heart. Do not be shy. Give them
that opportunity. It’s not as if you are conning them by asking for help—it is
really their pleasure to give, and to be seen giving.
Daily Law: You must figure out what makes others tick. When they ooze greed, appeal to
their greed. When they want to look charitable and noble, appeal to their charity.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 13: When Asking for Help, Appeal to People’s Self-Interest,
Never to Their Mercy or Gratitude

JUNE 10
Infect the Group with Productive Emotions
Infect the group with a sense of resolution that emanates from you. You are
not upset by setbacks; you keep advancing and working on problems. You
are persistent. The group senses this, and individuals feel embarrassed for
becoming hysterical over the slightest shift in fortune. You can try to infect
the group with confidence, but be careful that this does not slip into
grandiosity. Your confidence and that of the group mostly stems from a
successful track record. Periodically change up routines, surprise the group
with something new or challenging. This will wake them up and stir them
out of the complacency that can settle into any group that achieves success.
Most important, showing a lack of fear and an overall openness to new
ideas will have the most therapeutic effect of all. The members will become
less defensive, which encourages them to think more on their own, and not
operate as automatons.
Daily Law: People are naturally more emotional and permeable to the moods of others.
Work with human nature and turn this into a positive by infecting the group with the
proper set of emotions. People are more susceptible to the moods and attitudes of the
leader than of anyone else.
The Laws of Human Nature, 14: Resist the Downward Pull of the Group—The Law of
Conformity

JUNE 11
Strike the Shepherd
When the tree falls, the monkeys scatter.
—chinese saying
Within any group, trouble can most often be traced to a single source—the
unhappy, chronically dissatisfied one who will always stir up dissension and
infect the group with his or her ill ease. Before you know what hit you, the
dissatisfaction spreads. Act before it becomes impossible to disentangle one
strand of misery from another, or to see how the whole thing started. First,
recognize troublemakers by their overbearing presence, or by their
complaining nature. Once you spot them do not try to reform them or
appease them—that will only make things worse. Do not attack them,
whether directly or indirectly, for they are poisonous in nature and will
work underground to destroy you. Do this instead: Banish them before it is
too late. Separate them from the group before they become the eye of a
whirlpool. Do not give them time to stir up anxieties and sow discontent; do
not give them room to move. Let one person suffer so that the rest can live
in peace.
Daily Law: When the leader is gone, the center of gravity is gone; there is nothing to
revolve around and everything falls apart. Strike at the source of the trouble and the
sheep will scatter.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 42: Strike the Shepherd and the Sheep Will Scatter

JUNE 12
Use the Surrender Tactic
When you are weaker, never fight for honor’s sake; choose surrender
instead. Surrender gives you time to recover, time to torment and irritate
your conquerors, time to wait for their power to wane. Do not give them the
satisfaction of fighting and defeating you—surrender first. By turning the
other cheek you infuriate and unsettle them. Make surrender a tool of
power. And keep in mind the following: people trying to make a show of
their authority are easily deceived by the surrender tactic. Your outward
sign of submission makes them feel important; satisfied that you respect
them, they become easier targets for a later counterattack.
Daily Law: If you find yourself temporarily weakened, the surrender tactic is perfect for
raising yourself up again—it disguises your ambition; it teaches you patience and self-
control, key skills in the game.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 22: Use the Surrender Tactic—Transform Weakness into
Power

JUNE 13
Lead from the Front
Hannibal was the greatest general of antiquity by reason of his admirable comprehension of
the morale of combat. . . . His men were not better than the Roman soldiers. They were not as
well-armed, one-half less in number. Yet he was always the conqueror. He understood the
value of morale. He had the absolute confidence of his people.
—colonel charles ardant du picq
Morale is contagious, and you, as leader, set the tone. Ask for sacrifices you
won’t make yourself (doing everything through assistants) and your troops
grow lethargic and resentful; act too nice, show too much concern for their
well-being, and you drain the tension from their souls and create spoiled
children who whine at the slightest pressure or request for more work.
Personal example is the best way to set the proper tone and build morale.
When your people see your devotion to the cause, they ingest your spirit of
energy and self-sacrifice. A few timely criticisms here and there and they
will only try harder to please you, to live up to your high standards. Instead
of having to push and pull your army, you will find them chasing after you.
Daily Law: In commanding influence in the world, human beings—a devoted army of
followers—are more valuable than money. They will do things for you that money
cannot buy.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 7: Transform Your War into a Crusade—Morale
Strategies

JUNE 14
Deter with a Threatening Presence
When opponents are unwilling to fight with you, it is because they think it is contrary to their
interests, or because you have misled them into thinking so.
—sun tzu
We all have to fit in, play politics, seem nice and accommodating. Most
often this works fine, but in moments of danger and difficulty being seen as
so nice will work against you: it says that you can be pushed around,
discouraged, and obstructed. If you have never been willing to fight back
before, no threatening gesture you make will be credible. Understand: there
is great value in letting people know that when necessary you can let go of
your niceness and be downright difficult and nasty. A few clear, violent
demonstrations will suffice. Once people see you as a fighter, they will
approach you with a little fear in their hearts. And as Machiavelli said, it is
more useful to be feared than to be loved. Uncertainty is sometimes better
than overt threat: if your opponents are never sure what messing with you
will cost, they will not want to find out.
Daily Law: Build up a reputation: You’re a little crazy. Fighting you is not worth it.
Create this reputation and make it credible with a few impressive—impressively violent
—acts.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 10: Create a Threatening Presence—Deterrence
Strategies

JUNE 15
The Art of Presence and Absence
Absence diminishes minor passions and inflames great ones, as the wind douses a candle and
fans a fire.
—françois de la rochefoucauld
Leaders must know how to balance presence and absence. In general, it is
best to lean slightly more in the direction of absence, so that when you do
appear before the group, you generate excitement and drama. If done right,
in those moments when you are not available, people will be thinking of
you. Today people have lost this art. They are far too present and familiar,
their every move displayed on social media. That might make you relatable,
but it also makes you seem just like everyone else, and it is impossible to
project authority with such an ordinary presence. Keep in mind that talking
too much is a type of overpresence that grates and reveals weakness.
Silence is a form of absence and withdrawal that draws attention; it spells
self-control and power; when you do talk, it has a greater effect. In a similar
fashion, if you commit a mistake, do not overexplain and overapologize.
You make it clear you accept responsibility and are accountable for any
failures, and then you move on. Your contrition should be relatively quiet;
your subsequent actions will show you have learned the lesson. Avoid
appearing defensive and whiny if attacked. You are above that.
Daily Law: If you are too present and familiar, always available and visible, you seem too
banal. You give people no room to idealize you. But if you are too aloof, people cannot
identify with you.
The Laws of Human Nature, 15: Make Them Want to Follow You—The Law of Fickleness

JUNE 16
Get Others to Play with the Cards You Deal
Words like “freedom,” “options,” and “choice” evoke a power of possibility
far beyond the reality of the benefits they entail. When examined closely,
the choices we have—in the marketplace, in elections, in our jobs—tend to
have noticeable limitations: they are often a matter of a choice simply
between A and B, with the rest of the alphabet out of the picture. Yet as
long as the faintest mirage of choice flickers on, we rarely focus on the
missing options. We “choose” to believe that the game is fair, and that we
have our freedom. We prefer not to think too much about the depth of our
liberty to choose.
This unwillingness to probe the smallness of our choices stems from the
fact that too much freedom creates a kind of anxiety. The phrase “unlimited
options” sounds infinitely promising, but unlimited options would actually
paralyze us and cloud our ability to choose. Our limited range of choices
comforts us. This supplies the clever and cunning with enormous
opportunities for deception. For people who are choosing between
alternatives find it hard to believe they are being manipulated or deceived;
they cannot see that you are allowing them a small amount of free will in
exchange for a much more powerful imposition of your own will. Setting
up a narrow range of choices, then, should always be a part of your
deceptions.
Daily Law: There is a saying: if you can get the bird to walk into the cage on its own, it
will sing that much more prettily. Give people options that come out in your favor,
whichever one they choose. Force them to make choices between the lesser of two evils,
both of which serve your purpose.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 31: Control the Options—Get Others to Play with the Cards
You Deal

JUNE 17
The Seductive Visuals
The people are always impressed by the superficial appearance of things.
—niccolò machiavelli
When the con artist Yellow Kid Weil created a newsletter touting the phony
stocks he was peddling, he called it the “Red Letter Newsletter” and had it
printed, at considerable expense, in red ink. The color created a sense of
urgency, power, and good fortune. Weil recognized details like these as keys
to deception—as do modern advertisers and mass-marketers. If you use
“gold” in the title of anything you are trying to sell, for example, print it in
gold. Since the eye predominates, people will respond more to the color
than to the word.
Daily Law: Never neglect the way you arrange things visually. Factors like color have
enormous symbolic resonance.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 37: Create Compelling Spectacles

JUNE 18
Never Reform Too Much at Once
It must be considered that there is nothing more difficult to carry out, nor more doubtful of
success, nor more dangerous to handle, than to initiate a new order of things.
—niccolò machiavelli
Human psychology contains many dualities, one of them being that even
while people understand the need for change, knowing how important it is
for institutions and individuals to be occasionally renewed, they are also
irritated and upset by changes that affect them personally. They know that
change is necessary, and that novelty provides relief from boredom, but
deep inside they cling to the past. Change in the abstract, or superficial
change, they desire, but a change that upsets core habits and routines is
deeply disturbing to them. No revolution has gone without a powerful later
reaction against it, for in the long run the void it creates proves too
unsettling to the human animal, who unconsciously associates such voids
with death and chaos. The opportunity for change and renewal seduces
people to the side of the revolution, but once their enthusiasm fades, which
it will, they are left with a certain emptiness. Yearning for the past, they
create an opening for it to creep back in. It is far easier, and less bloody, to
play a kind of con game. Preach change as much as you like, and even enact
your reforms, but give them the comforting appearance of older events and
traditions.
Daily Law: If you are new to a position of power, or trying to build a power base, make a
show of respecting the old way of doing things. If change is necessary, make it feel like a
gentle improvement on the past.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 45: Preach the Need for Change, but Never Reform Too Much
at Once

JUNE 19
Make Others Come to You
Filippo Brunelleschi, the great Renaissance artist and architect, was a great
practitioner of the art of making others come to him as a sign of his power.
On one occasion he had been engaged to repair the dome of the Santa Maria
del Fiore cathedral in Florence. The commission was important and
prestigious. But when the city officials hired a second man, Lorenzo
Ghiberti, to work with Brunelleschi, the great artist brooded in secret. He
knew that Ghiberti had gotten the job through his connections, and that he
would do none of the work and get half the credit. At a critical moment of
the construction, then, Brunelleschi suddenly developed a mysterious
illness. He had to stop work, but pointed out to city officials that they had
hired Ghiberti, who should have been able to continue the work on his own.
Soon it became clear that Ghiberti was useless and the officials came
begging to Brunelleschi. He ignored them, insisting that Ghiberti should
finish the project, until finally they realized the problem: they fired
Ghiberti. By some miracle, Brunelleschi recovered within days. He did not
have to throw a tantrum or make a fool of himself; he simply practiced the
art of making others come to you.
Daily Law: If on one occasion you make it a point of dignity that others must come to
you and you succeed, they will continue to do so even after you stop trying.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 8: Make Other People Come to You—Use Bait if Necessary

JUNE 20
Display a Hint of Weakness
Learn to transform your vulnerabilities into power. The game is subtle: if
you wallow in your weakness, overplay your hand, you will be seen as
angling for sympathy, or, worse, as pathetic. No, what works best is to
allow people an occasional glimpse into the soft, frail side of your
character, and usually only after they have known you for a while. That
glimpse will humanize you, lowering their suspicions, and preparing the
ground for a deeper attachment. Normally strong and in control, at moments
you let go, give in to your weakness, let them see it.
Daily Law: Do not struggle against your vulnerabilities, or try to repress them, but put
them into play.
The Art of Seduction: Disarm Through Strategic Weakness and Vulnerability

JUNE 21
The Slow Power Grab
Ambition can creep as well as soar.
—edmund burke
In almost every film Alfred Hitchcock made, he had to go through the same
wars, gradually wresting control of the film from the producer, the actors,
and the rest of the team. His struggles with screenwriters were a microcosm
of the larger war. Hitchcock always wanted his vision for a film to be
exactly reflected in the script, but too firm a hand on his writer’s neck
would get him nothing except resentment and mediocre work. So instead he
moved slowly, starting out by giving the writer room to work loosely off his
notes, then asking for revisions that shaped the script his way. His control
became obvious only gradually, and by that time the writer was emotionally
tied to the project and, however frustrated, was working for his approval. A
very patient man, Hitchcock let his power plays unfold over time, so that
producer, writer, and stars understood the completeness of his domination
only when the film was finished. To gain control of any project, you must
be willing to make time your ally. If you start out with complete control,
you sap people’s spirit and stir up envy and resentment. So begin by
generating the illusion that you’re all working together on a team effort;
then slowly nibble away. If in the process you make people angry, do not
worry. That’s just a sign that their emotions are engaged, which means they
can be manipulated.
Daily Law: Overt manipulation and power grabs are dangerous, creating envy, distrust,
and suspicion. Often the best solution is to move slowly.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 29: Take Small Bites—The Fait Accompli Strategy

JUNE 22
Control What You Reveal
Never start moving your own lips and teeth before the subordinates do. The longer I keep
quiet, the sooner others move their lips and teeth. As they move their lips and teeth, I can
thereby understand their real intentions. . . . If the sovereign is not mysterious, the ministers
will find opportunity to take and take.
—han fei-tzu
Power is in many ways a game of appearances, and when you say less than
necessary, you inevitably appear greater and more powerful than you are.
Your silence will make other people uncomfortable. Humans are machines
of interpretation and explanation; they have to know what you are thinking.
When you carefully control what you reveal, they cannot pierce your
intentions or your meaning. Your short answers will put them on the
defensive, and they will jump in, nervously filling the silence with all kinds
of comments that will reveal valuable information about them and their
weaknesses. They will leave a meeting with you feeling as if they had been
robbed, and they will go home and ponder your every word. This extra
attention to your brief comments will only add to your power.
Daily Law: Powerful people impress and intimidate by saying less.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 4: Always Say Less Than Necessary

JUNE 23
Play to Their High Self-Opinion
The true spirit of conversation consists more in bringing out the cleverness of others than in
showing a great deal of it yourself.
—jean de la bruyère
If you need a favor from people, do not remind them of what you have done
for them in the past, trying to stimulate feelings of gratitude. Gratitude is
rare because it tends to remind us of our helplessness, our dependence on
others. We like to feel independent. Instead, remind them of the good things
they have done for you in the past. This will help confirm their self-opinion:
“Yes, I am generous.” And once reminded, they will want to continue to
live up to this image and do yet another good deed. A similar effect can
come from suddenly forgiving your enemies and forging a rapprochement.
In the emotional turmoil this creates, they will feel obligated to live up to
the high opinion you have now shown toward them and will be extra
motivated to prove themselves worthy.
Daily Law: Stimulate feelings of a high self-opinion in your targets.
The Laws of Human Nature, 7: Soften People’s Resistance by Confirming Their Self-
Opinion—The Law of Defensiveness

JUNE 24
Demonic Language
Most people employ symbolic language—their words stand for something
real, the feelings, ideas, and beliefs they really have. Or they stand for
concrete things in the real world. (The origin of the word symbolic lies in a
Greek word meaning “to bring things together”—in this case, a word and
something real.) To master the art of indirection, you need to master the
opposite: diabolic language. Your words do not stand for anything real;
their sound, and the feelings they evoke, are more important than what they
are supposed to stand for. (The word diabolic ultimately means to separate,
to throw things apart—here, words and reality.) The more you make people
focus on your sweet-sounding language, and on the illusions and fantasies it
conjures, the more you diminish their contact with reality. You lead them
into the clouds, where it is hard to distinguish truth from untruth, real from
unreal.
Daily Law: Keep your words vague and ambiguous, so people are never quite sure what
you mean. Envelop them in demonic, diabolical language and they will not be able to
focus on your maneuvers, on the possible consequences of your manipulations.
The Art of Seduction: Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion

JUNE 25
Create an Air of Mystery
Mix a little mystery with everything, and the very mystery stirs up veneration.
—baltasar gracián
Count Victor Lustig, the aristocrat of swindlers, played the game to
perfection. He was always doing things that were different or seemed to
make no sense. He would show up at the best hotels in a limo driven by a
Japanese chauffeur; no one had ever seen a Japanese chauffeur before, so
this seemed exotic and strange. Lustig would dress in the most expensive
clothing, but always with something—a medal, a flower, an armband—out
of place, at least in conventional terms. This was seen not as tasteless but as
odd and intriguing. In hotels he would be seen receiving telegrams at all
hours, one after the other, brought to him by his Japanese chauffeur—
telegrams he would tear up with utter nonchalance. (In fact they were fakes,
completely blank.) He would sit alone in the dining room, reading a large
and impressive-looking book, smiling at people yet remaining aloof. Within
a few days, of course, the entire hotel would be abuzz with interest in this
strange man. All this attention allowed Lustig to lure suckers in with ease.
They would beg for his confidence and his company. Everyone wanted to
be seen with this mysterious aristocrat. And in the presence of this
distracting enigma, they wouldn’t even notice that they were being robbed
blind.
Daily Law: People love mysteries and enigmas, so give them what they want.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 6: Court Attention at All Cost

JUNE 26
Never Conventional
No one is so brave that he is not disturbed by something unexpected.
—julius caesar
The unconventional is generally the province of the young, who are not
comfortable with conventions and take great pleasure in flouting them. The
danger is that as we age, we need more comfort and predictability and lose
our taste for the unorthodox. This is how Napoleon declined as a strategist:
he came to rely more on the size of his army and on its superiority in
weapons than on novel strategies and fluid maneuvers. He lost his taste for
the spirit of strategy and succumbed to the growing weight of his
accumulating years. You must fight the psychological aging process even
more than the physical one, for a mind full of stratagems, tricks, and fluid
maneuvers will keep you young. Keep the wheels turning and churning the
soil so that nothing settles and clumps into the conventional.
Daily Law: Make a point of breaking the habits you have developed, of acting in a way
that is contrary to how you have operated in the past; practice a kind of unconventional
warfare on your own mind.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 24: Take the Line of Least Expectation—The Ordinary-
Extraordinary Strategy

JUNE 27
Play to People’s Fantasies
The most detested person in the world is the one who always tells the truth, who never
romances. . . . I found it far more interesting and profitable to romance than to tell the truth.
joseph weil, aka “the yellow kid”
The truth is often avoided because it is ugly and unpleasant. Never appeal
to truth and reality unless you are prepared for the anger that comes from
disenchantment. To gain power, you must be a source of pleasure for those
around you—and pleasure comes from playing to people’s fantasies. Never
promise a gradual improvement through hard work; rather, promise the
moon, the great and sudden transformation, the pot of gold.
Daily Law: Life is so harsh and distressing that people who can manufacture romance or
conjure up fantasy are like oases in the desert: everyone flocks to them. There is great
power in tapping into the fantasies of the masses.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 32: Play to People’s Fantasies

JUNE 28
Renew Your Aura of Authority
Your authority will grow with each action that inspires trust and respect. It
gives you the luxury to remain in power long enough to realize great
projects. But as you get older, the authority you established can become
rigid and stodgy. You become the father figure who starts to seem
oppressive by how long he has monopolized power, no matter how deeply
people admired him in the past. A new generation inevitably emerges that is
immune to your charm, to the aura you have created. They see you as a
relic. You also have the tendency as you get older to become ever so
slightly intolerant and tyrannical, as you cannot help but expect people to
follow you. Without being aware, you start to feel entitled, and people sense
this. Besides, the public wants newness and fresh faces.
The first step in avoiding this danger is to maintain a kind of sensitivity,
noting the moods behind people’s words, gauging the effect you have on
newcomers and young people. Losing that empathy should be your greatest
fear, as you will begin to cocoon yourself in your great reputation. The
second step is to look for new markets and audiences to appeal to, which
will force you to adapt. If possible, expand the reach of your authority.
Without making a fool of yourself by attempting to appeal to a younger
crowd that you cannot really understand, try to alter your style somewhat
with the passing years. In the arts, this has been the secret to success of
people like Pablo Picasso, or Alfred Hitchcock, or Coco Chanel.
Daily Law: Flexibility and adaptability gives you a touch of the divine and immortal—
your spirit remains alive and open, and your authority is renewed.
The Laws of Human Nature, 15: Make Them Want to Follow You—The Law of Fickleness

JUNE 29
Mirror Their Values
Do not give dogs what is holy; and do not throw your pearls before swine, lest they trample
them under foot and turn to attack you.
—jesus christ, matthew 7:6
Wise and clever people learn early on that they can display conventional
behavior and mouth conventional ideas without having to believe in them.
The power these people gain from blending in is that of being left alone to
have the thoughts they want to have, and to express them to the people they
want to express them to, without suffering isolation or ostracism. The
logical extension of this practice is the invaluable ability to be all things to
all people. When you go into society, leave behind your own ideas and
values, and put on the mask that is most appropriate for the group in which
you find yourself. People will swallow the bait because it flatters them to
believe that you share their ideas. They will not take you as a hypocrite if
you are careful—for how can they accuse you of hypocrisy if you do not let
them know exactly what you stand for? Nor will they see you as lacking in
values. Of course you have values—the values you share with them, while
in their company.
Daily Law: Complete free expression is a social impossibility. Conceal your thoughts,
then, telling the prickly and insecure what you know they want to hear.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 38: Think as You Like but Behave Like Others

JUNE 30
Play the Honest Rogue
No smoke screen, red herring, false sincerity, or any other diversionary
device will succeed in concealing your intentions if you already have an
established reputation for deception. And as you get older and achieve
success, it often becomes increasingly difficult to disguise your cunning.
Everyone knows you practice deception; persist in playing naive and you
run the risk of seeming the rankest hypocrite, which will severely limit your
room to maneuver. In such cases it is better to own up, to appear the honest
rogue, or, better, the repentant rogue. Not only will you be admired for your
frankness, but, most wonderful and strange of all, you will be able to
continue your stratagems. As P. T. Barnum, the nineteenth-century king of
humbuggery, grew older, he learned to embrace his reputation as a grand
deceiver. At one point he organized a buffalo hunt in New Jersey, complete
with Indians and a few imported buffalo. He publicized the hunt as genuine,
but it came off as so completely fake that the crowd, instead of getting
angry and asking for their money back, was greatly amused. They knew
Barnum pulled tricks all the time; that was the secret of his success, and
they loved him for it. Learning a lesson from this affair, Barnum stopped
concealing all of his devices, even revealing his deceptions in a tell-all
autobiography. As Kierkegaard wrote, “The world wants to be deceived.”
Daily Law: When you can no longer disguise your cunning, reveal your devices.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 3: Conceal Your Intentions

July
The Seductive Character
penetrating hearts and minds
Most of us have known the power of having someone fall in love with us.
Our actions, gestures, the things we say, all have positive effects on this
person; we may not completely understand what we have done right, but
this feeling of power is intoxicating. It gives us confidence, which makes us
more seductive. We may also experience this in a social or work setting—
one day we are in an elevated mood and people seem more responsive,
more charmed by us. These moments of power are fleeting, but they
resonate in the memory with great intensity. We want them back. Nobody
likes to feel awkward or unable to reach people. The siren call of seduction
is irresistible because power is irresistible, and nothing will bring you more
power in the modern world than the ability to seduce. Repressing the desire
to seduce is a kind of hysterical reaction, revealing your deep-down
fascination with the process; you are only making your desires stronger.
Some day they will come to the surface. To have such power does not
require a total transformation in your character or any kind of physical
improvement in your looks. Seduction is a game of psychology, not beauty,
and it is within the grasp of any person to become a master at the game. The
month of July will arm you with weapons of charm, so that those around
you will slowly lose their ability to resist without knowing how or why it
has happened. It is an art of war for delicate times.
I want to take you away from thinking of seduction as just the sort of thing
that men do to women or women do to men. It’s something that permeates
our culture. It’s in advertising. It’s in marketing. It’s on the internet. It’s in
politics.
It’s slightly different in each case. Of course, a sexual seduction is not
exactly the same as a politician seducing the American public or an
influencer seducing her followers. But the dynamics, the casting of the
spell, the enchantment, the process is similar.
I tell people it’s like when you’re watching a movie and you feel like the
movie is casting a spell on you. It’s drawing you into the story. It’s having
an emotional impact on you. It’s taking you out of your life, out of the banal
day-to-day work, and on a ride of enchantment. By the end of the movie,
you’re moved to tears or laughter or whatever it is. That is a form of
seduction. Your psychology has been penetrated by the director, the writer,
the actors, and actresses.
People are dying for more of this kind of seduction in their lives. They
want some enchantment. They want some drama. They want pleasure. They
want to be taken on a ride, an adventure.
It’s a desire cemented in childhood. Seduction is like reaching the child
in a person. When you were a child, what was the greatest pleasure? It was
being picked up by your mother or father and being whirled around and
taken through the air and twisting and turning. The sense that someone was
taking you somewhere, that you were under their control—it made you
laugh, it gave you this incredible joy. That’s what’s happening when you’re
watching that movie: it’s taking you on this journey where you don’t
exactly where you’re going or what’s happening.
People don’t have enough of that in their lives. It’s an amazing power
that you could have.
It starts with the desire to be a seducer. You might be tempted to think,
“Oh, I don’t want to be a seducer, I’m not interested in seduction.” Yes, you
do. Yes, you are. Think of the walls that people normally have up—you
can’t get through to your kids, you can’t get through to your spouse, that
employee, those coworkers. They’re closed off to you. It makes you so
frustrated. Now think of a time in your life where you sensed that you had
power over another person, that someone was under your spell, that the
things you said excited them and interested them. There’s electricity in your
back and forth. It’s amazing. It’s powerful. You want more of that. You
want to be able to seduce. You want to penetrate the walls people typically
keep around their hearts and minds.
That’s the first thing: you want seduction in your life.
The next thing is: you have a misconception about seduction. Most
people do. It’s not about figuring out these very cold, calculating strategies.
There’s got to be a naturalness to it. If you’re someone that does too much
calculation in the seduction process—this is what I’m going to do, step A
then B then C—it’s not seductive. People can smell your coldness. We
sense that the other person is trying too hard, that they’ve read The Art of
Seduction, that they’re applying the twenty-four strategies. It doesn’t work.
You must bring out natural qualities that you have. And I maintain that
every person has natural qualities that make him or her authentically
seductive. It’s in you. It’s latent. It wants to come out. And that’s what will
make you an interesting and good seducer.
That, and adopting the seducer’s approach to life: It is all a game, an
arena for play. Knowing that the moralists, the crabbed repressed types who
croak about the evils of the seducer, secretly envy their power, they do not
concern themselves with other people’s opinions. They do not deal in moral
judgments—nothing could be less seductive.
Everything is pliant, fluid, like life itself. Seduction is a form of
deception, but people want to be led astray, they yearn to be seduced.
Get rid of any moralizing tendencies, adopt the seducer’s playful
philosophy, and you will find the rest of the process easy and natural.

JULY 1
Look at the World through the Eyes of a Seducer
To have seductive power does not require a total transformation in your
character or any kind of physical improvement in your looks. Seduction is a
game of psychology, not beauty, and it is within the grasp of any person to
become a master at the game. All that is required is that you look at the
world differently, through the eyes of a seducer. A seducer sees all of life as
theater, everyone an actor. Most people feel they have constricted roles in
life, which makes them unhappy. Seducers, on the other hand, can be
anyone and can assume many roles. Seducers take pleasure in performing
and are not weighed down by their identity, or by some need to be
themselves, or to be natural. This freedom of theirs, this fluidity in body
and spirit, is what makes them attractive. What people lack in life is not
more reality but illusion, fantasy, play. The clothes that seducers wear, the
places they take you to, their words and actions, are slightly heightened—
not overly theatrical but with a delightful edge of unreality, as if the two of
you were living out a piece of fiction or were characters in a film.
Daily Law: Seduction is a kind of theater in real life, the meeting of illusion and reality.
The Art of Seduction, Preface

JULY 2
Delay Satisfaction
The ability to delay satisfaction is the ultimate art of seduction—while
waiting, the victim is held in thrall. Coquettes are the grand masters of this
game, orchestrating a back-and-forth movement between hope and
frustration. They bait with the promise of reward—the hope of physical
pleasure, happiness, fame by association, power—all of which, however,
proves elusive; yet this only makes their targets pursue them the more.
Coquettes seem totally self-sufficient: they do not need you, they seem to
say, and their narcissism proves devilishly attractive. You want to conquer
them, but they hold the cards. The strategy of the Coquette is never to offer
total satisfaction. Imitate the alternating heat and coolness of the Coquette
and you will keep the seduced at your heels. You must understand a critical
property of love and desire: the more obviously you pursue a person, the
more likely you are to chase them away. Too much attention can be
interesting for a while, but it soon grows cloying and finally becomes
claustrophobic and frightening. It signals weakness and neediness, an
unseductive combination. How often we make this mistake, thinking our
persistent presence will reassure. But Coquettes have an inherent
understanding of this particular dynamic. Masters of selective withdrawal,
they hint at coldness, absenting themselves at times to keep their victim off
balance, surprised, intrigued. Their withdrawals make them mysterious, and
we build them up in our imaginations. (Familiarity, on the other hand,
undermines what we have built.) A bout of distance engages the emotions
further; instead of making us angry, it makes us insecure. Perhaps they
don’t really like us, perhaps we have lost their interest. Once our vanity is at
stake, we succumb to the Coquette just to prove we are still desirable.
Daily Law: The essence of the Coquette lies not in the tease and temptation but in the
subsequent step back, the emotional withdrawal. That is the key to enslaving desire.
The Art of Seduction: The Coquette

JULY 3
Direct Your Gaze Outward
Seducers are never self-absorbed. Their gaze is directed outward, not
inward. The reasons for this are several. First, self-absorption is a sign of
insecurity; it is anti-seductive. Everyone has insecurities, but seducers
manage to ignore them, finding therapy for moments of self-doubt by being
absorbed in the world. This gives them a buoyant spirit—we want to be
around them. Second, getting into someone’s skin, imagining what it is like
to be them, helps the seducer gather valuable information, learn what makes
that person tick, what will make them lose their ability to think straight and
fall into a trap. Armed with such information, a seducer can provide
focused and individualized attention—a rare commodity in a world in
which most people see us only from behind the screen of their own
prejudices.
Daily Law: When you meet someone your first move is to get inside that person’s skin, to
see the world through their eyes.
The Art of Seduction, Preface

JULY 4
The Empathic Attitude
The greatest danger you face is your general assumption that you really
understand people and that you can quickly judge them. Instead, you must
begin with the assumption that you are ignorant and that you have natural
biases that will make you judge people incorrectly. Each person you meet is
like an undiscovered country, with a very particular psychological
chemistry that you will carefully explore. This flexible, open spirit is
similar to creative energy—a willingness to consider more possibilities and
options. In fact, developing your empathy will also improve your creative
powers. The best place to begin this transformation in your attitude is in
your numerous daily conversations. Try reversing your normal impulse to
talk and give your opinion, desiring instead to hear the other person’s point
of view. You have tremendous curiosity in this direction. Cut off your
incessant interior monologue as best you can. Give full attention to the
other. What matters here is the quality of your listening, so that in the
course of the conversation you can mirror back to the other person things
they said, or things that were left unsaid but that you sensed. This will have
a tremendous seductive effect.
Daily Law: Let go of your tendency to make snap judgments. Open your mind to seeing
people in a new light. Do not assume that you are similar or that they share your values.
The Laws of Human Nature, 2: Transform Self-Love into Empathy—The Law of
Narcissism

JULY 5
Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo
People may be straining to remove restrictions on private behavior, to make
everything freer, in the world today, but that only makes seduction more
difficult and less exciting. Do what you can to reintroduce a feeling of
transgression and crime, even if it is only psychological or illusory. There
must be obstacles to overcome, social norms to flout, laws to break, before
the seduction can be consummated. It might seem that a permissive society
imposes few limits; find some. There will always be limits, sacred cows,
behavioral standards—endless ammunition for stirring up the transgressive
and taboo. Once the desire to transgress draws your targets to you, it will be
hard for them to stop.
Daily Law: Take them further than they imagined—the shared feeling of guilt and
complicity will create a powerful bond.
The Art of Seduction: Stir Up the Transgressive and Taboo

JULY 6
The Soft Sell
Let us say your goal is to sell yourself—as a personality, a trendsetter, a
candidate for office. There are two ways to go: the hard sell (the direct
approach) and the soft sell (the indirect approach). In the hard sell you state
your case strongly and directly. You tout your achievements, quote
statistics, bring in expert opinions, even go so far as to induce a bit of fear if
the audience ignores your message. Some people will be offended, resisting
your message, even if what you say is true. Others will feel you are
manipulating them—who can trust experts and statistics, and why are you
trying so hard? The soft sell, on the other hand, has the potential to draw in
millions because it is entertaining, gentle on the ears, and can be repeated
without irritating people. The technique was invented by the great
charlatans of seventeenth-century Europe. To peddle their elixirs and
alchemic concoctions, they would first put on a show—clowns, music,
vaudeville-type routines—that had nothing to do with what they were
selling. A crowd would form, and as the audience laughed and relaxed, the
charlatan would come onstage and briefly and dramatically discuss the
miraculous effects of the elixir. In the centuries since, publicists,
advertisers, political strategists, and others have taken this method to new
heights, but the rudiments of the soft sell remain the same: bring pleasure
by creating a positive atmosphere around your name or message.
Daily Law: Never seem to be selling something—that will look manipulative and
suspicious. Instead, let entertainment value and good feelings take center stage, sneaking
the sale through the side door.
The Art of Seduction: Soft Seduction—How to Sell Anything to the Masses

JULY 7
Appear to Be an Object of Desire
Most of the time we prefer one thing to another because that is what our friends already prefer
or because that object has marked social significance. . . . When we say of a man or woman
that he or she is desirable, what we really mean is that others desire them.
—serge moscovici
Few are drawn to the person whom others avoid or neglect; people gather
around those who have already attracted interest. We want what other
people want. To draw your victims closer and make them hungry to possess
you, you must create an aura of desirability—of being wanted and courted
by many. It will become a point of vanity for them to be the preferred object
of your attention, to win you away from a crowd of admirers. Manufacture
the illusion of popularity by surrounding yourself with members of the
opposite sex—friends, former lovers, present suitors. Create triangles that
stimulate rivalry and raise your value.
Daily Law: Build a reputation that precedes you: if many have succumbed to your
charms, there must be a reason.
The Art of Seduction: Appear to Be an Object of Desire—Create Triangles

JULY 8
The Anti-Seducer
Anti-Seducers come in many shapes and kinds, but almost all of them share
a single attribute, the source of their repellence: insecurity. We are all
insecure, and we suffer for it. Yet we are able to surmount these feelings at
times; a seductive engagement can bring us out of our usual self-absorption,
and to the degree that we seduce or are seduced, we feel charged and
confident. Anti-Seducers, however, are insecure to such a degree that they
cannot be drawn into the seductive process. Their needs, their anxieties,
their self-consciousness close them off. They interpret the slightest
ambiguity on your part as a slight to their ego; they see the merest hint of
withdrawal as a betrayal, and are likely to complain bitterly about it. It
seems 
easy: 
Anti-Seducers 
repel, 
so 
be 
repelled—avoid 
them.
Unfortunately, however, many Anti-Seducers cannot be detected as such at
first glance. They are more subtle, and unless you are careful they will
ensnare you in a most unsatisfying relationship. You must look for clues to
their self-involvement and insecurity: perhaps they are ungenerous, or they
argue with unusual tenacity, or are excessively judgmental. Perhaps they
lavish you with undeserved praise, declaring their love before knowing
anything about you. Or, most important, they pay no attention to details.
Since they cannot see what makes you different, they cannot surprise you
with nuanced attention. They lack the subtlety to create the promise of
pleasure that seduction requires.
Daily Law: Rid yourself of any anti-seductive tendencies by getting outside yourself and
your insecurities and into their spirit.
The Art of Seduction: The Anti-Seducer

JULY 9
Make Them Want to Spoil You
People often mistakenly believe that what makes a person desirable and
seductive is physical beauty, elegance, or overt sexuality. Yet Cora Pearl
was not dramatically beautiful; her body was boyish, and her style was
garish and tasteless. Even so, the most dashing men of Europe vied for her
favors, often ruining themselves in the process. It was Cora’s spirit and
attitude that enthralled them. Spoiled by her father, she imagined that
spoiling her was natural—that all men should do the same. The
consequence was that, like a child, she never felt she had to try to please. It
was Cora’s powerful air of independence that made men want to possess
her. The lesson is simple: It may be too late to be spoiled by a parent, but it
is never too late to make other people spoil you. It is all in your attitude.
People are drawn to those who expect a lot out of life, whereas they tend to
disrespect those who are fearful and undemanding.
Daily Law: Wild independence has a provocative effect on us: it appeals to us, while also
presenting us with a challenge—we want to be the one to tame it, to make the spirited
person dependent on us.
The Art of Seduction: The Natural

JULY 10
Set Off Viral Effects
The moment people know you are after something—a vote, a sale—they
become resistant. But disguise your sales pitch as a news event and not only
will you bypass their resistance, you can also create a social trend that does
the selling for you. To make this work, the event you set up must stand out
from all the other events that are covered by the media, yet it cannot stand
out too far or it will seem contrived. An event that is picked up by the news
has the imprimatur of reality. It is important to give this manufactured event
positive associations. Associations that are patriotic, say, or subtly sexual,
or spiritual—anything pleasant and seductive—take on a life of their own.
Who can resist? People essentially persuade themselves to join the crowd
without even realizing that a sale has taken place. The feeling of active
participation is vital to seduction. No one wants to feel left out of a growing
movement. Announce your message as a trend and it will become one. The
goal is to create a kind of viral effect in which more and more people
become infected with the desire to have whatever you are offering.
Daily Law: Seem to be in the vanguard of a trend or lifestyle and the public will lap you
up for fear of being left behind.
The Art of Seduction: Soft Seduction—How to Sell Anything to the Masses

JULY 11
Friend to Lover
I do not approach her, I merely skirt the periphery of her existence. . . . This is the first web
into which she must be spun.
—søren kierkegaard
To move from friendship to love can win success without calling attention
to itself as a maneuver. First, your friendly conversations with your targets
will bring you valuable information about their characters, their tastes, their
weaknesses, the childhood yearnings that govern their adult behavior.
Second, by spending time with your targets you can make them comfortable
with you. Believing you are interested only in their thoughts, in their
company, they will lower their resistance, dissipating the usual tension
between the sexes. Now they are vulnerable, for your friendship with them
has opened the golden gate to their body: their mind. At this point any
offhand comment, any slight physical contact, will spark a different
thought, which will catch them off guard: perhaps there could be something
else between you. Once that feeling has stirred, they will wonder why you
haven’t made a move, and will take the initiative themselves, enjoying the
illusion that they are in control. There is nothing more effective in seduction
than making the seduced think that they are the ones doing the seducing.
Daily Law: Cultivate a relatively neutral relationship, moving gradually from friend to
lover.
The Art of Seduction: Create a False Sense of Security—Approach Indirectly

JULY 12
Flout Their Expectations
Too constant a peace is productive of a deadly ennui. Uniformity kills love, for as soon as the
spirit of method mingles in an affair of the heart, the passion disappears, languor supervenes,
weariness begins to wear, and disgust ends the chapter.
—ninon de l’enclos
Familiarity is the death of seduction. If the target knows everything about
you, the relationship gains a level of comfort but loses the elements of
fantasy and anxiety. Without anxiety and a touch of fear, the erotic tension
is dissolved. Remember: reality is not seductive. Maintain some mystery or
be taken for granted. You will have only yourself to blame for what follows.
Daily Law: Keep some dark corners in your character, flout expectations, use absences
to fragment the clinging, possessive pull that allows familiarity to creep in.
The Art of Seduction: Beware the Aftereffects

JULY 13
Make Use of Contrasts
Careful exploitation of people who are dull or unattractive may enhance
your desirability by comparison. At a social affair, for instance, make sure
that your target has to chat with the most boring person available. Come to
the rescue and your target will be delighted to see you. In The Seducer’s
Diary, by Søren Kierkegaard, Johannes has designs on the innocent young
Cordelia. Knowing that his friend Edward is hopelessly shy and dull, he
encourages this man to court her; a few weeks of Edward’s attentions will
make her eyes wander in search of someone else, anyone else, and Johannes
will make sure that they settle on him. Johannes chose to strategize and
maneuver, but almost any social environment will contain contrasts you can
make use of almost naturally.
Daily Law: Make use of contrasts—either develop and display those attractive attributes
(humor, vivacity, and so on) that are the scarcest in your own social group, or choose a
group in which your natural qualities are rare, and will shine.
The Art of Seduction: Appear to Be an Object of Desire—Create Triangles

JULY 14
Create Calculated Surprises
A child is usually a willful, stubborn creature who will deliberately do the
opposite of what we ask. But there is one scenario in which children will
happily give up their usual willfulness: when they are promised a surprise.
Perhaps it is a present hidden in a box, a game with an unforeseeable
ending, a journey with an unknown destination, a suspenseful story with a
surprise finish. In those moments when children are waiting for a surprise,
their willpower is suspended. They are in your thrall for as long as you
dangle possibility before them. This childish habit is buried deep within us,
and is the source of an elemental human pleasure: being led by a person
who knows where they are going, and who takes us on a journey. In
seduction, you need to create constant tension and suspense, a feeling that
with you nothing is predictable. The moment people feel they know what to
expect from you, your spell on them is broken. More: you have ceded them
power. The only way to lead the seduced along and keep the upper hand is
to create suspense, a calculated surprise. People love a mystery, and this is
the key to luring them further into your web. Behave in a way that leaves
them wondering, What are you up to? Doing something they do not expect
from you will give them a delightful sense of spontaneity—they will not be
able to foresee what comes next. You are always one step ahead and in
control. Give them a thrill with a sudden change of direction.
Daily Law: There are all kinds of calculated surprises you can spring on your victims—
sending a message out of the blue, showing up unexpectedly, taking them to a place they
have never been. But best of all are surprises that reveal something new about your
character.
The Art of Seduction: Keep Them in Suspense—What Comes Next?

JULY 15
Heighten the Experience
In Marcel Proust’s novel Remembrance of Things Past, the character Swann
finds himself gradually seduced by a woman who is not really his type. He
is an aesthete and loves the finer things in life. She is of a lower class, less
refined, even a little tasteless. What poeticizes her in his mind is a series of
exuberant moments they share together, moments that from then on he
associates with her. One of these is a concert in a salon that they attend, in
which he is intoxicated by a little melody in a sonata. Whenever he thinks
of her, he remembers this little phrase. Little gifts she has given him,
objects she has touched or handled, begin to assume a life of their own. You
must find a way to share such moments with your targets—a concert, a
play, a spiritual encounter, whatever it takes—so that they associate
something elevated with you. Shared moments of exuberance have
immense seductive pull. Also, any kind of object can be imbued with poetic
resonance and sentimental associations. The gifts you give and other objects
can become imbued with your presence; if they are associated with pleasant
memories, the sight of them keeps you in mind and accelerates the
poeticization process.
Daily Law: Any kind of heightened experience, artistic or spiritual, lingers in the mind
much longer than normal experience.
The Art of Seduction: Poeticize Your Presence

JULY 16
Enter Their Spirit
The great, the implacable amorous passions are all linked to the fact that a being imagines he
sees his most secret self spying upon him behind the curtain of another’s eyes.
—robert musil
All of us are narcissists. When we were children our narcissism was
physical: we were interested in our own image, our own body, as if it were a
separate being. As we grow older, our narcissism grows more
psychological: we become absorbed in our own tastes, opinions,
experiences. A hard shell forms around us. Paradoxically, the way to entice
people out of this shell is to become more like them, in fact a kind of mirror
image of them. You do not have to spend days studying their minds; simply
conform to their moods, adapt to their tastes, play along with whatever they
send your way. In doing so you will lower their natural defensiveness. Their
sense of self-esteem does not feel threatened by your strangeness or
different habits. People truly love themselves, but what they love most of all
is to see their ideas and tastes reflected in another person. This validates
them. Their habitual insecurity vanishes. Hypnotized by their mirror image,
they relax. Now that their inner wall has crumbled, you can slowly draw
them out, and eventually turn the dynamic around. Once they are open to
you, it becomes easy to infect them with your own moods and heat.
Entering the other person’s spirit is a kind of hypnosis; it is the most
insidious and effective form of persuasion known to man.
Daily Law: Lure people out of their natural intractability and self-obsession by entering
their spirit. Soon you can shift the dynamic: once you have entered their spirit you can
make them enter yours, at a point when it is too late to turn back.
The Art of Seduction: Enter Their Spirit

JULY 17
Create Temptation
The only way to get rid of temptation is to yield to it.
—oscar wilde
What people want is not temptation; temptation happens every day. What
people want is to give in to temptation, to yield. That is the only way to get
rid of the tension in their lives. It costs much more to resist temptation than
to surrender. Your task, then, is to create a temptation that is stronger than
the daily variety. It has to be focused on them, aimed at them as individuals
—at their weakness. Understand: everyone has a principal weakness, from
which others stem. Find that childhood insecurity, that lack in their life, and
you hold the key to tempting them. Their weakness may be greed, vanity,
boredom, some deeply repressed desire, a hunger for forbidden fruit. They
signal it in little details that elude their conscious control: their style of
clothing, an offhand comment. Their past, and particularly their past
romances, will be littered with clues. Give them a potent temptation,
tailored to their weakness, and you can make the hope of pleasure that you
stir in them figure more prominently than the doubts and anxieties that
accompany it.
Daily Law: Find that weakness of theirs, that fantasy that has yet to be realized, and hint
that you can lead them toward it. It could be wealth, it could be adventure, it could be
forbidden and guilty pleasures; the key is to keep it vague.
The Art of Seduction: Create Temptation

JULY 18
Prove Yourself
Making your deed as dashing and chivalrous as possible will elevate the
seduction to a new level, stir up deep emotions, and conceal any ulterior
motives you may have. The sacrifices you are making must be visible;
talking about them, or explaining what they have cost you, will seem like
bragging. Lose sleep, fall ill, lose valuable time, put your career on the line,
spend more money than you can afford. You can exaggerate all this for
effect, but don’t get caught boasting about it or feeling sorry for yourself:
cause yourself pain and let them see it. Since almost everyone else in the
world seems to have an angle, your noble and selfless deed will be
irresistible.
Daily Law: Choose a dramatic, difficult action that reveals the painful time and effort
involved.
The Art of Seduction: Prove Yourself

JULY 19
Lure Others into Your Fantasy World
From very early on, Josephine Baker could not stand the feeling of having
no control over the world. Her solution was something children often do:
confronted with a hopeless environment, she closed herself off in a world of
her own making, oblivious to the ugliness around her. This world was filled
with dancing, clowning, dreams of great things. Let other people wail and
moan; Josephine would smile, remain confident and self-reliant. Almost
everyone who met her, from her earliest years to her last, commented on
how seductive this quality was. Her refusal to compromise, or to be what
she was expected to be, made everything she did seem authentic and
natural. A child loves to play, and to create a little self-contained world.
When children are absorbed in make believe, they are hopelessly charming.
They infuse their imaginings with such seriousness and feeling. Adult
Naturals do something similar, particularly if they are artists: they create
their own fantasy world, and live in it as if it were the real one. Fantasy is
so much more pleasant than reality, and since most people do not have the
power or courage to create such a world, they enjoy being around those
who do.
Daily Law: Learn to play with your image, never taking it too seriously. The key is to
infuse your play with the conviction and feeling of a child, making it seem natural. The
more absorbed you seem in your own joy-filled world, the more seductive you become.
The Art of Seduction: The Natural

JULY 20
Be a Source of Pleasure
No one wants to hear about your problems and troubles. Listen to your
targets’ complaints, but more important, distract them from their problems
by giving them pleasure. (Do this often enough and they will fall under
your spell.) An energetic presence is more charming than lethargy, which
hints at boredom, an enormous social taboo; and elegance and style will
usually win out over vulgarity, since most people like to associate
themselves with whatever they think elevated and cultured.
Daily Law: Being lighthearted and fun is always more charming than being serious and
critical.
The Art of Seduction: The Charmer

JULY 21
The Law of Covetousness
From the beginning, Coco Chanel made sure her clothes were seen
everywhere. Observing other women wearing such clothes stimulated
competitive desires to have the same and not be left out. In truth, the boater
hats she originally designed were nothing more than common objects
anyone could buy in a department store. The clothes she first designed were
made out of the cheapest materials. The perfume was a mix of ordinary
flowers. It was pure psychological magic that transformed them into objects
that stimulated such intense desires to possess them. Just like Chanel, you
need to reverse your perspective. Instead of focusing on what you want and
covet in the world, you must train yourself to focus on others, on their
repressed desires and unmet fantasies. You must train yourself to see how
they perceive the objects you make, as if you were looking at yourself and
your work from the outside. This will give you the almost limitless power
to shape people’s perceptions about these objects and excite them. People
do not want truth and honesty, no matter how much we hear such nonsense
endlessly repeated. They want their imaginations to be stimulated and to be
taken beyond their banal circumstances. Create an air of mystery around
you and your work. Associate it with something new, unfamiliar, exotic,
progressive, and taboo. Do not define your message but leave it vague.
Daily Law: Create an illusion of ubiquity—your object is seen everywhere and desired
by others. Then let the covetousness so latent in all humans do the rest, setting off a
chain reaction of desire.
The Laws of Human Nature, 5: Become an Elusive Object of Desire—The Law of
Covetousness

JULY 22
Create a Wound
In Plato’s dialogue Symposium—the West’s oldest treatise on love, and a
text that has had a determining influence on our ideas of desire—the
courtesan Diotima explains to Socrates the parentage of Eros, the god of
love. Eros’s father was Contrivance, or Cunning, and his mother was
Poverty, or Need. Eros takes after his parents: he is constantly in need,
which he is constantly contriving to fill. As the god of love, he knows that
love cannot be induced in another person unless they too feel need. And
that is what his arrows do: piercing people’s flesh, they make them feel a
lack, an ache, a hunger. This is the essence of your task as a seducer. Like
Eros, you must create a wound in your victim, aiming at their soft spot, the
chink in their self-esteem. If they are stuck in a rut, make them feel it more
deeply, “innocently” bringing it up and talking about it. What you want is a
wound, an insecurity you can expand a little, an anxiety that can best be
relieved by involvement with another person, namely you.
Daily Law: Try to position yourself as coming from outside, as a stranger of sorts. You
represent change, difference, a breakup of routines. Make your victims feel that by
comparison their lives are boring and their friends less interesting than they had
thought.
The Art of Seduction: Create a Need—Stir Anxiety and Discontent

JULY 23
Pay Attention to Detail
When we were children, our senses were much more active. The colors of a
new toy, or a spectacle such as a circus, held us in thrall; a smell or a sound
could fascinate us. In the games we created, many of them reproducing
something in the adult world on a smaller scale, what pleasure we took in
orchestrating every detail. We noticed everything. As we grow older our
senses get dulled. We no longer notice as much, for we are constantly
hurrying to get things done, to move on to the next task. In seduction, you
are always trying to bring the target back to the golden moments of
childhood. A child is less rational, more easily deceived. A child is also
more attuned to the pleasures of the senses. So when your targets are with
you, you must never give them the feeling they normally get in the real
world, where we are all rushed, ruthless, out for ourselves. You need to
deliberately slow things down, and return them to the simpler times of their
youth. The details that you orchestrate—colors, gifts, little ceremonies—are
aimed at their senses, at the childish delight we take in the immediate
charms of the natural world. Their senses filled with delightful things, they
grow less capable of reason and rationality. Pay attention to detail and you
will find yourself assuming a slower pace; your targets will not focus on
what you might be after because you seem so considerate, so attentive. In
the childish realm of the senses in which you envelop them, they get a clear
sense that you are involving them in something distinct from the real world
—an essential ingredient of seduction.
Daily Law: Lofty words and grand gestures can be suspicious: Why are you trying so
hard to please? The details of a seduction—the subtle gestures, the offhand things you do
—are often more charming and revealing.
The Art of Seduction: Pay Attention to Detail

JULY 24
Make Them Fetishize You
When Marlene Dietrich entered a room, or arrived at a party, all eyes
inevitably turned to her. First there were her startling clothes, chosen to
make heads turn. Then there was her air of nonchalant indifference. Men,
and women too, became obsessed with her, fetishizing her long after other
memories of the evening had faded. She had a distance from her own self:
she could study her face, her legs, her body, as if she were someone else.
This gave her the ability to mold her look, transforming her appearance for
effect. She was like a beautiful object, something to fetishize and admire the
way we admire a work of art. If you see yourself as an object, then others
will too. An ethereal, dreamlike air will heighten the effect. Consider
yourself a blank screen. Float through life noncommittally and people will
want to seize you and consume you. Of all the parts of your body that draw
this fetishistic attention, the strongest is the face; so learn to tune your face
like an instrument, making it radiate a fascinating vagueness for effect. And
since you will have to stand out from other Stars in the sky, you will need to
develop an attention-getting style. Dietrich was the great practitioner of this
art; her style was chic enough to dazzle, weird enough to enthrall.
Daily Law: Your own image and presence are materials you can control. The sense that
you are engaged in this kind of play will make people see you as superior and worthy of
imitation.
The Art of Seduction: The Star

JULY 25
Play with Ambiguity
To capture and hold attention, you need to show attributes that go against
your physical appearance, creating depth and mystery. If you have a sweet
face and an innocent air, let out hints of something dark, even vaguely cruel
in your character. It is not advertised in your words, but in your manner. Do
not worry if this underquality is a negative one, like danger, cruelty, or
amorality; people will be drawn to the enigma anyway, and pure goodness
is rarely seductive.
Daily Law: No one is naturally mysterious, at least not for long; mystery is something
you have to work at, a ploy on your part, and something that must be used early on in
the seduction.
The Art of Seduction: Send Mixed Signals

JULY 26
Know When to Withdraw
Love never dies of starvation but often of indigestion.
—ninon de l’enclos
The Russian seductress Lou Andreas-Salomé had an intense presence; when
a man was with her, he felt her eyes boring into him, and often became
entranced with her coquettish ways and spirit. But then, almost invariably,
something would come up—she would have to leave town for a while, or
would be too busy to see him. It was during her absences that men fell
hopelessly in love with her, and vowed to be more aggressive next time
they were with her. Your absences at this latter point of the seduction should
seem at least somewhat justified. You are insinuating not a blatant brush-off
but a slight doubt: perhaps you could have found some reason to stay,
perhaps you are losing interest, perhaps there is someone else.
Daily Law: In your absence, their appreciation of you will grow. They will forget your
faults, forgive your sins. The moment you return, they will chase after you as you desire.
It will be as if you had come back from the dead.
The Art of Seduction: Give Them Space to Fall—The Pursuer Is Pursued

JULY 27
Know When to Be Bold
The more timidity a lover shows with us the more it concerns our pride to goad him on; the
more respect he has for our resistance, the more respect we demand of him. We would
willingly say to you men. Ah, in pity’s name do not suppose us to be so very virtuous; you are
forcing us to have too much of it.
—ninon de l’enclos
No one is born timid; timidity is a protection we develop. If we never stick
our necks out, if we never try, we will never have to suffer the
consequences of failure or success. If we are kind and unobtrusive, no one
will be offended—in fact, we will seem saintly and likable. In truth, timid
people are often self-absorbed, obsessed with the way people see them, and
not at all saintly. And humility may have its social uses, but it is deadly in
seduction. You need to be able to play the humble saint at times; it is a mask
you wear. But in seduction, take it off. Boldness is bracing, erotic, and
absolutely necessary to bring the seduction to its conclusion. Done right, it
tells your targets that they have made you lose your normal restraint, and
gives them license to do so as well. People are yearning to have a chance to
play out the repressed sides of their personality.
Daily Law: At the final stage of a seduction, boldness eliminates any awkwardness or
doubts.
The Art of Seduction: Master the Art of the Bold Move

JULY 28
Communicate to People’s Senses
Free yourself from the need to communicate in the normal direct manner
and you will present yourself with greater opportunities for the soft sell.
Make the words you say unobtrusive, vague, alluring. And pay much
greater attention to your style, the visuals, the story they tell. Convey a
sense of movement and progress by showing yourself in motion. Express
confidence not through facts and figures but through colors and positive
imagery, appealing to the infant in everyone. Let the media cover you
unguided and you are at their mercy. So turn the dynamic around—the press
needs drama and visuals? Provide them. It is fine to discuss issues or
“truth” as long as you package it entertainingly. Remember: images linger
in the mind long after words are forgotten. Do not preach to the public—
that never works. Learn to express your message through visuals that
insinuate positive emotions and happy feelings. The audience may focus
superficially on the content or moral you are preaching, but they are really
absorbing the visuals, which get under their skin and stay there longer than
any words or preachy pronouncements.
Daily Law: Pay more attention to the form of your message than to the content. Images
are more seductive than words, and visuals should actually be your real message.
The Art of Seduction: Soft Seduction—How to Sell Anything to the Masses

JULY 29
The Pursuer Is Pursued
I retreat and thereby teach her to be victorious as she pursues me. I continually fall back, and
in this backward movement I teach her to know through me all the powers of erotic love, its
turbulent thoughts, its passion, what longing is, and hope, and impatient expectancy.
—søren kierkegaard
Each gender has its own seductive lures, which come naturally to them.
When you seem interested in someone but do not respond sexually, it is
disturbing and presents a challenge: they will find a way to seduce you. To
produce this effect, first reveal an interest in your targets, through letters or
subtle insinuation. But when you are in their presence, assume a kind of
sexless neutrality. Be friendly, even warm, but no more. You are pushing
them into arming themselves with the seductive charms that are natural to
their sex—exactly what you want.
Daily Law: Create the illusion that the seducer is being seduced.
The Art of Seduction: Give Them Space to Fall—The Pursuer Is Pursued

JULY 30
The Thrill of Illusion
Theater creates a sense of a separate, magical world. The actors’ makeup,
the fake but alluring sets, the slightly unreal costumes—these heightened
visuals, along with the story of the play, create illusion. To produce this
effect in real life, you must fashion your clothes, makeup, and attitude to
have a playful, artificial edge—a feeling that you have dressed for the
pleasure of your audience. This is the goddesslike effect of a Marlene
Dietrich. Your encounters with your targets should also have a sense of
drama, achieved through the settings you choose and through your actions.
The target should not know what will happen next. Create suspense through
twists and turns that lead to the happy ending; you are performing.
Daily Law: Whenever your targets meet you, give them the vague feeling of being in a
play, the thrill of wearing masks, of playing a different role from the one your life has
allotted you.
The Art of Seduction: Appendix A—Seductive Environment/Seductive Time

JULY 31
Poeticize Your Presence
He who does not know how to poetize himself into a girl so that it is from her that everything
proceeds as he wants it—he is and remains a bungler. . . . To poetize oneself into a girl is an
art.
—søren kierkegaard
In a world that is harsh and full of disappointment, it is a great pleasure to
be able to fantasize about a person you are involved with. This makes the
seducer’s task easy: people are dying to be given the chance to fantasize
about you. Do not spoil this golden opportunity by overexposing yourself or
becoming so familiar and banal that the target sees you exactly as you are.
You do not have to be an angel, or a paragon of virtue—that would be quite
boring. You can be dangerous, naughty, even somewhat vulgar, depending
on the tastes of your victim.
Daily Law: Never be ordinary or limited. In poetry (as opposed to reality), anything is
possible.
The Art of Seduction: Poeticize Your Presence

August
The Master Persuader
softening people’s resistance
We humans cannot avoid trying to influence others. Everything we say or
do is examined and interpreted by others for clues as to our intentions. As
social animals we cannot avoid constantly playing the game, whether we
are conscious of this or not. Most people do not want to expend the effort
that goes into thinking about others and figuring out a strategic entry past
their defenses. They are lazy. They want to simply be themselves, speak
honestly, or do nothing, and justify this to themselves as stemming from
some great moral choice. Since the game is unavoidable, better to be
skillful at it than in denial or merely improvising in the moment. In the end,
being good at influence is actually more socially beneficial than the moral
stance. Becoming proficient at persuasion requires that we immerse
ourselves in the perspective of others, exercising our empathy. The month
of August will teach you the maneuvers and strategies that will instruct you
on how to create a spell, break down people’s resistance, give movement
and force to your persuasion, and induce surrender in your target.
I’m often asked why I talk to the reader through stories.
I’m very focused on the reader. I’m always thinking when I’m writing,
how are they going to absorb this information?
There’s a problem that psychologists have noted. If you’re a teacher, you
assume that your students have the same knowledge you have. This makes
them bad teachers. I know that my readers don’t necessarily know what I’m
talking about. If I’m talking about Carl Jung, for instance, and I just throw
out jargon, the reader is not going to get it. So I have to make it
understandable to the average person.
In The Art of Seduction, I talk about how telling a story lowers people’s
resistance. Stories make the mind open up.
From the time we’re kids—being carried by our parents or playing peek-
a-boo—the sense of not knowing what comes next is very deeply ingrained
in human psychology.
So if I tell a story about Rockefeller to illustrate aggression, I know that
as the reader is being pulled into this story, they don’t know where I’m
going, or who the aggressor is in this story, or the lesson that I’m trying to
derive. So they’re going to want to read. They’re going to want to go
further and further and further. I’ve tricked them into coming to page eight.
Whereas if I immediately hit them with Jung and this or that study and
some sociology jargon, their minds close off. They’re falling asleep.
That’s the mistake 98 percent of people who write books out there make.
They don’t think about the reader. They assume that the reader is as
interested in the material as they are. You have to seduce the reader. You
have to persuade them that what you have to say is worth the time. That’s
why I tell stories.
People make the same mistake in the social realm, in trying to persuade
or influence others. If you want someone to do you’re bidding, to help you,
to finance your film or whatever it is—if you come at it only thinking about
what you want or deserve, it has no effect. But if you think in terms of how
they think, the stories they want to hear, what will please them, what will
interest them—the game changes. You have the power to influence them.
Just as I have the power to influence the reader when I start thinking
about what the reader wants, you have the power to influence people when
you start thinking about what they want.

AUGUST 1
The Hypnotist’s Art
The goal of persuasive speech is often to create a kind of hypnosis: you are
distracting people, lowering their defenses, making them more vulnerable to
suggestion. Learn the hypnotist’s lessons of repetition and affirmation, key
elements in putting a subject to sleep. Repetition involves using the same
words over and over, preferably a word with emotional content: “taxes,”
“liberals,” “bigots.” The effect is mesmerizing—ideas can be permanently
implanted in people’s unconscious simply by being repeated often enough.
Affirmation is simply the making of strong positive statements, like the
hypnotist’s commands. Seductive language should have a kind of boldness,
which will cover up a multitude of sins. Your audience will be so caught up
in your bold language that they won’t have time to reflect on whether or not
it is true. Never say, “I don’t think the other side made a wise decision”;
say, “We deserve better,” or “They have made a mess of things.”
Affirmative language is active language, full of verbs, imperatives, and
short sentences.
Daily Law: Cut out “I believe,” “Perhaps,” “In my opinion.” Head straight for the heart.
The Art of Seduction: Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion

AUGUST 2
Play on Their Competitive Spirit
In 1948 the director Billy Wilder was casting for his new film, A Foreign
Affair, which was to be set in Berlin just after the war. One of the main
characters was a woman named Erika von Schluetow, a German cabaret
singer with suspicious ties to various Nazis during the war. Wilder knew
that Marlene Dietrich would be the perfect actress to play the part, but
Dietrich had publicly expressed her intense dislike of anything having to do
with the Nazis and had worked hard for various Allied causes. When first
approached about the role, she found it too distasteful, and that was the end
of the discussion. Wilder did not protest or plead with her, which would
have been futile, given Dietrich’s famed stubbornness. Instead he told her
he had found two perfect American actresses to play the part, but he wanted
her opinion on which would be better. Would she view their tests? Feeling
bad that she had turned down her old friend Wilder, Dietrich naturally
agreed to this. But Wilder had cleverly tested two well-known actresses
whom he knew would be quite terrible for the role, making a mockery of
the part of a sexy German cabaret singer. The ploy worked like a charm.
The very competitive Dietrich was aghast at their performances and
immediately volunteered to do the part herself.
Daily Law: Your attempts at influence must always follow a similar logic: how can you
get others to perceive what you want them to do as something they are choosing to do?
The Laws of Human Nature, 7: Soften People’s Resistance by Confirming Their Self-
Opinion—The Law of Defensiveness

AUGUST 3
Make Them the Star of the Show
Most men . . . seek less to be instructed, and even to be amused, than to be praised and
applauded.
—jean de la bruyère
Influence over people and the power that it brings are gained in the opposite
way from what you might imagine. Normally we try to charm people with
our own ideas, showing ourselves off in the best light. We hype our past
accomplishments. We promise great things about ourselves. We ask for
favors, believing that being honest is the best policy. What we do not realize
is that we are putting all of the attention on ourselves. In a world where
people are increasingly self-absorbed, this only has the effect of making
others turn more inward in return and think more of their own interests
rather than ours. The royal road to influence and power is to go the opposite
direction: Put the focus on others. Let them do the talking. Let them be the
stars of the show. Their opinions and values are worth emulating. The
causes they support are the noblest. Such attention is so rare in this world,
and people are so hungry for it, that giving them such validation will lower
their defenses and open their minds to whatever ideas you want to insinuate.
Daily Law: In conversation, try getting others to do 70 percent of the talking without
them noticing, and see the effect.
The Laws of Human Nature, 7: Soften People’s Resistance by Confirming Their Self-
Opinion—The Law of Defensiveness

AUGUST 4
Channel Overpowering Emotions
Malcolm X spoke all over the United States. He never read from a text;
looking out at the audience, he made eye contact, pointed his finger. His
anger was obvious, not so much in his tone—he was always controlled and
articulate—as in his fierce energy, the veins popping out on his neck. Many
earlier Black leaders had used cautious words, and had asked their
followers to deal patiently and politely with their social lot, no matter how
unfair. What a relief Malcolm was. He ridiculed the racists, he ridiculed the
liberals, he ridiculed the president; no white person escaped his scorn. If
whites were violent, Malcolm said, the language of violence should be
spoken back to them, for it was the only language they understood.
“Hostility is good!” he cried out. “It’s been bottled up too long.” Malcolm
X had a bracing effect on many who felt the same anger he did but were
frightened to express it. He was a Charismatic of Moses’s kind: he was a
deliverer. The power of this sort of Charismatic comes from his or her
expression of dark emotions that have built up over years of oppression.
That’s the essence of charisma—it’s an overpowering emotion that
communicates itself in your gestures, in your tone of voice, in subtle signs
that are the more powerful for being unspoken. You feel something more
deeply than others, and no emotion is more powerful and more capable of
creating a charismatic reaction than hatred, particularly if it comes from
deep-rooted feelings of oppression. Express what others are afraid to
express and they will see great power in you. Say what they want to say but
cannot.
Daily Law: Learn how to channel your emotions. Nothing is more charismatic than the
sense that someone is struggling with great emotion rather than simply giving in to it.
The Art of Seduction: The Charismatic

AUGUST 5
Win through Your Actions
During his extremely long career as England’s most celebrated architect, Sir
Christopher Wren was often told by his patrons to make impractical
changes in his designs. Never once did he argue or offend. He had other
ways of proving his point. In 1688 Wren designed a magnificent town hall
for the city of Westminster. The mayor, however, was not satisfied; in fact
he was nervous. He told Wren he was afraid the second floor was not
secure, and that it could all come crashing down on his office on the first
floor. He demanded that Wren add two stone columns for extra support.
Wren, the consummate engineer, knew that these columns would serve no
purpose, and that the mayor’s fears were baseless. But build them he did,
and the mayor was grateful. It was only years later that workmen on a high
scaffold saw that the columns stopped just short of the ceiling. They were
dummies. But both men got what they wanted: the mayor could relax, and
Wren knew posterity would understand that his original design worked and
the columns were unnecessary.
Daily Law: Demonstrate, do not explicate.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 9: Win through Your Actions, Never through Argument

AUGUST 6
Keep Them Guessing
Only months after arriving in Paris in 1926, Josephine Baker had
completely charmed and seduced the French public with her wild dancing.
But less than a year later she could feel their interest wane. Since childhood
she had hated feeling out of control of her life. Why be at the mercy of the
fickle public? She left Paris and returned a year later, her manner
completely altered—now she played the part of an elegant Frenchwoman,
who happened to be an ingenious dancer and performer. The French fell in
love again; the power was back on her side. If you are in the public eye, you
must learn from this trick of surprise. People are bored, not only with their
own lives but with people who are meant to keep them from being bored.
The minute they feel they can predict your next step, they will eat you alive.
The artist Andy Warhol kept moving from incarnation to incarnation, and
no one could predict the next one—artist, filmmaker, society man. Always
keep a surprise up your sleeve.
Daily Law: To keep the public’s attention, keep them guessing. Let the moralists accuse
you of insincerity, of having no core or center. They are actually jealous of the freedom
and playfulness you reveal in your public persona.
The Art of Seduction: Keep Them in Suspense—What Comes Next?

AUGUST 7
Consider Their Self-Interest
Most men are so thoroughly subjective that nothing really interests them but themselves.
—arthur schopenhauer
The quickest way to secure people’s minds is by demonstrating, as simply
as possible, how an action will benefit them. Self-interest is the strongest
motive of all: a great cause may capture minds, but once the first flush of
excitement is over, interest will flag—unless there is something to be
gained. Self-interest is the solider foundation. The causes that work best use
a noble veneer to cover a blatant appeal to self-interest; the cause seduces
but the self-interest secures the deal.
Daily Law: Show people what’s in it for them.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 43: Work on the Hearts and Minds of Others

AUGUST 8
Avoid Argument
Never argue. In society nothing must be discussed; give only results.
—benjamin disraeli
The Arguer does not understand that words are never neutral, and that by
arguing with a superior he impugns the intelligence of one more powerful
than he. He also has no awareness of the person he is dealing with. Since
each man believes that he is right, and words will rarely convince him
otherwise, the arguer’s reasoning falls on deaf ears. When cornered, he only
argues more, digging his own grave. Once he has made the other person
feel insecure and inferior in his beliefs, the eloquence of Socrates could not
save the situation. It is not simply a question of avoiding an argument with
those who stand above you. We all believe we are masters in the realm of
opinions and reasoning.
Daily Law: You must be careful to always try to demonstrate the correctness of your
ideas indirectly.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 9: Win through Your Actions, Never through Argument

AUGUST 9
The Moral Effect
The power of verbal argument is extremely limited, and often accomplishes
the opposite of what is intended. As Gracián remarks, “The truth is
generally seen, rarely heard.” The Moral Effect is a perfect way to
demonstrate your ideas through action. Quite simply, you teach others a
lesson by giving them a taste of their own medicine. In the Moral Effect,
you mirror what other people have done to you, and do so in a way that
makes them realize you are doing to them exactly what they did to you. You
make them feel that their behavior has been unpleasant, as opposed to
hearing you complain and whine about it, which only gets their defenses up.
And as they feel the result of their actions mirrored back at them, they
realize in the profoundest sense how they hurt or punish others with their
unsocial behavior.
Daily Law: Objectify the qualities you want them to feel ashamed of and create a mirror
in which they can gaze at their follies and learn a lesson about themselves.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 44: Disarm and Infuriate with the Mirror Effect

AUGUST 10
Anchor Their Ego
Think of people’s ego and vanity as a kind of front. When they are attacking
you and you don’t know why, it is often because you have inadvertently
threatened their ego, their sense of importance in the world. Whenever
possible, you must work to make people feel secure about themselves. Use
whatever works: subtle flattery, a gift, an unexpected promotion, an offer of
alliance, a presentation of you and they as equals, a mirroring of their ideas
and values. All these things will make them feel anchored in their frontal
position relative to the world, lowering their defenses and making them like
you. Secure and comfortable, they are now set up for persuasion. This is
particularly devastating with a target whose ego is delicate.
Daily Law: When people feel secure about themselves, when you anchor the ego they
front, they are disarmed and maneuverable.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 18: Expose and Attack Your Opponent’s Soft Flank—
The Turning Strategy

AUGUST 11
Master the Art of Insinuation
No persuader can hope to succeed without mastering the language and art
of insinuation. Slips of the tongue, apparently inadvertent “sleep on it”
comments, alluring references, statements for which you quickly apologize
— all of these have immense insinuating power. They get under people’s
skin like a poison and take on a life of their own. The key to succeeding
with your insinuations is to make them when your targets are at their most
relaxed or distracted, so that they are not aware of what is happening. Polite
banter is often the perfect front for this; people are thinking about what they
will say next, or are absorbed in their own thoughts. Your insinuations will
barely register, which is how you want it. There is too little mystery in the
world; too many people say exactly what they feel or want. We yearn for
something enigmatic, for something to feed our fantasies. Because of the
lack of suggestion and ambiguity in daily life, the person who uses them
suddenly seems to have something alluring and full of promise.
Daily Law: Insinuation is the supreme means of influencing people. Hints, suggestions,
and insinuations bypass people’s natural resistance. Make everything suggestive.
The Art of Seduction: Master the Art of Insinuation

AUGUST 12
Use Their Emotions
In the book Change, the therapist authors (Paul Watzlawick, John
Weakland, and Richard Fisch) discuss the case of a rebellious teenager,
suspended from school by the principal because he was caught dealing
drugs. He was still to do his homework at home, but was forbidden from
being on campus. This would put a big dent in his drug-dealing business.
The boy burned with the desire to get vengeance.
The mother consulted a therapist who told her to do the following:
explain to the son that the principal believed only students who attended
class in person could do well. In the principal’s mind, by keeping the boy
away from school he was ensuring he would fail. If he did better by
working at home than at class, this would embarrass the principal. Better to
not try too hard this semester, he advised her to say; instead, get on the
good side of the principal by proving him right. Of course, such advice was
cleverly designed to play into his rebellious nature. Now he desired nothing
more than to embarrass the principal, and so threw himself into his
homework with great energy, the goal of the therapist all along.
Daily Law: In essence, the idea is not to counter people’s strong emotions but move with
them and find a way to channel them in a productive direction.
Robert Greene, “4 Strategies for Becoming a Master Persuader,” Medium, November 14,
2008

AUGUST 13
Penetrate Their Minds
Machiavelli craved the power to spread his ideas and advice. Denied this
power through politics, he set out to win it through books: he would convert
readers to his cause, and they would spread his ideas, witting or unwitting
carriers. Machiavelli knew that the powerful are often reluctant to take
advice, particularly from someone apparently beneath them. He also knew
that many of those not in power might be frightened by the dangerous
aspects of his philosophy—that many readers would be attracted and
repelled at the same time. To win over the resistant and ambivalent,
Machiavelli’s books would have to be strategic, indirect, and crafty. So he
devised unconventional rhetorical tactics to penetrate deep behind his
readers’ defenses. First, he filled his books with indispensable advice—
practical ideas on how to get power, stay in power, protect one’s power.
That draws in readers of all kinds, for all of us think first of our own self-
interest. Next, Machiavelli stitched historical anecdotes throughout his
writing to illustrate his ideas. People like to be shown ways to fancy
themselves modern Caesars or Medicis, and they like to be entertained by a
good story; and a mind captivated by a story is relatively undefended and
open to suggestion. Finally, Machiavelli used stark, unadorned language to
give his writing movement. Instead of finding their minds slowing and
stopping, his readers are infected with the desire to go beyond thought and
take action.
Daily Law: You may have brilliant ideas, the kind that could revolutionize the world, but
unless you can express them effectively, they will have no force, no power to enter
people’s minds in a deep and lasting way. Be strategic in your messaging.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 30: Penetrate Their Minds

AUGUST 14
Leave People with a Feeling
For most of us, the conclusion of anything—a project, a campaign, an
attempt at persuasion—represents a kind of wall: our work is done, and it is
time to tally our gains and losses and move on. Lyndon Johnson looked at
the world much differently: an ending was not like a wall but more like a
door, leading to the next phase or battle. What mattered to him was not
gaining a victory but where it left him, how it opened onto the next round.
He kept his eye on the future, and on the kind of success that would keep
him moving forward. Johnson used the same approach in his efforts to win
over voters. Instead of trying to persuade people to support him with
speeches and fancy words (he was not a good orator anyway), he focused
on the feeling he left people with. He knew that persuasion is ultimately a
process of the emotions: words can sound nice, but if a politician leaves
people suspecting him of being insincere, of merely plugging for votes, they
will close off to him and forget him. So Johnson worked to establish an
emotional connection with voters, and he would close his conversations
with them with a hearty handshake and with a look in his eye, a tremor in
his voice, that sealed the bond between them. He left them feeling that they
would see him again, and he stirred emotions that would erase any
suspicion he might be insincere. The end of the conversation was in fact a
kind of beginning, for it stayed in their minds and translated into votes.
Daily Law: Keep your eyes on the aftermath of any encounter. Think more of the feeling
you leave people with—a feeling that might translate into a desire to see more of you.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 22: Know How to End Things—The Exit Strategy

AUGUST 15
Create Compelling Spectacles
Using words to plead your case is risky business: Words are dangerous
instruments, and often go astray. The words people use to persuade us
virtually invite us to reflect on them with words of our own; we mull them
over, and often end up believing the opposite of what they say. (That is part
of our perverse nature.) It also happens that words offend us, stirring up
associations unintended by the speaker. The visual, on the other hand, short-
circuits the labyrinth of words. It strikes with an emotional power and
immediacy that leave no gaps for reflection and doubt. Like music, it leaps
right over rational, reasonable thoughts. The best way to use visuals is to
organize images and symbols into a grand spectacle that awes people and
distracts them from unpleasant realities. This is easy to do: People love
what is grand, spectacular, and larger than life. Appeal to their emotions and
they will flock to your spectacle in hordes. The visual is the easiest route to
their hearts.
Daily Law: Stage spectacles for those around you, then, full of arresting visuals and
radiant symbols that heighten your presence. Dazzled by appearances, no one will notice
what you are really doing.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 37: Create Compelling Spectacles

AUGUST 16
Use Their Rigidity
A pawnbroker’s son once came to the great eighteenth-century Zen master
Hakuin with the following problem: he wanted to get his father to practice
Buddhism, but the man pretended to be too busy with his bookkeeping to
have time for even a single chant or prayer. Hakuin knew the pawnbroker—
he was an inveterate miser who was only using this as an excuse to avoid
religion, which he considered a waste of time. Hakuin advised the boy to
tell his father that the Zen master himself would buy from him each prayer
and chant that he did on a daily basis. It was strictly a business deal. Of
course the pawnbroker was very happy with the deal—he could shut his son
up and make money in the process. Each day he presented Hakuin with his
bill for the prayers, and Hakuin duly paid him. But on the seventh day, he
failed to show up. It seemed that he had gotten so caught up in the chanting
that he had forgotten to count how many prayers he had done. A few days
later he admitted to Hakuin he had become completely taken up with the
chants, felt so much better, and did not need to be paid anymore. He soon
became a very generous donor to Hakuin’s temple. When people are rigid in
their opposition to something, it stems from deep fear of change and the
uncertainty it could bring. They must have everything on their terms and
feel in control. You play into their hands if you try with all your advice to
encourage change—it gives them something to react against and justifies
their rigidity. They become more stubborn. Stop fighting with such people
and use the actual nature of their rigid behavior to effect a gentle change
that could lead to something greater.
Daily Law: People often won’t do what others ask them to do, because they simply want
to assert their will. If you heartily agree with their rebellion, they will rebel again and
assert their will in the opposite direction, which is what you wanted all along—the
essence of reverse psychology.
The Laws of Human Nature, 7: Soften People’s Resistance by Confirming Their Self-
Opinion—The Law of Defensiveness

AUGUST 17
Persuade with a Light Touch
The most anti-seductive form of language is argument. How many silent
enemies do we create by arguing? There is a superior way to get people to
listen and be persuaded: humor and a light touch. The nineteenth-century
English politician Benjamin Disraeli was a master at this game. In
Parliament, to fail to reply to an accusation or slanderous comment was a
deadly mistake: silence meant the accuser was right. Yet to respond angrily,
to get into an argument, was to look ugly and defensive. Disraeli used a
different tactic: he stayed calm. When the time came to reply to an attack,
he would slowly make his way to the speaker’s table, pause, then utter a
humorous or sarcastic retort. Everyone would laugh. Now that he had
warmed people up, he would proceed to refute his enemy, still mixing in
amusing comments; or perhaps he would simply move on to another
subject, as if he were above it all. His humor took out the sting of any attack
on him. Laughter and applause have a domino effect: once your listeners
have laughed, they are more likely to laugh again. In this lighthearted mood
they are also more apt to listen.
Daily Law: A subtle touch and a bit of irony give you room to persuade them, move them
to your side, mock your enemies. That is the seductive form of argument.
The Art of Seduction: Use the Demonic Power of Words to Sow Confusion

AUGUST 18
Make Them Feel Your Point
A heckler once interrupted Nikita Khrushchev in the middle of a speech in
which he was denouncing the crimes of Stalin. “You were a colleague of
Stalin’s,” the heckler yelled, “why didn’t you stop him then?” Khrushschev
apparently could not see the heckler and barked out, “Who said that?” No
hand went up. No one moved a muscle. After a few seconds of tense
silence, Khrushchev finally said in a quiet voice, “Now you know why I
didn’t stop him.” Instead of just arguing that anyone facing Stalin was
afraid, knowing that the slightest sign of rebellion would mean certain
death, he had made them feel what it was like to face Stalin—had made
them feel the paranoia, the fear of speaking up, the terror of confronting the
leader, in this case Khrushchev. The demonstration was visceral and no
more argument was necessary. The power of demonstrating is that your
opponents do not get defensive, and are therefore more open to persuasion.
Daily Law: Your goal must be to make them literally and physically feel your meaning,
rather than pouring words over them.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 9: Win through Your Actions, Never through Argument

AUGUST 19
Let Them Win on the Minor Points
In 1782 the French playwright Pierre-Augustin Caron de Beaumarchais put
the finishing touches on his great masterpiece The Marriage of Figaro. The
approval of King Louis XVI was required, and when he read the
manuscript, he was furious. Such a play would lead to a revolution, he said:
“This man mocks everything that must be respected in a government.”
After much pressure, he agreed to have it privately performed in a theater at
Versailles. The aristocratic audience loved it. The king allowed more
performances, but he directed his censors to get their hands on the script
and alter its worst passages before it was presented to the public, To bypass
this, Beaumarchais commissioned a tribunal of academics, intellectuals,
courtiers, and government ministers to go over the play with him. A man
who attended the meeting wrote, “M. de Beaumarchais announced that he
would submit unreservedly to every cut and change that the gentlemen and
even the ladies present might deem appropriate. . . . Everyone wanted to
add something of his own.  .  .  . M. de Breteuil suggested a witticism,
Beaumarchais accepted it and thanked him. . . . ‘It will save the fourth act.’
Mme de Matignon contributed the color of the little page’s ribbon. The
color was adopted and became fashionable.” Beaumarchais was indeed very
clever. By allowing others to make even the smallest changes to his
masterpiece, he greatly flattered their egos and their intelligence. Of course,
on the larger changes later requested by Louis’s censors, Beaumarchais did
not relent. By then he had so won over the members of his own tribunal that
they stridently defended him, and Louis had to back down.
Daily Law: Learn to lower people’s defenses by agreeing to matters that are not so
important. This will give you great latitude to move them in the direction you desire and
get them to concede to your desires on more important matters.
The Laws of Human Nature, 7: Soften People’s Resistance by Confirming Their Self-
Opinion—The Law of Defensiveness

AUGUST 20
How to Deal with the Irritating
Earlier on in his career, when the renowned psychotherapist Milton
Erickson was a medical professor at a university, he had to deal with a very
smart student named Anne, who always showed up late to classes, then
apologized profusely and very sincerely. She happened to be a straight-A
student. She always promised to be on time for the next class but never was.
This made it difficult for her fellow students; she frequently held up lectures
or laboratory work. And on the first day of one of Erickson’s lecture
classes, she was up to her old tricks, but Erickson was prepared. When she
entered late, he had the entire class stand up and bow down to her in mock
reverence; he did the same. Even after class, as she walked down the hall,
the students continued their bowing. The message was clear—“We see
through you”—and feeling embarrassed and ashamed, she stopped showing
up late.
Daily Law: Teach the irritating a lesson by giving them a taste of their own medicine or
showing them you see through them.
The Laws of Human Nature, 16: See the Hostility Behind the Friendly Façade—The Law
of Aggression

AUGUST 21
The Master Motivator
On the eve of his army’s first battle with the fearsome Roman legions,
Hannibal somehow had to bring his worn-out men alive. He decided to put
on a show: he brought in a group of prisoners and told them that if they
fought one another to the death in a gladiatorial contest, the victors would
win freedom and a place in the Carthaginian army. The prisoners agreed,
and Hannibal’s soldiers were treated to hours of bloody entertainment.
When the fighting was over, Hannibal addressed his men. You soldiers, said
Hannibal, are in exactly the same position as the prisoners. You are many
miles from home, on hostile territory, and you have nowhere to go. It is
either freedom or slavery, victory or death. But fight as these men fought
today and you will prevail. The contest and speech got hold of Hannibal’s
soldiers, and the next day they fought with deadly ferocity and defeated the
Romans. Hannibal was a master motivator of a rare kind. Where others
would harangue their soldiers with speeches, he knew that to depend on
words was to be in a sorry state: words only hit the surface of a soldier, and
a leader must grab his men’s hearts, make their blood boil, get into their
minds, alter their moods. Hannibal reached his soldiers’ emotions
indirectly, by relaxing them, calming them, taking them outside their
problems, and getting them to bond. Only then did he hit them with a
speech that brought home their precarious reality and swayed their
emotions.
Daily Law: Motivating people is a subtle art. You must aim indirectly at people’s
emotions. By setting up your emotional appeal, you will get inside instead of just
scratching the surface.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 7: Transform Your War into a Crusade—Morale
Strategies

AUGUST 22
The Lure of the Unfamiliar
One of the perverse parts of human nature is that we always desire what we
don’t have. We look on the other side of the fence—the grass is always
greener, the neighbor has a better car, their children are better behaved.
We’re always desiring what other people have. We think what we don’t
have is better. That’s the nature of desire. When we actually attain
something, it’s not such a great feeling. The importance of desire is to
always be pursuing something, something outside of ourselves. We want
what is unfamiliar, what is exotic, what we’ve never had in our lives before.
We want what is transgressive, what is the taboo, what other people don’t
have, what is new or fresh. You have to create that object of desire—in
whatever you’re creating in life. You have to give people the feeling that
there’s something a little bit taboo and transgressive about it, which was
what I did with The 48 Laws of Power. When you pick up that book, you
feel like you’re doing something a little bit dirty and nasty. You want to
create the feeling that what you are offering is not something familiar.
Daily Law: When a person or an object is familiar, we have a bit of disdain. But when
it’s distant and alluring and mysterious and something out there that we don’t have—
that sparks our desire. That’s the key to any sort of marketing or soft sell.
Robert Greene in conversation at Live Talks Los Angeles, February 11, 2019

AUGUST 23
Find Their Thumbscrew
Find out each man’s thumbscrew. ’Tis the art of setting their wills in action. It needs more skill
than resolution. You must know where to get at anyone. Every volition has a special motive
which varies according to taste. All men are idolaters, some of fame, others of self-interest,
most of pleasure. Skill consists in knowing these idols in order to bring them into play.
Knowing any man’s mainspring of motive you have as it were the key to his will.
—baltasar gracián
We all have resistances. We live with a perpetual armor around ourselves to
defend against change and the intrusive actions of friends and rivals. We
would like nothing more than to be left to do things our own way.
Constantly butting up against these resistances will cost you a lot of energy.
One of the most important things to realize about people, though, is that
they all have a weakness, some part of their psychological armor that will
not resist, that will bend to your will if you find it and push on it. Some
people wear their weaknesses openly, others disguise them. Those who
disguise them are often the ones most effectively undone through that one
chink in their armor.
Daily Law: Everyone has a thumbscrew, a gap in the castle wall. Once found, it is a
thumbscrew you can turn to your advantage.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 33: Discover Each Man’s Thumbscrew

AUGUST 24
Mix Harshness and Kindness
Napoleon was the greatest man manager in history: he took millions of
unruly, undisciplined, unsoldierly young men, recently liberated by the
French Revolution, and molded them into one of the most successful
fighting forces ever known. Of all Napoleon’s techniques, none was more
effective than his use of punishments and rewards, all staged for the greatest
dramatic impact. His personal rebukes were rare, but when he was angry,
when he punished, the effect was devastating: the target felt disowned,
outcast. As if exiled from the warmth of his family, he would struggle to
win back the general’s favor and then never to give him a reason to be
angry again. Promotions, rewards, and public praise were equally rare, and
when they came, they were always for merit, never for some political
calculation. Caught between the poles of wanting never to displease
Napoleon and yearning for his recognition, his men were pulled into his
sway, following him devotedly but never quite catching up. Learn from the
master: the way to manage people is to keep them in suspense. First, create
a bond between your soldiers and yourself. They respect you, admire you,
even fear you a little. To make the bond stronger, hold yourself back, create
a little space around yourself; you are warm yet with a touch of distance.
Once the bond is forged, appear less often. Make both your punishments
and your praises rare and unexpected, whether for mistakes or for successes
that may seem minor at the time but have symbolic meaning. Understand:
once people know what pleases you and what angers you, they turn into
trained poodles, working to charm you with apparent good behavior.
Daily Law: Keep them in suspense—make them think of you constantly and want to
please you but never know just how to do it. Once they are in the trap, you will have a
magnetic pull over them. Motivation will become automatic.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 7: Transform Your War into a Crusade—Morale
Strategies

AUGUST 25
Cultivate the Third Eye
In 401 BC, ten thousand Greek mercenary soldiers suddenly found
themselves on the losing side of a battle, trapped deep in the heart of Persia.
They wandered through their camp bemoaning their fate. Among them was
the writer Xenophon, who had gone along with the soldiers as a kind of
roving reporter. Xenophon had studied philosophy as a student of Socrates.
He believed in the supremacy of rational thinking, of seeing the entire
picture, the general idea behind the fleeting appearances of daily life. One
night he had a vision of how the Greeks could escape their trap and return
home. He saw them moving swiftly and stealthily through Persia,
sacrificing everything for speed. He saw them leaving right away, using the
element of surprise to gain some distance. He thought ahead—of the terrain,
the route to take, the many enemies they would face, how they could help
and use citizens who revolted against the Persians. In the space of a few
hours, he had conjured up the details of the retreat, all inspired by his
overall vision of their fast zigzag route to the Mediterranean and home.
Although he had no military experience, his vision was so complete, and he
communicated it with such confidence, that the soldiers nominated him as
their de facto leader. This story embodies the essence of all authority and
the most essential element in establishing it. Most people are locked in the
moment. They are prone to overreacting and panicking, to seeing only a
narrow part of the reality facing the group. They cannot entertain alternative
ideas or prioritize. Those who maintain their presence of mind and elevate
their perspective above the moment tap into the visionary powers of the
human mind and cultivate that third eye for unseen forces and trends. They
stand out from the group and fulfill the true function of leadership.
Daily Law: Create the aura of authority by seeming to possess the godlike ability to read
the future. This is a power that can be practiced and developed and applied to any
situation.
The Laws of Human Nature, 15: Make Them Want to Follow You—The Law of Fickleness

AUGUST 26
Appeal to Their Unrealized Greatness
Most people believe themselves to be inwardly greater than they outwardly
appear to the world. They are full of unrealized ideals: they could be artists,
thinkers, leaders, spiritual figures, but the world has crushed them, denied
them the chance to let their abilities flourish. This is the key to their
seduction—and to keeping them seduced over time. Appeal only to people’s
physical side, as many amateur seducers do, and they will resent you for
playing upon their basest instincts. But appeal to their better selves, to a
higher standard of beauty, and they will hardly notice that they have been
seduced.
Daily Law: Make your targets feel elevated, lofty, spiritual, and your power over them
will be limitless.
The Art of Seduction: The Ideal Lover

AUGUST 27
Transform Yourself into a Deep Listener
You know your own thoughts only too well. You are rarely surprised. Your
mind tends to circle obsessively around the same subjects. But each person
you encounter represents an undiscovered country full of surprises. Imagine
for a moment that you could step inside people’s minds and what an
amazing journey that could be. People who seem quiet and dull often have
the strangest inner lives for you to explore. Even with boors and fools, you
can educate yourself as to the origins and nature of their flaws.
Daily Law: Transforming yourself into a deep listener will not only prove more amusing
as you open your mind to their mind but will also provide the most invaluable lessons
about human psychology. The secret to this: finding other people endlessly fascinating.
The Laws of Human Nature, 7: Soften People’s Resistance by Confirming Their Self-
Opinion—The Law of Defensiveness

AUGUST 28
Instill a Feeling of Inner Security
When you try to convince people of something, one of three things will
happen. First, you might inadvertently challenge a particular aspect of their
self-opinion. Second, you can leave their self-opinion in a neutral position
—neither challenged nor confirmed. Third, you can actively confirm their
self-opinion. In this case, you are fulfilling one of people’s greatest
emotional needs. We can imagine that we are independent, intelligent,
decent, and self-reliant, but only other people can truly confirm this for us.
And in a harsh and competitive world in which we are all prone to continual
self-doubt, we almost never get this validation that we crave. When you
give it to people, you will have the magical effect that occurred when you
yourself were drunk, or at a rally, or in love. You will make people relax.
No longer consumed by insecurities, they can direct their attention outward.
Their minds open, making them susceptible to suggestion and insinuation.
If they decide to help you, they feel like they are doing this of their own
free will.
Daily Law: Your task is simple: instill in people a feeling of inner security. Mirror their
values, show that you like and respect them, make them feel you appreciate their wisdom
and experience.
The Laws of Human Nature, 7: Soften People’s Resistance by Confirming Their Self-
Opinion—The Law of Defensiveness

AUGUST 29
Infect People with the Proper Mood
If you are relaxed and anticipating a pleasurable experience, this will
communicate itself and have a mirror-like effect on the other person. One of
the best attitudes to adapt for this purpose is one of complete indulgence.
You do not judge other people; you accept them as they are. In the novel
The Ambassadors, the writer Henry James paints the portrait of this ideal in
the form of Marie de Vionnet, an older French woman of impeccable
manners, who surreptitiously uses an American named Lambert Strether to
help her in a love affair. From the very moment he meets her, Strether is
captivated. She seems a “mix of lucidity and mystery.” She listens deeply to
what he says and, without responding, gives him the feeling she completely
understands him. She envelops him in her empathy. She acts from the
beginning as if they have become good friends, but it is in her manner,
nothing she says. He calls her indulgent spirit “a beautiful conscious
mildness,” and it has a hypnotic power over him. Well before she even asks
for his help, he is completely under her spell and will do anything for her.
Such an attitude replicates the ideal mother figure—unconditional in her
love. It is not expressed so much in words as in looks and body language. It
works equally well on men and women and has a hypnotic effect on almost
anyone.
Daily Law: As social animals, we are extremely susceptible to the moods of other people.
Use this power to subtly infuse into people the appropriate mood for influencing them.
The Laws of Human Nature, 7: Soften People’s Resistance by Confirming Their Self-
Opinion—The Law of Defensiveness

AUGUST 30
Imagine Them in the Best Light
Keep in mind that your expectations about people are communicated to
them nonverbally. It has been demonstrated, for instance, that teachers who
expect greater things from their pupils can, without ever saying anything,
have a positive effect on their work and grades. By feeling particularly
excited when you’re meeting someone, you will communicate this to him or
her in a powerful way. Some have claimed to get great results by simply
thinking the other person is handsome or good-looking.
Daily Law: If there is a person of whom you will eventually ask a favor, try imagining
him or her in the best light—generous and caring—if that is possible.
The Laws of Human Nature, 7: Soften People’s Resistance by Confirming Their Self-
Opinion—The Law of Defensiveness

AUGUST 31
Come to Terms with Your Own Self-Opinion
Finally, when it comes to your own self-opinion, try to have some ironic
distance from it. Make yourself aware of its existence and how it operates
within you. Come to terms with the fact that you are not as free and
autonomous as you like to believe. You do conform to the opinions of the
groups you belong to; you do buy products because of subliminal influence;
you can be manipulated. Realize as well that you are not as good as the
idealized image of your self-opinion. Like everyone else, you can be quite
self-absorbed and obsessed with your own agenda. With this awareness,
you will not feel the need to be validated by others.
Daily Law: Work at making yourself truly independent and concerned with the welfare
of others, as opposed to staying attached to the illusion of your self-opinion.
The Laws of Human Nature, 7: Soften People’s Resistance by Confirming Their Self-
Opinion—The Law of Defensiveness

September
The Grand Strategist
rising out of tactical hell
Strategy is an art that requires not only a different way of thinking but an
entirely different approach to life itself. Too often there is a chasm between
our ideas and knowledge on the one hand and our actual experience on the
other. We absorb trivia and information that take up mental space but get us
nowhere. We read books that divert us but have little relevance to our daily
lives. We have lofty ideas that we do not put into practice. We also have
many rich experiences that we do not analyze enough, that do not inspire us
with ideas, whose lessons we ignore. Strategy requires a constant contact
between the two realms. It is practical knowledge of the highest form.
Events in life mean nothing if you do not reflect on them in a deep way, and
ideas from books are pointless if they have no application to life as you live
it. In strategy all of life is a game that you are playing. This game is
exciting but also requires deep and serious attention. The stakes are so high.
What you know must translate into action, and action must translate into
knowledge. In this way strategy becomes a lifelong challenge and the
source of constant pleasure in surmounting difficulties and solving
problems. The month of September aims to transform you into a strategic
warrior in daily life.
In my book The 33 Strategies of War, I make the point that most of us exist
in a realm that I call tactical hell. This hell consists of all the people around
us who are vying for power or some kind of control, and whose actions
intersect our lives in a thousand different directions. We are constantly
having to react to what this person does or says, getting emotional in the
process. Once you sink into this hell, it is very difficult to raise your mind
above it. You are dealing with one battle after another, and none of them
end with any resolution. It is very hard for you to see the hell for what it is;
you are too close to it, too mired in it to think of it any other way. Because
there are so many people now vying for power in this world, and our
attentions are so distracted in many different directions, this dynamic only
gets worse and worse.
Strategy is the only answer. This is not some dry academic point of
contention. It is actually a matter of grave importance, the difference
between a life of misery and one of balance and success. Strategy is a
mental process in which your mind elevates itself above the battlefield. You
have a sense of a larger purpose for your life, where you want to be down
the road, what you were destined to accomplish. This makes it easier to
decide what is truly important, what battles to avoid. You are able to control
your emotions, to view the world with a degree of detachment.
If a person tries to suck you into their battles or problems, you have the
necessary distance and perspective to keep away or help them without
losing your balance. You see everything as a strategic concern, including
how the group you lead is structured—for mobility, for morale. Once you
are on this track, everything becomes easier. A defeat or setback is a lesson
to be learned, not a personal affront. Success does not go to your head,
make you overreach.
There are false strategists in this world who are nothing more than
master tacticians. They look like strategists because they are able to manage
immediate problems with a degree of aplomb. They know how to fix
problems. They get ahead, or rather, they are able to just raise their heads
above the water. But they inevitably slip up. I consider President Bill
Clinton to be an example of this, as compared to an Abraham Lincoln or
Franklin Delano Roosevelt, who were true strategists.
There are others who also seem to have a vision, to have a large plan in
life. They look like strategists as well, but their plans have no relation to
reality. Their plans and goals are really reflections of their desires. And in
the execution we can see this. Everything turns into friction. President
Bush’s “grand strategy” to remold the Middle East is an example of this. It
looks large and encompassing, on paper it makes some sense, but in
practice it is a massive failure, because it has no relation to the reality on
the ground. Strategists are realists if nothing else—they can look at the
world and themselves with a higher degree of objectivity than others.
My books have been described as evil and immoral, and me as someone
who is creating more harm in this world by writing them. I don’t take this
personally, but the truth as I see it is that the books are not evil at all. I
believe far more bad things occur in this world because people do not know
how to operate effectively, or strategically. They launch wars without
knowing where they are headed; they start businesses that are on shaky
ground and get nowhere; they direct political campaigns that are badly
thought out and fail; they waste valuable time and energy on things that do
not matter. It is tempting for people to talk about good and evil from their
armchairs. Nothing is easier. But to translate those ideas into reality requires
strategic thinking. Even Gandhi knew that.
To the ancient Greeks, far more harm is caused in this world by stupidity
and incompetence than outright evil. Those who are overtly evil can be
combated, because they are easy to recognize and fight against. The
incompetent and stupid are far more dangerous because we are never quite
sure where they are leading us, until it is too late. The greatest military
disasters in history have more often than not originated from leaders who
lack strategic wisdom.
It is almost a religious matter: Will you convert to the light side, to
strategy? Or will you keep yourself in tactical hell? The mental
commitment to being more of a strategist in life is half of the battle. It is all
that I ask of my readers.

SEPTEMBER 1
Elevate Yourself Above the Battlefield
[Strategy] is more than a science: it is the application of knowledge to practical life, the
development of thought capable of modifying the original guiding idea in the light of ever-
changing situations; it is the art of acting under the pressure of the most difficult conditions.
—helmuth von moltke
In war, strategy is the art of commanding the entire military operation.
Tactics, on the other hand, is the skill of forming up the army for battle
itself and dealing with the immediate needs of the battlefield. Most of us in
life are tacticians, not strategists. We become so enmeshed in the conflicts
we face that we can think only of how to get what we want in the battle we
are currently facing. To think strategically is difficult and unnatural. You
may imagine you are being strategic, but in all likelihood you are merely
being tactical. To have the power that only strategy can bring, you must be
able to elevate yourself above the battlefield, to focus on your long-term
objectives, to craft an entire campaign, to get out of the reactive mode that
so many battles in life lock you into. Keeping your overall goals in mind, it
becomes much easier to decide when to fight and when to walk away. That
makes the tactical decisions of daily life much simpler and more rational.
Daily Law: Tactical people are heavy and stuck in the ground; strategists are light on
their feet and can see far and wide. Where are you on that spectrum?
The 33 Strategies of War, Preface

SEPTEMBER 2
Control the Entire Chessboard
The film director Alfred Hitchcock made this strategy a life principle. His
every action a setup designed to yield results down the road, he calmly
thought ahead and moved step by step. His goal was to make a film that
matched his original vision, uncorrupted by the influence of the actors,
producers, and other staff who necessarily came along later. By controlling
every detail of the film’s screenplay, he made it almost impossible for the
producer to interfere. Should the producer try to meddle during the actual
shooting, Hitchcock would have a camera ready on set with no film in it.
He could pretend to take the extra shots that the producer wanted, letting
the producer feel powerful without risk to the end result. Hitchcock did the
same with actors: instead of telling them directly what to do, he would
infect them with the emotion he wanted—fear, anger, desire—by the way
he treated them on set. Every step on the campaign trail fit perfectly into the
next one.
Daily Law: Maintain control of your emotions and plot your moves in advance, seeing
the entire chessboard.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 12: Lose Battles but Win the War—Grand Strategy

SEPTEMBER 3
Attack the Center of Gravity
The first principle is that the ultimate substance of enemy strength must be traced back to the
fewest possible sources, and ideally to one alone. . . . By constantly seeking out the center of
his power, by daring all to win all, will one really defeat the enemy.
—carl von clausewitz
It is the nature of power to present a forceful front, to seem menacing and
intimidating, strong and decisive. But this outward display is often
exaggerated or even downright deceptive, since power does not dare show
its weaknesses. And beneath the display is the support on which power rests
—its “center of gravity.” The phrase is von Clausewitz’s, who elaborated it
as “the hub of all power and movement, on which everything depends.” To
attack this center of gravity, to neutralize or destroy it, is the ultimate
strategy, for without it the whole structure will collapse. Hitting the enemy’s
center of gravity there is the best way to end a conflict definitively and
economically. In looking for those centers, it is crucial not to be misled by
the intimidating or dazzling exterior, mistaking the outward appearance for
what sets it in motion. You will probably have to take several steps, one by
one, to uncover this ultimate power source, peeling away layer after layer.
Daily Law: When you look at your rivals, search for the center of gravity that holds the
entire structure together. That center can be their wealth, their popularity, a key
position, a winning strategy. Hitting them there will inflict disproportionate pain.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 16: Hit Them Where It Hurts—The Center-of-Gravity
Strategy

SEPTEMBER 4
Avoid Tactical Hell
Often we see this dynamic in marital spats: it is no longer about repairing
the relationship but about imposing one’s point of view. At times, caught in
these battles, you feel defensive and petty, your spirit drawn downward.
This is almost a sure sign that you have descended into tactical hell. Our
minds are designed for strategic thinking—calculating several moves in
advance toward our goals. In tactical hell you can never raise your
perspective high enough to think in that manner. You are constantly reacting
to the moves of this or that person, embroiled in their dramas and emotions,
going around in circles. The only solution is to back out temporarily or
permanently from these battles, particularly if they are occurring on several
fronts. You need some detachment and perspective. Get your ego to calm
down. Remind yourself that winning an argument or proving your point
really gets you nowhere in the long run. Win through your actions, not your
words. Start to think again about your long-term goals.
Daily Law: Create a ladder of values and priorities in your life, reminding yourself of
what really matters to you. If you determine that a particular battle is in fact important,
with a greater sense of detachment you can now plot a more strategic response.
The Laws of Human Nature, 7: Soften People’s Resistance by Confirming Their Self-
Opinion—The Law of Defensiveness

SEPTEMBER 5
Place Yourself in Shih
To separate yourself from the mechanical and reactive types, you need to
get rid of a common misconception: the essence of strategy is not to carry
out a brilliant plan that proceeds in steps; it is to put yourself in situations
where you have more options than the enemy does. Instead of grasping at
Option A as the single right answer, true strategy is positioning yourself to
be able to do A, B, or C depending on the circumstances. That is strategic
depth of thinking, as opposed to formulaic thinking. Sun Tzu expressed this
idea differently: what you aim for in strategy, he said, is shih, a position of
potential force—the position of a boulder perched precariously on a hilltop,
say, or of a bowstring stretched taut. A tap on the boulder, the release of the
bowstring, and potential force is violently unleashed. The boulder or arrow
can go in any direction; it is geared to the actions of the enemy. What
matters is not following preordained steps but placing yourself in shih and
giving yourself options.
Daily Law: Rid yourself of the illusion that strategy is a series of steps to be followed
toward a goal. Run in the opposite direction of any expert or guru proclaiming to possess
a secret formula for success and power.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 6: Segment Your Forces—The Controlled-Chaos
Strategy

SEPTEMBER 6
Never Attack Your Opponents Head-On
“It is by turning the enemy, by attacking his flank, that battles are won.”
—napoleon bonaparte
One of Napoleon’s favorite strategies was what he called the manoeuvre sur
les derrières. Its success was based on two truths: First, generals like to
place their armies in a strong frontal position. Napoleon would often play
on this tendency to face forward in battle by seeming to engage the enemy
frontally; in the fog of battle, it was hard to tell that really only half of his
army was deployed here, and meanwhile he would sneak the other half to
the side or rear. Second, an army sensing attack from the flank is alarmed
and vulnerable and must turn to face the threat. This moment of turning
contains great weakness and confusion. Learn from the great master
himself: Attacking from the front is rarely wise. Go for the flank, the
vulnerable side. This principle is applicable to conflicts or encounters of
any scale. Individuals often show their flank, signal their vulnerability, by
its opposite, the front they show most visibly to the world. This front can be
an aggressive personality, a way of dealing with people by pushing them
around. It can be their most cherished beliefs and ideas; it can be the way
they make themselves liked. The more you get people to expose this front,
to show more of themselves and the directions they tend to move in, the
more their unprotected flanks will come into focus—unconscious desires,
gaping insecurities, precarious alliances, uncontrollable compulsions. Once
you move on their flanks, your targets will turn to face you and lose their
equilibrium. All enemies are vulnerable from their sides. There is no
defense against a well-designed flanking maneuver.
Daily Law: When you attack people head-on, you stiffen their resistance and make your
task that much harder. Instead: distract your opponents’ attention to the front, then
attack them from the side, where they least expect it.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 18: Expose and Attack Your Opponent’s Soft Flank—
The Turning Strategy

SEPTEMBER 7
Divide and Conquer
Japan’s great seventeenth-century swordsman Miyamoto Musashi on
several occasions faced bands of warriors determined to kill him. The sight
of such a group would intimidate most people. Another tendency would be
to lash out violently, trying to kill as many of the attackers as possible all at
once, but at the risk of losing control of the situation. Musashi, however,
was above all else a strategist, and he solved these dilemmas in the most
rational way possible. He would place himself so that the men would have
to come at him in a line or at an angle. Then he would focus on killing the
first man and move swiftly down the line. Instead of being overwhelmed or
trying too hard, he would break the band into parts. Then he just had to kill
opponent number one, while leaving himself in position to deal with
opponent number two and preventing his mind from being clouded and
confused. The effect was that he could retain his focus while keeping his
opponents off balance, for as he proceeded down the line, they would
become the ones who were intimidated and flustered. Whether you are
beset by many small problems or by one giant problem, make Musashi the
model for your mental process. If you let the complexity of the situation
confuse you and either hesitate or lash out without thought, you will lose
mental control, which will only add momentum to the negative force
coming at you. Always divide up the issue at hand, first placing yourself in
a central position, then proceeding down the line, killing off your problems
one by one. It is often wise to begin with the smallest problem while
keeping the most dangerous one at bay. Solving that one will help you
create momentum that will help you overwhelm all the rest.
Daily Law: Take problems one by one.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 17: Defeat Them in Detail

SEPTEMBER 8
Exploit the Chaos
Chaos—where brilliant dreams are born.
—the i ching
Think of your mind as an army. Armies must adapt to the complexity and
chaos of modern war by becoming more fluid and maneuverable. The
ultimate extension of this evolution is guerrilla warfare, which exploits
chaos by making disorder and unpredictability a strategy. The guerrilla
army never stops to defend a particular place or town; it wins by always
moving, staying one step ahead. By following no set pattern, it gives the
enemy no target. The guerrilla army never repeats the same tactic. It
responds to the situation, the moment, the terrain where it happens to find
itself. There is no front, no concrete line of communication or supply, no
slow-moving wagon. The guerrilla army is pure mobility. That is the model
for your new way of thinking. Apply no tactic rigidly; do not let your mind
settle into static positions, defending any particular place or idea, repeating
the same lifeless maneuvers. Staying in constant motion you show your
enemies no target to aim at. You exploit the chaos of the world instead of
succumbing to it.
Daily Law: Attack problems from new angles, adapting to the landscape and to what
you’re given.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 2: Do Not Fight the Last War—The Guerrilla-War-of-
the-Mind Strategy

SEPTEMBER 9
See the Larger Dangers That Loom in the Future
Experience shows that, if one foresees from far away the designs to be undertaken, one can act
with speed when the moment comes to execute them.
—cardinal richelieu
According to the cosmology of the ancient Greeks, the gods were thought to
have complete vision into the future. They saw everything to come, right
down to the intricate details. Men, on the other hand, were seen as victims
of fate, trapped in the moment and their emotions, unable to see beyond
immediate dangers. Those heroes, such as Odysseus, who were able to look
beyond the present and plan several steps ahead, seemed to defy fate, to
approximate the gods in their ability to determine the future. The
comparison is still valid—those among us who think further ahead and
patiently bring their plans to fruition seem to have a godlike power. Because
most people are too imprisoned in the moment to plan with this kind of
foresight, the ability to ignore immediate dangers and pleasures translates
into power.
Daily Law: Overcome the natural human tendency to react to things as they happen, and
instead train yourself to step back, imagine the larger things taking shape beyond your
immediate vision.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 29: Plan All the Way to the End

SEPTEMBER 10
Never Seem Defensive
Man: Kick him—he’ll forgive you. Flatter him—he may or may not see through you. But
ignore him and he’ll hate you.
—idries shah, caravan of dreams
The Renaissance writer Pietro Aretino often boasted of his aristocratic
lineage, which was, of course, a fiction, since he was actually the son of a
shoemaker. When an enemy of his finally revealed the embarrassing truth,
word quickly spread, and soon all of Venice (where he lived at the time)
was aghast at Aretino’s lies. Had he tried to defend himself, he would have
only dragged himself down. His response was masterful: he announced that
he was indeed the son of a shoemaker, but this only proved his greatness,
since he had risen from the lowest stratum of society to its very pinnacle.
From then on he never mentioned his previous lie, trumpeting instead his
new position on the matter of his ancestry. Remember: the powerful
responses to niggling, petty annoyances and irritations are contempt and
disdain. Never show that something has affected you, or that you are
offended—that only shows you have acknowledged a problem. Contempt is
a dish that is best served cold and without affectation.
Daily Law: By acknowledging a petty problem you give it existence and credibility. The
less interest you reveal, the more superior you seem.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 36: Disdain Things You Cannot Have—Ignoring Them Is the
Best Revenge

SEPTEMBER 11
The Warrior’s Creed
Reality can be defined by a sharp series of limitations on every living thing,
the final boundary being death. We have only so much energy to expend
before we tire; only so much in the way of food and resources is available
to us; our skills and capacities can go only so far. An animal lives within
those limits: it does not try to fly higher or run faster or expend endless
energy amassing a pile of food, for that would exhaust it and leave it
vulnerable to attack. It simply tries to make the most of what it has. A cat,
for instance, instinctively practices an economy of motion and gesture,
never wasting effort. People who live in poverty, similarly, are acutely
aware of their limits: forced to make the most of what they have, they are
endlessly inventive. Necessity has a powerful effect on their creativity. The
problem faced by those of us who live in societies of abundance is that we
lose a sense of limit. Abundance makes us rich in dreams, for in dreams
there are no limits. But it makes us poor in reality. It makes us soft and
decadent, bored with what we have and in need of constant shocks to
remind us that we are alive. In life you must be a warrior, and war requires
realism. While others may find beauty in endless dreams, warriors find it in
reality, in awareness of limits, in making the most of what they have. Like
the cat, they look for the perfect economy of motion and gesture—the way
to give their blows the greatest force with the least expenditure of effort.
Their awareness that their days are numbered—that they could die at any
time—grounds them in reality. There are things they can never do, talents
they will never have, lofty goals they will never reach; that hardly bothers
them. Warriors focus on what they do have, the strengths that they do
possess and that they must use creatively. Knowing when to slow down, to
renew, to retrench, they outlast their opponents. They play for the long
term.
Daily Law: Sometimes in strategy you have to ignore your greater strength and force
yourself to get the maximum out of the minimum. Even if you have the technology, fight
the peasant’s war.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 8: Pick Your Battles Carefully—The Perfect-Economy
Strategy

SEPTEMBER 12
Time Is All You Have
Space I can recover. Time, never.
—napoleon bonaparte
Time is just as important as space in strategic thought, and knowing how to
use time will make you a superior strategist, giving an added dimension to
your attacks and defense. To do this you must stop thinking of time as an
abstraction: in reality, beginning the minute you are born, time is all you
have. It is your only true commodity. People can take away your
possessions, but—short of murder—not even the most powerful aggressors
can take time away from you unless you let them. Even in prison your time
is your own, if you use it for your own purposes. To waste your time in
battles not of your choosing is more than just a mistake, it is stupidity of the
highest order.
Daily Law: Resist the urge to respond to trivial annoyances. Time lost can never be
regained.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 11: Trade Space for Time—The Nonengagement
Strategy

SEPTEMBER 13
Think of the Unintended Consequences
The years teach much which the days never know.
—ralph waldo emerson
In ancient Rome, a group of men loyal to the Republic feared that Julius
Caesar was going to make his dictatorship permanent and establish a
monarchy. In 44 BC they decided to assassinate him, thereby restoring the
Republic. In the ensuing chaos and power vacuum, Caesar’s great-nephew
Octavius quickly rose to the top, assumed power, and permanently ended
the Republic by establishing a de facto monarchy. After Caesar’s death it
came out that he had never intended to create a monarchical system. The
conspirators brought about precisely what they had tried to stop. Invariably
in these cases, people’s thinking is remarkably simple and lazy: kill Caesar
and the Republic returns, action A leads to result B. Understand: Any
phenomenon in the world is by nature complex. The people you deal with
are equally complex. Any action sets off a limitless chain of reactions. It is
never so simple as A leads to B. B will lead to C, to D, and beyond. Other
actors will be pulled into the drama and it is hard to predict their
motivations and responses. You cannot possibly map out these chains or get
a complete handle on consequences. But by making your thinking more
consequential you can at least become aware of the more obvious negative
consequences that could ensue, and this often spells the difference between
success and disaster. You want depth of thinking, to go to several degrees in
imagining the permutations, as far as your mind can go.
Daily Law: Game out all of the possible consequences of a strategy or line of action.
The Laws of Human Nature, 6: Elevate Your Perspective—The Law of Shortsightedness

SEPTEMBER 14
Crowd Out Panic
Lord Yamanouchi, an aristocrat of eighteenth-century Japan, once asked his
tea master to accompany him on a visit to Edo (later Tokyo). Now, the tea
master knew everything there was to know about the tea ceremony, but little
else. He dressed, however, like a samurai. One day, the tea master was
accosted by a samurai who challenged him to a duel. Though not a
swordsman, to turn the challenge down would disgrace both his family and
Lord Yamanouchi. He accepted—knowing that meant certain death—
requesting only that the duel be put off to the next day. His wish was
granted. In panic, the tea master hurried to the nearest fencing school. If he
were to die, he wanted to learn how to die honorably. The fencing master
listened to his story and agreed to teach the poor visitor the art of dying, but
first he wanted to be served some tea. As the tea master proceeded to
perform the ritual, the fencing master yelled out in excitement, “No need
for you to learn the art of death! The state of mind you’re in now is enough
for you to face any samurai. When you see your challenger, imagine you’re
about to serve tea to a guest.” This ritual completed, the tea master was to
raise his sword in the same alert spirit. Then he would be ready to die. The
tea master agreed to do as his teacher said. The next day, he went to meet
the samurai, who could not help but notice the completely calm and
dignified expression on his opponent’s face as he took off his coat. The
samurai thought this fumbling tea master must actually be a skilled
swordsman. He begged pardon for his behavior and hurried away. When
circumstances scare us, our imagination tends to take over, filling our minds
with endless anxieties. You need to gain control of your imagination. A
focused mind has no room for anxiety or for the effects of an overactive
imagination.
Daily Law: Give yourself such control by forcing the mind to concentrate on something
relatively simple—a calming ritual, a repetitive task that you are good at. You are
creating the kind of composure you naturally have when your mind is absorbed in a
problem.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 3: Amidst the Turmoil of Events, Do Not Lose Your
Presence of Mind—The Counterbalance Strategy

SEPTEMBER 15
Drop Your Preconceived Notions
If you put an empty gourd on the water and touch it, it will slip to one side. No matter how you
try, it won’t stay in one spot. The mind of someone who has reached the ultimate state does not
stay with anything, even for a second. It is like an empty gourd on the water that is pushed
around.
—takuan sōhō
The greatest generals, the most creative strategists, stand out not because
they have more knowledge but because they are able, when necessary, to
drop their preconceived notions and focus intensely on the present moment.
That is how creativity is sparked and opportunities are seized. Knowledge,
experience, and theory have limitations: no amount of thinking in advance
can prepare you for the chaos of life, for the infinite possibilities of the
moment. The great philosopher of war Carl von Clausewitz called this
“friction”: the difference between our plans and what actually happens.
Since friction is inevitable, our minds have to be capable of keeping up with
change and adapting to the unexpected. The better we can adapt our
thoughts to changing circumstances, the more realistic our responses to
them will be. The more we lose ourselves in predigested theories and past
experiences, the more inappropriate and delusional our response. It can be
valuable to analyze what went wrong in the past, but it is far more
important to develop the capacity to think in the moment. In that way you
will make far fewer mistakes to analyze.
Daily Law: Think of the mind as a river: the faster it flows, the better it keeps up with
the present and responds to change.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 2: Do Not Fight the Last War—The Guerrilla-War-of-
the-Mind Strategy

SEPTEMBER 16
Force Them Off the Negative
It is always easier to argue from the negative side—criticizing other
people’s actions, dissecting their motives, etc. And that is why most people
will opt for this. If they had to describe a positive vision of what they want
in the world, or how they would accomplish a particular task, this would
open them up to all kinds of attacks and criticisms. It takes effort and
thought to establish a positive position. It takes less effort to work on what
other people have done, and poke endless holes. It also makes you look
tough and insightful, because people delight in hearing someone tear an
idea apart. Facing these negative-mongers in a debate or argument is
infuriating. They can come at you from all angles: hit you with sarcasm and
snide comments, weave all kinds of abstractions that can make you look
bad. If you lower yourself to their position, you end up like a boxer
throwing punches into thin air. These opponents give you nothing to hit. (In
war, it is always easier to hold ground than take ground.) Your task is to
force them off this position by getting them to commit to some positive
position. Now, you have a target. If they resist or refuse to do this, you can
attack them for this resistance.
Daily Law: Avoid the temptation to fight back on the same level as the opponent. You
must always shift the terms of the battle onto the terrain of your choice. In that moment
of shifting, you have the initiative and the upper hand.
Robert Greene, “Only the Dull and Stupid Fight Head-on: Some Strategic Thoughts,”
powerseductionandwar.com, July 15, 2007

SEPTEMBER 17
Balance Ends and Means
Wise generals through the ages have learned to begin by examining the
means they have at hand and then to develop their strategy out of those
tools. They always think first of the givens—the makeup of their own army
and of the enemy’s, their respective proportions of cavalry and infantry, the
terrain, their troops’ morale, the weather. That would give them the
foundation not only for their plan of attack but also for the ends they
wanted to achieve in a particular encounter. Instead of being locked in to a
way of fighting, they constantly adjust their ends to their means. The next
time you launch a campaign, try an experiment: do not think about either
your solid goals or your wishful dreams, and do not plan out your strategy
on paper. Instead think deeply about what you have—the tools and
materials you will be working with. Ground yourself not in dreams and
plans but in reality: think of your own skills, any political advantage you
might have, the morale of your troops, how creatively you can use the
means at your disposal. Then, out of that process, let your plans and goals
blossom. Not only will your strategies be more realistic, they will be more
inventive and forceful. Dreaming first of what you want and then trying to
find the means to reach it is a recipe for exhaustion, waste, and defeat.
Daily Law: Constantly balance ends and means: you might have the best plan to achieve
a certain end, but unless you have the means to accomplish it, your plan is worthless.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 8: Pick Your Battles Carefully—The Perfect-Economy
Strategy.

SEPTEMBER 18
The Piecemeal Strategy
To multiply small successes is precisely to build one treasure after another. In time one
becomes rich without realizing how it has come about.
—frederick the great
The problem that many of us face is that we have great dreams and
ambitions. Caught up in the emotions of our dreams and the vastness of our
desires, we find it very difficult to focus on the small, tedious steps usually
necessary to attain them. We tend to think in terms of giant leaps toward our
goals. But in the social world as in nature, anything of size and stability
grows slowly. The piecemeal strategy is the perfect antidote to our natural
impatience: it focuses us on something small and immediate, a first bite,
then how and where a second bite can get us closer to our ultimate
objective. It forces us to think in terms of a process, a sequence of
connected steps and actions, no matter how small, which has immeasurable
psychological benefits as well. Too often, the magnitude of our desires
overwhelms us; taking that small first step makes them seem realizable.
There is nothing more therapeutic than action.
Daily Law: Have a clear sense of your objective, but then identify the small composite
steps. Now, attaining your dreams is easy: step-by-step.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 29: Take Small Bites—The Fait Accompli Strategy

SEPTEMBER 19
Make Use of the Cat’s-Paw
Important affairs often require rewards and punishments. Let only the good come from you
and the evil from others.
—baltasar gracián
In the fable, the Monkey grabs the paw of his friend, the Cat, and uses it to
fish chestnuts out of the fire, thus getting the nuts he craves, without hurting
himself.
If there is something unpleasant or unpopular that needs to be done, it is
far too risky for you to do the work yourself. You need a cat’s-paw—
someone who does the dirty, dangerous work for you. The cat’s-paw grabs
what you need, hurts whom you need hurt, and keeps people from noticing
that you are the one responsible.
Daily Law: Let someone else be the executioner, or the bearer of bad news, while you
bring only joy and glad tidings.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 26: Keep Your Hands Clean

SEPTEMBER 20
Hit from Unexpected Angles
People expect your behavior to conform to known patterns and conventions.
Your task as a strategist is to upset their expectations. Surprise them with
chaos and unpredictability—which they try desperately to keep at bay. To
Sun Tzu and the ancient Chinese, doing something extraordinary had little
effect without a setup of something ordinary. You had to mix the two—to
fix your opponent’s expectations with some banal, ordinary maneuver, a
comfortable pattern that they would then expect you to follow. With the
enemy sufficiently mesmerized, you would then hit it with the
extraordinary, a show of stunning force from an entirely new angle. Framed
by the predictable, the blow would have double the impact.
Daily Law: Operate according to your own rhythms, adapting strategies to your
idiosyncrasies, not the other way around. Refusing to follow common patterns will make
it hard for people to guess what you’ll do next.
Robert Greene, “What Muhammad Ali Can Teach Us about Success and an Authentic
Life,” The Observer, July 22, 2015

SEPTEMBER 21
Get Them to Reveal Their Intentions
If you have reason to suspect that a person is telling you a lie, look as though you believed
every word he said. This will give him courage to go on; he will become more vehement in his
assertions, and in the end betray himself.
—arthur schopenhauer
In the realm of power, your goal is a degree of control over future events.
Part of the problem you face, then, is that people won’t tell you all their
thoughts, emotions, and plans. Controlling what they say, they often keep
the most critical parts of their character hidden—their weaknesses, ulterior
motives, obsessions. The result is that you cannot predict their moves, and
are constantly in the dark. The trick is to find a way to probe them, to find
out their secrets and hidden intentions, without letting them know what you
are up to. The French politician Talleyrand was one of the greatest
practitioners of this art. He had an uncanny ability to worm secrets out of
people in polite conversation. A contemporary of his, Baron de Vitrolles,
wrote, “Wit and grace marked his conversation. He possessed the art of
concealing his thoughts or his malice beneath a transparent veil of
insinuations, words that imply something more than they express. Only
when necessary did he inject his own personality.” The key here is
Talleyrand’s ability to suppress himself in the conversation, to make others
talk endlessly about themselves and inadvertently reveal their intentions and
plans.
Daily Law: Suppress yourself in conversation. Let others talk endlessly.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 14: Pose as a Friend, Work as a Spy

SEPTEMBER 22
Create Maximum Disorder
So to win a hundred victories in a hundred battles is not the highest excellence; the highest
excellence is to subdue the enemy’s army without fighting at all.
—sun tzu
Your enemy depends on being able to read you, to get some sense of your
intentions. The goal of your maneuvers should be to make that impossible,
to send the enemy on a wild-goose chase for meaningless information, to
create ambiguity as to which way you are going to jump.
Daily Law: The more you break down people’s ability to reason about you, the more
disorder you inject into their system.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 20: Maneuver Them into Weakness—The Ripening-for-
the-Sickle Strategy

SEPTEMBER 23
Develop Your Fingerspitzengefühl
Presence of mind depends not only on your mind’s ability to come to your
aid in difficult situations but also on the speed with which this happens.
Waiting until the next day to think of the right action to take does you no
good at all. “Speed” here means responding to circumstances with rapidity
and making lightning-quick decisions. This power is often read as a kind of
intuition, what the Germans call Fingerspitzengefühl (fingertip feel). Erwin
Rommel, who led the German tank campaign in North Africa during World
War II, had great fingertip feel. He could sense when the Allies would
attack and from what direction. He didn’t just study his men, his tanks, the
terrain, and the enemy—he got inside their skin, understood the spirit that
animated them, what made them tick. Having felt his way into these things,
in battle he entered a state of mind in which he did not have to think
consciously of the situation. The totality of what was going on was in his
blood, at his fingertips. He had Fingerspitzengefühl. Whether or not you
have the mind of a Rommel, there are things you can do to help you
respond faster and bring out that intuitive feel that all animals possess. Deep
knowledge of the terrain will let you process information faster than your
enemy, a tremendous advantage. Getting a feel for the spirit of men and
material, thinking your way into them instead of looking at them from
outside, will help to put you in a different frame of mind, less conscious and
forced, more unconscious and intuitive.
Daily Law: Get your mind into the habit of making lightning-quick decisions, trusting
your fingertip feel. And you will develop this by knowing as deeply as possible all the
details in any situation.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 3: Amidst the Turmoil of Events, Do Not Lose Your
Presence of Mind—The Counterbalance Strategy

SEPTEMBER 24
Retreat to Gain Perspective
To remain disciplined and calm while waiting for disorder to appear amongst the enemy is the
art of self-possession.
—sun tzu
The problem we all face in strategy, and in life, is that each of us is unique
and has a unique personality. Our circumstances are also unique; no
situation ever really repeats itself. But most often we are barely aware of
what makes us different—in other words, of who we really are. Our ideas
come from books, teachers, all kinds of unseen influences. We respond to
events routinely and mechanically instead of trying to understand their
differences. In our dealings with other people too, we are easily infected by
their tempo and mood. All this creates a kind of fog. We fail to see events
for what they are; we do not know ourselves. Your task as a strategist is
simple: to see the differences between yourself and other people, to
understand yourself, your side, and the enemy as well as you can, to get
more perspective on events, to know things for what they are. In the hubbub
of daily life, this is not easy—in fact, the power to do it can come only from
knowing when and how to retreat. If you are always advancing, always
attacking, always responding to people emotionally, you have no time to
gain perspective. Your strategies will be weak and mechanical, based on
things that happened in the past or to someone else. Like a monkey, you
will imitate instead of create.
Daily Law: Retreating shows not weakness but strength. It is something you must do
every now and then, to find yourself and detach yourself from infecting influences.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 11: Trade Space for Time—The Nonengagement
Strategy

SEPTEMBER 25
Stay Away from the Corners
In almost all board games—chess, go (wei chi), backgammon, et cetera—
the corners spell defeat and death. These corners also exist on higher, more
abstract planes. As you are right now, in your profession or relationships or
battles that you face, you could be backing yourself into a corner. And the
thing is, you are rarely aware of it as it happens, because often it is when
you are excited and emotional, feeling engaged and moving in some
direction, or that you have solved a problem, that you inadvertently trap
yourself. There are always ways to get yourself out, in a tactical sense, but
the wisest course is to become a strategist in the Sun Tzu sense of the term.
What matters in the Sun Tzu universe are not positions of strength and
power, but situations in which you have options, full of potential force. On
a career level, for instance, I always advise people to look ahead and be
open to changes in direction. That job that seems so good now can easily
turn into a nightmare if you do not see the possible corners it can land you
in. I know, because working in Hollywood, seduced by the pay, I backed
myself into such a corner. I only got out by thinking far ahead and plotting a
much different direction in my life. Instead of aiming at becoming a
screenwriter, a trapped position if ever there is one, I aimed at writing books
on subjects that excited me and presented endless possibilities for going in
this or that direction, even returning to screenwriting, if I wanted to, but on
my terms.
Daily Law: Strategists think differently than the way many are used to, in which so
much revolves around moving toward a goal. That is linear thinking. What you want is
to always aim to increase your options for power and mobility.
“Corners,” powerseductionandwar.com

SEPTEMBER 26
Let Go of the Past
Thus one’s victories in battle cannot be repeated—they take their form in response to
inexhaustibly changing circumstances.
—sun tzu
What limits individuals as well as nations is the inability to confront reality,
to see things for what they are. As we grow older, we become more rooted
in the past. Habit takes over. Something that has worked for us before
becomes a doctrine, a shell to protect us from reality. Repetition replaces
creativity. We rarely realize we’re doing this, because it is almost
impossible for us to see it happening in our own minds. Then, suddenly, a
young Napoleon crosses our path, a person who does not respect tradition,
who fights in a new way. Only then do we see that our ways of thinking and
responding have fallen behind the times. Never take it for granted that your
past successes will continue in the future. Actually, your past successes are
your biggest obstacle: every battle, every war, is different, and you cannot
assume that what worked before will work today.
Daily Law: Think of the mind as a river: the faster it flows, the better it keeps up with
the present and responds to change. Obsessional thoughts and past experiences (whether
traumas or successes) are like boulders or mud in this river.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 2: Do Not Fight the Last War—The Guerrilla-War-of-
the-Mind Strategy

SEPTEMBER 27
Give Yourself Space to Maneuver
Any project—artistic or professional or scientific—is like fighting a war.
There is a certain strategic logic to the way you attack a problem, shape
your work, deal with friction and the discrepancy between what you want
and what you get. Directors or artists often start out with great ideas but in
the planning create such a straitjacket for themselves, such a rigid script to
follow and form to fit in, that the process loses all joy; there’s nothing left
to explore in the creation itself, and the end result seems lifeless and
disappointing. On the other side, artists may start with a loose idea that
seems promising, but they are too lazy or undisciplined to give it shape and
form. They create so much space and confusion that in the end nothing
coheres. The solution is to plan, to have a clear idea what you want, then
put yourself in open space and give yourself options to work with. This
means not burdening yourself with commitments that will limit your
options. It means not taking stances that leave you nowhere to go. The need
for space is psychological as well as physical: you must have an unfettered
mind to create anything worthwhile.
Daily Law: You always want open space, never dead positions. Direct the situation but
leave room for unexpected opportunities and random events.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 20: Maneuver Them into Weakness—The Ripening-for-
the-Sickle Strategy

SEPTEMBER 28
Plan All the Way to the End
The most ordinary cause of people’s mistakes is their being too much frightened at the present
danger, and not enough so at that which is remote.
—cardinal de retz
The dangers that are remote, that loom in the distance—if we can see them
as they take shape, how many mistakes we avoid. How many plans we
would instantly abort if we realized we were avoiding a small danger only
to step into a larger one. So much of power is not what you do but what you
do not do—the rash and foolish actions that you refrain from before they
get you into trouble. Plan in detail before you act—do not let vague plans
lead you into trouble. Unhappy endings are much more common than happy
ones—do not be swayed by the happy ending in your mind.
Daily Law: Ask of every potential action: Will this have unintended consequences? Will
I stir up new enemies? Will someone else take advantage of my labors?
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 29: Plan All the Way to the End

SEPTEMBER 29
Assume Formlessness
The consummation of forming an army is to arrive at formlessness. Victory in war is not
repetitious, but adapts its form endlessly. . . . A military force has no constant formation, water
has no constant shape: The ability to gain victory by changing and adapting according to the
opponent is called genius.
—sun tzu
Everything in life depends on the circumstances you’re in. That’s why the
last law in The 48 Laws of Power is “Assume Formlessness.” The idea is
that being formless like water is the highest form of power and strategy. In
that chapter, I contradict my entire book and I essentially say: There are no
laws. You have to be in the moment. You have to understand the
circumstances you’re in. Learning to adapt to each new circumstance means
seeing events through your own eyes, and often ignoring the advice that
people constantly peddle your way. It means that ultimately you must throw
out the laws that others preach, and the books they write to tell you what to
do, and the sage advice of the elder. “The laws that govern circumstances
are abolished by new circumstances,” Napoleon wrote, which means that it
is up to you to gauge each new situation.
Daily Law: Accept the fact that nothing is certain and no law or strategy is fixed. The
best way to protect yourself is to be as fluid and formless as water; never bet on stability
or lasting order. Everything changes.
“Robert Greene: Mastery and Research,” Finding Mastery: Conversations with Michael
Gervais, January 25, 2017

SEPTEMBER 30
Do Not Go Past the Mark You Aimed For
The greatest danger occurs at the moment of victory.
—napoleon bonaparte
The essence of strategy is controlling what comes next, and the elation of
victory can upset your ability to control what comes next in two ways. First,
you owe your success to a pattern that you are apt to try to repeat. You will
try to keep moving in the same direction without stopping to see whether
this is still the direction that is best for you. Second, success tends to go to
your head and make you emotional. Feeling invulnerable, you make
aggressive moves that ultimately undo the victory you have gained. The
lesson is simple: The powerful vary their rhythms and patterns, change
course, adapt to circumstance, and learn to improvise. Rather than letting
their dancing feet impel them forward, they step back and look where they
are going. It is as if their bloodstream bore a kind of antidote to the
intoxication of victory, letting them control their emotions and come to a
kind of mental halt when they have attained success. They steady
themselves, give themselves the space to reflect on what has happened,
examine the role of circumstance and luck in their success. As they say in
riding school, you have to be able to control yourself before you can control
the horse.
Daily Law: The moment of victory is often the moment of greatest peril. Do not allow
success to go to your head. There is no substitute for strategy and careful planning. Set a
goal, and when you reach it, stop.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 47: Do Not Go Past the Mark You Aimed for—In Victory,
Learn When to Stop

October
The Emotional Self
coming to terms with our dark side
For thousands of years, it has been our fate to largely grope in the shadows
when it comes to understanding ourselves and our own nature. We have
labored under so many illusions about the human animal—imagining we
descended magically from a divine source, from angels instead of primates.
We have found any signs of our primitive nature and our animal roots
deeply distressing, something to deny and repress. We have covered up our
darker impulses with all kinds of excuses and rationalizations, making it
easier for some people to get away with the most unpleasant behavior. But
finally we’re at a point where we can overcome our resistance to the truth
about who we are through the sheer weight of knowledge we have now
accumulated about human nature. The month of October will help you
come to terms with human nature, accept that there are patterns beyond
your control, and understand your primitive roots so that you are not
destroyed by them.
Over the course of several years after the publication of The 48 Laws of
Power, I received thousands of emails from readers who came to me with
their problems. I was also approached by hundreds of people who wanted
one-on-one consulting for their problems.
After much deep thinking about these experiences and my own
experiences with people I knew, I came to the following conclusion: We
humans have a dirty little secret. It’s a secret that has nothing to do with sex
lives or fantasies or anything as exciting as that. Rather, the secret is that all
of us, to some degree, are in pain. It’s a pain that we don’t discuss or even
understand.
The source of this pain is other people.
What I mean is our often disappointing, superficial, unsatisfactory
relationships with people. This comes in the form of relationships and
connections that aren’t very deep between us and those whom we consider
our friends, leading to a lot of loneliness. It comes in the form of bad
choices for associates and partners—leading to all this struggle and messy
breakups. It comes from letting some toxic narcissist into our life—leading
to all kinds of emotional trauma that can take years to get over, if we even
ever do. And it also comes from our inability to persuade, to move people,
to influence them, to get them interested in our ideas—generating feelings
of frustration and anger.
We are deeply social animals and having dysfunctional social
relationships leads to all kinds of problems. It leads to depression. It leads
to recurring obsessive thoughts, to the inability to focus on our work, to
eating disorders, to even physical diseases such as heart disease. We only
see the surface phenomenon—the loneliness or the depression or physical
ailment. We don’t see the underlying source. And sometimes we’re not even
aware that we suffer from loneliness.
And so, in 2012, while I was writing Mastery, I decided what I really
wanted to do next was to write a book that would help people deal with and
overcome this very deep pain that I felt a lot of my readers were expressing
to me. But I didn’t want to just write the usual stupid self-help book that
throws little formulas at you, pat phrases about how to get along with
people. I wanted to write a book like I always try to do—one that gets
inside of you, that changes how you think about the world, that gets under
your skin and really alters your perspective about people and the world.
And so with that “modest” goal in mind, I asked myself a question like I
always do when I write a book: What is the source of this pain, of this
problem? The obvious answer is that we are generally very poor observers
of people around us. We’re poor listeners. We’ve become so self-absorbed
with our smartphones and our technology. We’re not paying attention. And
when we do pay attention, we project onto people our own emotions, our
own desires. Or we’re very quick to judge and categorize them—that
person’s good, that person’s evil; that person’s likeable, that person’s not
likeable.
Seeing just a small portion of who people are, we naturally
misunderstand and misjudge them—leading to all kinds of problems, to bad
decisions, to bad strategies.
And so, if that is the source of our problem, then the solution is that we
all just become better observers and listeners, which is what a lot of self-
help books that deal with the subject say. But I found that very unsatisfying
for an answer. That’s not where I wanted to begin.
I thought very deeply and decided I wanted to ask another question: Are
there moments in our lives in which we actually feel different? In which we
are actually paying deep attention to people? In which we are actually
observing them? And I said yes, there are.
First of all, as children. Children are master observers of people. They
are very attuned to the emotions and moods of their parents—their survival
depends on it. Con artists hate children because children can see through
their phoniness, their fakeness. We were all great observers when we were
children. Then, if we travel to a foreign country and everything’s exotic and
weird, our senses are heightened. We’re paying attention to people. They
seem so different—we want to understand them. Also, if we start a new job
and we’re a bit nervous—we’re paying attention to all the little power
dynamics going on. Obviously, when we fall in love—we’re extremely
attentive to that person. We’re picking out every little sign and detail that
they’re emitting about whether they like us, who they are, what their
character is like. And finally, strangely enough, if we read a really good
novel or see a great movie. We’re fascinated by the characters someone has
created, and we want to get inside of their world.
What do all these experiences have in common? In these moments, our
desire is engaged. We’re excited. We’re curious. We feel the need to pay
attention to people. Our survival could even depend on it. And when we’re
excited and curious and we feel the necessity, suddenly our eyes come to
life. We’re watching. We’re observing. We’re getting inside people. And in
these moments, there’s less of our ego. We’re getting outside of ourselves
and into the world of other people.
Normally, we don’t feel that way. We actually have low interest in the
people around us. I hate to say that, but it’s true. The people we deal with
every day—they’re too familiar to us. They don’t seem exciting. We feel
that our own thoughts and our own world is more interesting than theirs. We
have our own needs and our own problems to deal with.
So I decided—what if I could write a book that would bring you back to
those positions you had in those moments? What if I could make you feel
like a child again? What if I could make you feel like those moments when
you were in love or when you were traveling to a foreign country or when
you were excited and curious and really wanted to probe inside the minds of
the people around you?
That would change everything. You wouldn’t have to suddenly imagine
you were a better listener or observer. You would become a better listener
and observer.
So how could I create that kind of magic? By taking you as a reader and
leading you deep inside the inner worlds of the people around you. By
making you see what their fantasies are, what their lives are like from the
inside.
It’s my contention that the people you deal with are a lot more
interesting and complicated and weird than you imagine. You think that you
have to travel to some foreign region like Bali or see some interesting
movie to find people interesting. No, that salesperson at Rite Aid or
whomever—they actually have a really deep, rich inner life. They are
fascinating. You’re just not realizing it.
So how am I going to be able to do this? How am I going to make you
understand people rather than let them cause you pain?
By immersing you in the study of human nature. And as I said, I will
alter how you perceive people from the inside out. And once I get you to go
that far, you’re never going to want to go back to where you were before.

OCTOBER 1
The Primary Law of Human Nature
Let’s start with the primary law of human nature. If I had to say what the
primary law of human nature is, it is to deny that we have human nature, to
deny that we are subject to these forces. We think, I’m not irrational, I’m
not aggressive, I don’t feel envy, I am not a narcissist. It’s always the other
side. It’s the Republicans, it’s the Spartans, it’s the Ethiopians—they’re the
ones who are irrational and aggressive. Me? No. The truth is we all evolved
from the same source, from the same small number of people. Our brains
are basically the same. We are wired in a similar way. We experience the
world, emotionally, the same way that hunter-gatherers experienced the
world. Very little has changed in that sense. So if we all come from the
same source, why would it be that only a small number of people are
aggressive or are irrational? We are all the same.
Daily Law: Accept the nature you share with others. Stop separating yourself out as
special or superior.
“The Laws of Human Nature: An Interview with Robert Greene,” dailystoic.com, October
23, 2018

OCTOBER 2
There’s Nothing Stronger Than Human Nature
Man will only become better when you make him see what he is like.
—anton chekhov
You might be tempted to imagine that this knowledge of human nature is a
bit old-fashioned. After all, you might argue, we are now so sophisticated
and technologically advanced, so progressive and enlightened; we have
moved well beyond our primitive roots; we are in the process of rewriting
our nature. But the truth is in fact the opposite—we have never been more
in the thrall of human nature and its destructive potential than now. And by
ignoring this fact, we are playing with fire. Look at how the permeability of
our emotions has only been heightened through social media, where viral
effects are continually sweeping through us and where the most
manipulative leaders are able to exploit and control us. Look at the
aggression that is now openly displayed in the virtual world, where it is so
much easier to play out our shadow sides without repercussions. Notice
how our propensities to compare ourselves with others, to feel envy, and to
seek status through attention have only become intensified with our ability
to communicate so quickly with so many people. And finally, look at our
tribal tendencies and how they have now found the perfect medium to
operate in—we can find a group to identify with, reinforce our tribal
opinions in a virtual echo chamber, and demonize any outsiders, leading to
mob intimidation. The potential for mayhem stemming from the primitive
side of our nature has only increased. It is simple: Human nature is stronger
than any individual, than any institution or technological invention. It ends
up shaping what we create to reflect itself and its primitive roots. It moves
us around like pawns. Ignore the laws at your own peril.
Daily Law: Refusing to come to terms with human nature simply means that you are
dooming yourself to patterns beyond your control and to feelings of confusion and
helplessness.
The Laws of Human Nature, Introduction

OCTOBER 3
The Inner Athena
What I fear is not the enemy’s strategy but our own mistakes.
—pericles
In Pericles’s conception, the human mind has to worship something, has to
have its attention directed to something it values above all else. For most
people, it is their ego; for some it is their family, their clan, their god, or
their nation. For Pericles it would be nous, the ancient Greek word for
“mind” or “intelligence.” Nous is a force that permeates the universe,
creating meaning and order. The human mind is naturally attracted to this
order; this is the source of our intelligence. For Pericles, the nous that he
worshipped was embodied in the figure of the goddess Athena. Athena was
literally born from the head of Zeus, her name itself reflecting this—a
combination of “god” (theos) and “mind” (nous). But Athena came to
represent a very particular form of nous—eminently practical, feminine,
and earthy. She is the voice that comes to heroes in times of need, instilling
in them a calm spirit, orienting their minds toward the perfect idea for
victory and success, then giving them the energy to achieve this. In essence,
Athena stood for rationality, the greatest gift of the gods to mortals, for it
alone could make a human act with divine wisdom. The voice of Athena
exists within you right now, a potential you have perhaps felt in moments of
calmness and focus, the perfect idea coming to you after much thinking.
You are not connected to this higher power in the present because your
mind is weighed down with emotions.
Daily Law: Cultivate your inner Athena and worship her. Rationality is then what you
will value the most and that which will serve as your guide.
The Laws of Human Nature, 1: Master Your Emotional Self—The Law of Irrationality

OCTOBER 4
Analyze, Scrutinize, Question
It’s just as though one’s second self were standing beside one; one is sensible and rational
oneself, but the other self is impelled to do something perfectly senseless, and sometimes very
funny; and suddenly you notice that you are longing to do that amusing thing, goodness knows
why; that is, you want to, as it were, against your will; though you fight against it with all of
your might, you want to.
—fyodor dostoyevsky, a raw youth
To cultivate his inner Athena, Pericles first had to find a way to master his
emotions. Emotions turn us inward, away from nous, away from reality. We
dwell on our anger or our insecurities. If we look out at the world and try to
solve problems, we see things through the lens of these emotions; they
cloud our vision. Pericles trained himself to never react in the moment, to
never make a decision while under the influence of a strong emotion.
Instead, he analyzed his feelings. Usually when he looked closely at his
insecurities or his anger, he saw that they were not really justified, and they
lost their significance under scrutiny. Sometimes he had to physically get
away from the heated Assembly and retire to his house, where he remained
alone for days on end, calming himself down. Slowly, the voice of Athena
would come to him.
Daily Law: Look at those emotions that are continually infecting your ideas and
decisions. Learn to question yourself: Why this anger or resentment? Where does this
incessant need for attention come from?
The Laws of Human Nature, 1: Master Your Emotional Self—The Law of Irrationality

OCTOBER 5
Do Not Let Success Intoxicate You
We humans possess a weakness that is latent in us all and will push us into
the delusional process without our ever being aware of the dynamic. The
weakness stems from our natural tendency to overestimate our skills. We
normally have a self-opinion that is somewhat elevated in relation to reality.
We have a deep need to feel ourselves superior to others in something—
intelligence, beauty, charm, popularity, or saintliness. This can be a positive.
A degree of confidence impels us to take on challenges, to push past our
supposed limits, and to learn in the process. But once we experience
success on any level—increased attention from an individual or group, a
promotion, funding for a project—that confidence will tend to rise too
quickly, and there will be an ever-growing discrepancy between our self-
opinion and reality.
Daily Law: After any kind of success, analyze the components. See the element of luck
that is inevitably there, as well as the role that other people, including mentors, played in
your good fortune.
The Laws of Human Nature, 11: Know Your Limits—The Law of Grandiosity

OCTOBER 6
See into Your Own Nature
We’re very complicated. We don’t know where ideas come from. We don’t
know where our emotions come from. But you can get closer to that. You
can have some degree of clarity. You can start to see that kind of shadow
side or that stranger within. And that’s really the only hope because when
you’re in denial, you don’t realize that you’re being a narcissist, you don’t
realize that you’re being governed by your emotions. You could think
you’re superior to other people just because of the opinion you hold. You
can let your shadow side come out without even being aware of it. You need
to come to terms with the fact that 95 percent of your ideas and opinions are
not your own—they come from what other people have taught you, from
what you’re reading on the internet, from what other people are saying and
doing. You’re a conformist—that’s who you are. I’m like that and
everybody is like that and you realize that only by throwing some light on
yourself and realizing that these qualities, these flaws that are built into us,
they are inside you too. Only then can you begin to overcome them and use
them for productive purposes. Question, question, question. Don’t assume
that the reason that you feel something, and that it’s right just because you
feel it. And in that kind of process, you will become rational, you’ll become
somebody who can use empathy, you will have the ability to judge people
properly and accept them for who they are as opposed to continually
moralizing, wishing people were something that they’re not. You’ll have a
much smoother path through life, and you’ll be much calmer and more
peaceful without all that emotional baggage that drags you down. But it
starts with looking inward and questioning yourself and not assuming that
everything you feel or think is right.
Daily Law: Ask yourself, “Where did I pick up this belief?” “Is it true?” “Would I agree
with it if I heard it fresh today?”
“ ‘Stop Assuming that Everything You Feel or Think Is Right’—An Interview with Robert
Greene,” Quillette, January 1, 2019

OCTOBER 7
Rationality: A Simple Definition
Clearly the words rational and irrational can be quite loaded. People are
always labeling those who disagree with them “irrational.” What we need is
a simple definition that can be applied as a way of judging, as accurately as
possible, the difference between the two. The following shall serve as our
barometer: We constantly feel emotions, and they continually infect our
thinking, making us veer toward thoughts that please us and soothe our
egos. It is impossible to not have our inclinations and feelings somehow
involved in what we think. Rational people are aware of this and through
introspection and effort are able, to some extent, to subtract emotions from
their thinking and counteract their effect. Irrational people have no such
awareness. They rush into action without carefully considering the
ramifications and consequences. In all cases, the degree of awareness
represents the difference. Rational people can readily admit their own
irrational tendencies and the need to be vigilant. On the other hand,
irrational people become highly emotional when challenged about the
emotional roots of their decisions. They are incapable of introspection and
learning. Their mistakes make them increasingly defensive.
Daily Law: How would you rate yourself on this scale?
The Laws of Human Nature, 1: Master Your Emotional Self—The Law of Irrationality

OCTOBER 8
The Madness of Groups
Madness is something rare in individuals—but in groups, parties, peoples, and ages it is the
rule.
—friedrich nietzsche
If as individuals we had some plan that was clearly ridiculous, others would
warn us and bring us back down to earth, but in a group the opposite
happens—everyone seems to validate the scheme, no matter how delusional
(such as invading Iraq and expecting to be greeted as liberators), and there
are no outsiders to splash some cold water on us. Whenever you feel
unusually certain and excited about a plan or idea, you must step back and
gauge whether it is a viral group effect operating on you. If you can detach
yourself for a moment from your excitement, you might notice how your
thinking is used to rationalize your emotions, to confirm the certainty you
want to feel.
Daily Law: Never relinquish your ability to doubt, reflect, and consider other options—
your rationality as an individual is your only protection against the madness that can
overcome a group.
The Laws of Human Nature, 14: Resist the Downward Pull of the Group—The Law of
Conformity

OCTOBER 9
The Power of Association
Humans are extremely susceptible to the moods, emotions, and even the
ways of thinking of those with whom they spend their time. The incurably
unhappy and unstable have a particularly strong infecting power because
their characters and emotions are so intense. They often present themselves
as victims, making it difficult, at first, to see their miseries as self-inflicted.
Before you realize the real nature of their problems you have been infected
by them. Understand this: the people you associate with are critical. The
risk of associating with infectors is that you will waste valuable time and
energy trying to free yourself. Through a kind of guilt by association, you
will also suffer in the eyes of others.
Daily Law: Be aware of the power those with whom you associate have over you.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 10: Infection—Avoid the Unhappy and Unlucky

OCTOBER 10
Think for Yourself
We human beings tend to be incredibly conventional animals. We get ideas
from our parents, from our schooling, from the people around us. And that
becomes how we think about everything in the world. We stop thinking for
ourselves, and with social media this has become much worse. We’re afraid
to think for ourselves. The classic example of this cowardice in thinking
comes from academics—the people who are supposed to be the most
brilliant thinkers of all—many of whom have been largely indoctrinated in
a particular way of looking at the world, filled with jargon and orthodoxies.
They can never get outside of it—everything they write, everything they
see, everything they think about is in that little bubble that they have been
inculcated with in their academic training. You need to be fearless. You
need to be able to get rid of everything you’ve ever believed in before. You
need to get rid of all the strategies you’ve used before. All the conventional
ideas.
Commandment: You need to think for yourself and not be tied to what other people have
told you is reality.
Robert Greene Official, “Irrationality 2020,” YouTube, August 29, 2020

OCTOBER 11
Beware the Fragile Ego
Of all the human emotions, none is uglier or more elusive than envy, the
sensation that others have more of what we want—possessions, attention,
respect. We deserve to have as much as they do yet feel somewhat helpless
to get such things. But paradoxically, envy entails the admission to
ourselves that we are inferior to another person in something we value. Not
only is it painful to admit this inferiority, but it is even worse for others to
see that we are feeling this. And so almost as soon as we feel the initial
pangs of envy, we are motivated to disguise it to ourselves—it is not envy
we feel but unfairness at the distribution of goods or attention, resentment at
this unfairness, even anger. The underlying sense of inferiority is too strong,
leading to hostility that cannot be vented by a comment or put-down. Sitting
with one’s envy over a long period of time can be painful and frustrating.
Feeling righteous indignation against the envied person, however, can be
invigorating. Acting on envy, doing something to harm the other person,
brings satisfaction, although the satisfaction is short lived because enviers
always find something new to envy.
Daily Law: Envy is perhaps the ugliest human emotion. Destroy it before it destroys you.
Develop your sense of self-worth from internal standards and not incessant comparisons.
The Laws of Human Nature, 10: Beware the Fragile Ego—The Law of Envy

OCTOBER 12
See Things as They Are, Not as Your Emotions
Color Them
You must see your emotional responses to events as a kind of disease that
must be remedied. Fear will make you overestimate the enemy and act too
defensively. Anger and impatience will draw you into rash actions that will
cut off your options. Overconfidence, particularly as a result of success, will
make you go too far. Love and affection will blind you to the treacherous
maneuvers of those apparently on your side. Even the subtlest gradations of
these emotions can color the way you look at events. The only remedy is to
be aware that the pull of emotion is inevitable, to notice it when it is
happening, and to compensate for it. When you have success, be extra wary.
When you are angry, take no action. When you are fearful, know you are
going to exaggerate the dangers you face.
Daily Law: Life demands the utmost in realism, seeing things as they are. The more you
can limit or compensate for your emotional responses, the closer you will come to this
ideal.
The 33 Strategies of War, Preface

OCTOBER 13
Change Your Circumstances by Changing Your
Attitude
The greatest discovery of my generation is the fact that human beings can alter their lives by
altering their attitudes of mind.
—william james
Imagine the following scenario: A young American must spend a year
studying in Paris. He is somewhat timid and cautious, prone to feelings of
depression and low self-esteem, but he’s genuinely excited by this
opportunity. Once there, he finds it hard to speak the language, and the
mistakes he makes and the slightly derisory attitude of the Parisians make it
even harder for him to learn. He finds the people not friendly at all. The
weather is damp and gloomy. The food is too rich. Even Notre Dame
Cathedral seems disappointing, the area around it so crowded with tourists.
He concludes that Paris is overrated and a rather unpleasant place. Now
imagine the same scenario but with a young woman who is more
extroverted and has an adventurous spirit. She’s not bothered by making
mistakes in French, nor by the occasional snide remark from a Parisian. She
finds learning the language a pleasant challenge. Others find her spirit
engaging. She makes friends more easily, and with more contacts, her
knowledge of French improves. She finds the weather romantic and quite
suitable to the place. To her, the city represents endless adventures and she
finds it enchanting. In this case, two people see and judge the same city in
opposite ways. The world simply exists as it is—things or events are not
good or bad, right or wrong, ugly or beautiful. It is we, with our particular
perspectives, who add color to or subtract it from things and people. We
focus on either the beautiful Gothic architecture or the annoying tourists.
Daily Law: We, with our mindset, can make people respond to us in a friendly or
unfriendly manner, depending on our anxiety or openness. We shape much of the reality
that we perceive, dictated by our moods and emotions.
The Laws of Human Nature, 8: Change Your Circumstances by Changing Your Attitude—
The Law of Self-sabotage

OCTOBER 14
Confront Your Dark Side
Our whole being is nothing but a fight against the dark forces within ourselves. To live is to
war with trolls in heart and soul. To write is to sit in judgment on oneself.
—henrik ibsen
You have crafted a public persona that accentuates your strengths and
conceals your weaknesses. You have repressed the less socially acceptable
traits you naturally possessed as a child. You have become terribly nice and
pleasant. And you have a dark side, one that you are loath to admit or
examine. It contains your deepest insecurities, your secret desires to hurt
people, even those close to you, your fantasies of revenge, your suspicions
about others, your hunger for more attention and power. This dark side
haunts your dreams. It leaks out in moments of inexplicable depression,
unusual anxiety, touchy moods, sudden neediness, and suspicious thoughts.
It comes out in offhand comments you later regret. And sometimes, it even
leads to destructive behavior. You will tend to blame circumstances or other
people for these moods and behavior, but they keep recurring because you
are unaware of their source. Depression and anxiety come from not being
your complete self, from always playing a role. It requires great energy to
keep this dark side at bay, but at times unpleasant behavior leaks out as a
way to release the inner tension.
Daily Law: Recognize and examine the dark side of your character. Once subjected to
conscious scrutiny, it loses its destructive power.
The Laws of Human Nature, 9: Confront Your Dark Side—The Law of Repression

OCTOBER 15
Create Mental Space from the Group
If we looked at ourselves closely and honestly, we would have to admit that
the moment we enter our workspace or any group, we undergo a change.
We easily slip into more primitive modes of thinking and behaving, without
realizing it. Around others, we naturally tend to feel insecure as to what
they think of us. We feel pressure to fit in, and to do so, we begin to shape
our thoughts and beliefs to the group orthodoxies. We unconsciously imitate
others in the group—in appearances, verbal expressions, and ideas. We tend
to worry a lot about our status and where we rank in the hierarchy: “Am I
getting as much respect as my colleagues?” This is the primate part of our
nature, as we share this obsession with status with our chimpanzee relatives.
Depending on patterns from early childhood, in the group setting we
become more passive or more aggressive than usual, revealing the less
developed sides of our character. To resist this downward pull that groups
inevitably exert on us, we must conduct a kind of experiment in human
nature with a simple goal in mind—to develop the ability to detach
ourselves from the group and create some mental space for true independent
thinking. We begin this experiment by accepting the reality of the powerful
effect that the group has on us.
Daily Law: Be brutally honest with yourself, aware of how your need to fit in can shape
and warp your thinking. Does that anxiety or sense of outrage that we feel come
completely from within, or is it inspired by the group?
The Laws of Human Nature, 14: Resist the Downward Pull of the Group—The Law of
Conformity

OCTOBER 16
Test for Envy
The root of the Latin word for envy, invidia, means “to look through, to
probe with the eyes like a dagger.” The early meaning of the word was
associated with the “evil eye” and the belief that a look could actually
convey a curse and physically harm someone. The eyes are indeed a telling
indicator, but the envious microexpression affects the entire face. The
German philosopher Arthur Schopenhauer devised a quick way to test for
envy. Tell suspected enviers some good news about yourself—a promotion,
a new and exciting love interest, a book contract. You will notice a very
quick expression of disappointment. Their tone of voice as they
congratulate you will betray some tension and strain. Equally, tell them
some misfortune of yours and notice their uncontrollable microexpression
of joy in your pain, what is commonly known as schadenfreude. Their eyes
light up for a fleeting second. People who are envious cannot help feeling
some glee when they hear of the bad luck of those they envy.
Daily Law: If you see such looks in the first few encounters with someone, and they
happen more than once, be on the lookout for a dangerous envier entering your life.
The Laws of Human Nature, 10: Beware the Fragile Ego—The Law of Envy

OCTOBER 17
See into the Spirit of the Times
A man’s shortcomings are taken from his epoch; his virtues and greatness belong to himself.
—johann wolfgang von goethe
You must alter your attitude toward your own generation. We like to
imagine that we are autonomous and that our values and ideas come from
within, not without, but this is in fact not the case. Your goal is to
understand as deeply as possible how profoundly the spirit of your
generation, and the times that you live in, have influenced how you
perceive the world. Consider yourself a kind of archaeologist digging into
your own past and that of your generation, looking for artifacts, for
observations that you can piece together to form a picture of the underlying
spirit. When you examine your memories, try to do so with some distance,
even when you recall the emotions you felt at the time. Catch yourself in
the inevitable process of making judgments of good and bad about your
generation or the next one, and let go of them. You can develop such a skill
through practice. Forging such an attitude will play a key role in your
development.
Daily Law: With some distance and awareness, you can become much more than a
follower of or a rebel against your generation; you can mold your own relationship to the
zeitgeist and become a formidable trendsetter.
The Laws of Human Nature, 17: Seize the Historical Moment—The Law of Generational
Myopia

OCTOBER 18
Think Like a Writer
Anton Chekhov’s family was large and poor, and his father, an alcoholic,
mercilessly beat all of the children, including young Chekhov. Chekhov
became a doctor and took up writing as a side career. He applied his
training as a doctor to the human animal, his goal to understand what makes
us so irrational, so unhappy, and so dangerous. In his stories and plays, he
found it immensely therapeutic to get inside his characters and make sense
of even the worst types. In this way, he could forgive anybody, even his
father. His approach in these cases was to imagine that each person, no
matter how twisted, has a reason for what they’ve become, a logic that
makes sense to them. In their own way, they are striving for fulfillment, but
irrationally. By stepping back and imagining their story from the inside,
Chekhov demythologized the brutes and aggressors; he cut them down to
human size. They no longer elicited hatred but rather pity.
Daily Law: Think more like a writer in approaching the people you deal with, even the
worst sorts.
The Laws of Human Nature, 1: Master Your Emotional Self—The Law of Irrationality

OCTOBER 19
Accept People as Facts
If you come across any special trait of meanness or stupidity . . . you must be careful not to let
it annoy or distress you, but to look upon it merely as an addition to your knowledge—a new
fact to be considered in studying the character of humanity. Your attitude towards it will be
that of the mineralogist who stumbles upon a very characteristic specimen of a mineral.
—arthur schopenhauer
Interactions with people are the major source of emotional turmoil, but it
doesn’t have to be that way. The problem is that we are continually judging
people, wishing they were something that they are not. We want to change
them. We want them to think and act a certain way, most often the way we
think and act. And because this is not possible, because everyone is
different, we are continually frustrated and upset. Instead, see other people
as phenomena, as neutral as comets or plants. They simply exist. They
come in all varieties, making life rich and interesting. Work with what they
give you, instead of resisting and trying to change them. Make
understanding people a fun game, the solving of puzzles. It is all part of the
human comedy. Yes, people are irrational, but so are you. Make your
acceptance of human nature as radical as possible. This will calm you down
and help you observe people more dispassionately, understanding them on a
deeper level. You will stop projecting your own emotions on to them. All of
this will give you more balance and calmness, more mental space for
thinking.
Daily Law: Examine the faults you see in others and how they are in you as well.
The Laws of Human Nature, 1: Master Your Emotional Self—The Law of Irrationality

OCTOBER 20
See Beyond the Moment
We humans tend to live in the moment. It is the animal part of our nature.
We respond first and foremost to what we see and hear, to what is most
dramatic in an event. But we are not merely animals tied to the present.
Human reality encompasses the past—every event is connected to
something that happened before in an endless chain of historical causation.
Any present problem has deep roots in the past. It also encompasses the
future. Whatever we do has consequences that stretch far into the years to
come. When we limit our thinking to what our senses provide, to what is
immediate, we descend to the pure animal level in which our reasoning
powers are neutralized. We are no longer aware of why or how things come
about. We imagine that some successful scheme that has lasted a few
months can only get better. We no longer give thought to the possible
consequences of anything we set in motion. We react to what is given in the
moment, based on only a small piece of the puzzle. Salesmen and
demagogues play on this weakness in human nature to con us with the
prospect of easy gains and instant gratification. Our only antidote is to train
ourselves to continually detach from the immediate rush of events and
elevate our perspective.
Daily Law: Instead of merely reacting, step back and look at the wider context. Consider
the ramifications of any action you take. Realize that is often better to do nothing, to not
react, to let time go by and see what it reveals.
The Laws of Human Nature, 6: Elevate Your Perspective—The Law of Shortsightedness

OCTOBER 21
Recognize Your Aggressive Impulses
Men are not gentle, friendly creatures wishing for love, who simply defend themselves if
attacked. . . . A powerful desire for aggression has to be reckoned as part of their . . .
endowment.
—sigmund freud
What this means is the following: All of us understand that humans have
been capable of much violence and aggression in the past and in the
present. We know that out there in the world there are sinister criminals,
greedy and unscrupulous businesspeople, belligerent negotiators, and sexual
aggressors. But we create a sharp dividing line between those examples and
us. We have a powerful block against imagining any kind of continuum or
spectrum when it comes to our own aggressive moments and those of the
more extreme variety in others. We in fact define the word to describe the
stronger manifestations of aggression, excluding ourselves. It is always the
other who is belligerent, who starts things, who is aggressive. This is a
profound misconception of human nature. Aggression is a tendency that is
latent in every single human individual. It is a tendency wired into our
species. We became the preeminent animal on this planet precisely because
of our aggressive energy, supplemented by our intelligence and cunning.
We cannot separate this aggressiveness from the way we attack problems,
alter the environment to make our lives easier, fight injustice, or create
anything on a large scale.
Daily Law: Look for signs of your own aggressive impulses in past actions—how they led
to friction or success.
The Laws of Human Nature, 16: See the Hostility Behind the Friendly Façade—The Law
of Aggression

OCTOBER 22
Lost in Trivia
You feel overwhelmed by the complexity of your work. You feel the need to
be on top of all the details and global trends so you can control things
better, but you are drowning in information. It is hard to see the proverbial
forest for the trees. This is a sure sign that you have lost a sense of your
priorities—which facts are more important, what problems or details
require more attention. What you need is a mental filtering system based on
a scale of priorities and your long-term goals. Knowing what you want to
accomplish in the end will help you weed out the essential from the
nonessential. You do not have to know all the details. Sometimes you need
to delegate—let your subordinates handle the information gathering.
Daily Law: Remember that greater control over events will come from realistic
assessments of the situation, precisely what is made most difficult by a brain submerged
in trivia.
The Laws of Human Nature, 6: Elevate Your Perspective—The Law of Shortsightedness

OCTOBER 23
The Lost Self
Your task is to let go of the rigidity that takes hold of you as you
overidentify with the expected gender role. Power lies in exploring that
middle range between the masculine and the feminine, in playing against
people’s expectations. Return to the harder or softer sides of your character
that you have lost or repressed. In relating to people, expand your repertoire
by developing greater empathy, or by learning to be less deferential. When
confronting a problem or resistance from others, train yourself to respond in
different ways—attacking when you normally defend, or vice versa. In your
thinking, learn to blend the analytical with the intuitive in order to become
more creative.
Do not be afraid to bring out the more sensitive or ambitious sides to
your character. These repressed parts of you are yearning to be let out. In
the theater of life, expand the roles that you play. Don’t worry about
people’s reactions to any changes in you they sense. You are not so easy to
categorize, which will fascinate them and give you the power to play with
their perceptions of you, altering them at will.
Daily Law: Return to the harder or softer sides of your character that you have lost or
repressed.
The Laws of Human Nature, 12: Reconnect to the Masculine or Feminine within You—
The Law of Gender Rigidity

OCTOBER 24
Know How Little You Know
When I left him, I reasoned thus with myself: I am wiser than this man, for neither of us
appears to know anything great and good; but he fancies he knows something, although he
knows nothing; whereas I, as I do not know anything, so I do not fancy I do. In this trifling
particular, then, I appear to be wiser than he, because I do not fancy I know what I do not
know.
—socrates
We like to scoff at the superstitious and irrational ideas that most people
held in the seventeenth century. Imagine how those of the twenty-fifth
century will scoff at ours. Our knowledge of the world is limited, despite
the advances of science. Our ideas are conditioned by the prejudices
instilled in us by our parents, by our culture, and by the historical period we
live in. They are further limited by the increasing rigidity of the mind. A bit
more humility about what we know would make us all more curious and
interested in a wider range of ideas.
Daily Law: When it comes to the ideas and opinions you hold, see them as toys or
building blocks that you are playing with. Some you will keep, others you will knock
down, but your spirit remains flexible and playful.
The Laws of Human Nature, 7: Soften People’s Resistance by Confirming Their Self-
Opinion—The Law of Defensiveness

OCTOBER 25
Examine Your Emotions to Their Roots
You are angry. Let the feeling settle from within, and think about it. Was it
triggered by something seemingly trivial or petty? That is a sure sign that
something or someone else is behind it. Perhaps a more uncomfortable
emotion is at the source—such as envy or paranoia. You need to look at this
square in the eye. Dig below any trigger points to see where they started.
For these purposes, it might be wise to use a journal in which you record
your self-assessments with ruthless objectivity. Your greatest danger here is
your ego and how it makes you unconsciously maintain illusions about
yourself. These may be comforting in the moment, but in the long run they
make you defensive and unable to learn or progress. Find a neutral position
from which you can observe your actions, with a bit of detachment and
even humor. Soon all of this will become second nature, and when the
Emotional Self suddenly rears its head in some situation, you will see it as it
happens and be able to step back and find that neutral position.
Daily Law: Develop the habit of examining in depth your own emotional responses. You
will end up slowly eliminating unnecessary reactions.
The Laws of Human Nature, 1: Master Your Emotional Self—The Law of Irrationality

OCTOBER 26
Resist Simple Explanations
It is not an enemy who taunts me—then I could bear it; it is not an adversary who deals
insolently with me—then I could hide from him. But it is you, my equal, my companion, my
familiar friend. . . . My companion stretched out his hand against his friends, he violated his
covenant. His speech was smoother than butter, yet war was in his heart; his words were softer
than oil, yet they were drawn swords.
—psalms, 55:12–15, 20–21
We humans have a particular limitation to our reasoning powers that causes
us endless problems: when we are thinking about someone or about
something that has happened to us, we generally opt for the simplest, most
easily digestible interpretation. An acquaintance is good or bad, nice or
mean, his or her intentions noble or nefarious; an event is positive or
negative, beneficial or harmful; we are happy or sad. The truth is that
nothing in life is ever so simple. People are invariably a mix of good and
bad qualities, strengths and weaknesses. Their intentions in doing
something can be helpful and harmful to us at the same time, a result of
their ambivalent feelings toward us. Even the most positive event has a
downside. And we often feel happy and sad at the same time. Reducing
things to simpler terms makes them easier for us to handle, but because it is
not related to reality, it also means we are constantly misunderstanding and
misreading.
Daily Law: It would be of infinite benefit for us to allow more nuances and ambiguity
into our judgments of people and events.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 32: Dominate while Seeming to Submit—The Passive-
Aggression Strategy

OCTOBER 27
See Your Shadow
My devil had long been caged, he came out roaring.
—dr. jekyll
The writer Robert Louis Stevenson expressed the law of repression in the
novel The Strange Case of Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde, published in 1886. The
main character, Dr. Jekyll, is a well-respected and wealthy doctor/scientist
with impeccable manners, so much like the paragons of goodness in our
culture. He invents a concoction that transforms him into Mr. Hyde, the
embodiment of his Shadow, who proceeds to murder and rape and indulge
in the wildest of sensual pleasures. Stevenson’s idea is that the more
civilized and moral we outwardly become, the more potentially dangerous
is the Shadow, which we so fiercely deny. The solution is not more
repression and correctness. We can never alter human nature through
enforced niceness. The pitchfork doesn’t work. Nor is the solution to seek
release for our Shadow in the group, which is volatile and dangerous.
Instead the answer is to see our Shadow in action and become more self-
aware. It is hard to project onto others our own secret impulses or to
overidealize some cause, once we are made aware of the mechanism
operating within us.
Daily Law: Through self-knowledge we can find a way to integrate the dark side into our
consciousness productively and creatively. In doing so, we become more authentic and
complete, exploiting to the maximum the energies we naturally possess.
The Laws of Human Nature, 9: Confront Your Dark Side—The Law of Repression

OCTOBER 28
Move Closer to What You Envy
For not many men . . . can love a friend who fortune prospers without envying; and about the
envious brain cold poison clings and doubles all the pain life brings him. His own woundings
he must nurse, and feel another’s gladness like a curse.
—aeschylus
People tend to hide their problems and to put their best face forward. We
only see and hear of their triumphs, their new relationships, their brilliant
ideas that will land them a gold mine. If we moved closer—if we saw the
quarrels that go on behind closed doors or the horrible boss that goes with
that new job—we would have less reason to feel envy. Nothing is ever so
perfect as it seems, and often we would see that we are mistaken if we only
looked closely enough. Spend time with that family you envy and wish you
had as your own, and you will begin to reassess your opinion. If you envy
people with greater fame and attention, remind yourself that with such
attention comes a lot of hostility and scrutiny that is quite painful. Wealthy
people are often miserable. Read any account of the last ten years of the life
of Aristotle Onassis (1906–1975), one of the wealthiest men in history,
married to the glamorous Jacqueline Kennedy, and you will see that his
wealth brought him endless nightmares, including the most spoiled and
unloving of children. The process of moving closer is twofold: on the one
hand, try to actually look behind the glittering facades people present, and
on the other hand, simply imagine the inevitable disadvantages that go
along with their position.
Daily Law: Remember that few people are as happy as the image they present. See past
their facades and you will appreciate what you have.
The Laws of Human Nature, 10: Beware the Fragile Ego—The Law of Envy

OCTOBER 29
Manage Your Grandiose Tendencies
Let us say that you have a project to realize. You can think of the project as
a block of marble you must sculpt into something precise and beautiful. The
block is much larger than you and the material is quite resistant, but the task
is not impossible. With enough effort, focus, and resiliency you can slowly
carve it into what you need. You must begin, however, with a proper sense
of proportion—goals are hard to reach, people are resistant, and you have
limits to what you can do. With such a realistic attitude, you can summon
up the requisite patience and get to work. Imagine, however, that your brain
has succumbed to a psychological disease that affects your perception of
size and proportion. Instead of seeing the task you are facing as rather large
and the material resistant, under the influence of this disease you perceive
the block of marble as relatively small and malleable. Losing your sense of
proportion, you believe it won’t take long to fashion the block into the
image you have in your mind of the finished product. You imagine that the
people you are trying to reach are not naturally resistant but quite
predictable. You know how they’ll respond to your great idea—they’ll love
it. In fact, they need you and your work more than you need them. They
should seek you out. The emphasis is not on what you need to do to succeed
but on what you feel you deserve. You can foresee a lot of attention coming
your way with this project, but if you fail, other people must be to blame,
because you have gifts, your cause is the right one, and only those who are
malicious or envious could stand in your way. We can call this
psychological disease grandiosity.
Daily Law: Accept your limitations and work with what you have, rather than fantasize
about godlike powers you can never attain. Maintain a realistic attitude.
The Laws of Human Nature, 11: Know Your Limits—The Law of Grandiosity

OCTOBER 30
The Myth of Progress
A final word on the irrational in human nature: do not imagine that the
more extreme types of irrationality have somehow been overcome through
progress and enlightenment. Throughout history we witness continual
cycles of rising and falling levels of the irrational. The great golden age of
Pericles, with its philosophers and its first stirrings of the scientific spirit,
was followed by an age of superstition, cults, and intolerance. This same
phenomenon happened after the Italian Renaissance. That this cycle is
bound to recur again and again is part of human nature. The irrational
simply changes its look and its fashions. We may no longer have literal
witch hunts, but in the twentieth century, not so very long ago, we
witnessed the show trials of Stalin, the McCarthy hearings in the U.S.
Senate, and the mass persecutions during the Chinese Cultural Revolution.
Various cults are continually being generated, including cults of personality
and the fetishizing of celebrities. Technology now inspires religious fervor.
People have a desperate need to believe in something and they will find it
anywhere. Polls have revealed that increasing numbers of people believe in
ghosts, spirits, and angels, in the twenty-first century. As long as there are
humans, the irrational will find its voices and means of spreading.
Daily Law: Rationality is something to be acquired by individuals, not by mass
movements or technological progress. Feeling superior and beyond it is a sure sign that
the irrational is at work.
The Laws of Human Nature, 1: Master Your Emotional Self—The Law of Irrationality

OCTOBER 31
You Are the Obstacle
In this world, where the game is played with loaded dice, a man must have a temper of iron,
with armor proof to the blows of fate, and weapons to make his way against men. Life is one
long battle; we have to fight at every step; and Voltaire very rightly says that if we succeed, it
is at the point of the sword, and that we die with the weapon in our hand.
—arthur schopenhauer
Life is battle and struggle, and you will constantly find yourself facing bad
situations, destructive relationships, dangerous engagements. How you
confront these difficulties will determine your fate. If you feel lost and
confused, if you lose your sense of direction, if you cannot tell the
difference between friend and foe, you have only yourself to blame.
Everything depends on your frame of mind and on how you look at the
world. A shift of perspective can transform you from a passive and
confused mercenary into a motivated and creative fighter.
Daily Law: As Xenophon said, your obstacles are not rivers or mountains or other
people; your obstacle is yourself.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 1: Declare War on Your Enemies—The Polarity
Strategy

November
The Rational Human
realizing your higher self
The lower self tends to be stronger. Its impulses pull us down into
emotional reactions and defensive postures, making us feel self-righteous
and superior to others. It makes us grab for immediate pleasures and
distractions, always taking the path of least resistance. It induces us to adopt
what other people are thinking, losing ourselves in the group. We feel the
impulses of the higher self when we are drawn out of ourselves, wanting to
connect more deeply with others, to absorb our minds in our work, to think
instead of react, to follow our own path in life, and to discover what makes
us unique. The lower is the more animal and reactive side of our nature, and
one that we easily slip into. The higher is the more truly human side of our
nature, the side that makes us thoughtful and self-aware. Because the higher
impulse is weaker, connecting to it requires effort and insight. Bringing out
this ideal self within us is what we all really want, because it is only in
developing this side of ourselves that we humans feel truly fulfilled. The
month of November will help you accomplish this by making you aware of
the potentially positive and active elements contained within your nature.
There’s a common misconception that people have about human rationality.
This misconception is that rationality involves the suppression or the
repression of emotions. In other words, if you’re feeling fear or anger or
love or hatred, you have to tamp down those emotions. You have to get rid
of them in order to be rational.
In this view, rationality isn’t something very fun or very exciting. It’s
kind of like health food. It’s good for you, but it doesn’t taste very good. I
want to tell you that this is actually quite wrong. It’s actually the opposite.
Rationality involves some very important emotions that if you’re not
experiencing you can’t begin to think rationally
Neuroscience has demonstrated this with studies of people who’ve had
damage to the emotional centers in their brain. After, they are not capable of
making rational decisions or rational thinking.
I can illustrate my idea of rationality with some examples you may have
experienced.
Let’s say you have a plan—something you want to accomplish in life.
There’s a book you want to write, or you want to lose weight or start a
business. You’ve been feeling very frustrated and impatient with the course
of your life. So you decide, I’m going to stop this, I’m going to actually get
this project done, I’m going to create this business, or whatever it is. And
you think about it and take gradual steps to get there.
Or let’s say you’re dealing with a nasty divorce situation, and you’re
fighting over custody of your child, whom you love very much. It’s getting
so ugly that you realize if it keeps going this way the child will actually be
damaged by this process. And so at some point you take a step back and
you think, “What’s really important is the long-term health of my child, so
I’m not going to get involved in this process. I’m actually going to back off,
and I’m going to think of what’s best for the child.”
Or let us say finally, there’s a very toxic person involved in your life.
Some kind of raging narcissist, for instance, who’s getting you enmeshed in
all of this drama that’s making you miserable. And at some point, you tell
yourself, “Damn it, I’ve had enough of this person. I’m going to figure out a
way to get rid of this narcissist.” It’s not easy because this person is
entangled in your life in all these ways. So you step back, and you get
control of yourself, and you think, “How can I get rid of this person?” And
then you do it. Finally, the narcissist is gone, and you feel a tremendous
sense of relief.
Let’s look at these three examples.
In the first one—you’re fed up with the fact that you’re overweight or
that you haven’t been able to accomplish any of your dreams or desires in
life. That frustration—that emotion—impels you to take action, which is to
go through the steps of thinking rationally of how to get out of this state of
frustration. And then, when it’s over, when you finally have realized the
project or goal, you feel a tremendous sense of relief and pride.
In the case of the child—you’re impelled by the sense of empathy and
love for the child. You’re worried about them and that love makes you step
back and go through this rational process. And when it’s over, you feel so
much better about yourself.
Or with that toxic person in your life—you’re full of anger, but you step
back, you take rational steps, and you get rid of them. You feel joy and
relief.
So if you didn’t feel these emotions at first, you would never be able to
take the actions that will lead you to some kind of rational decision. And if
you did not feel the rewards of pride, of empathy, and love of
accomplishing something, you would never be motivated to go through the
rational process again and again and again. So rationality involves emotions
and thinking. Rationality is not about tamping down your emotions. It’s
about creating a beautiful harmony between the thinking process and the
emotional animal parts of our nature. It is important to not see the path to
rationality as something painful and ascetic. In fact, it brings powers that
are immensely satisfying and pleasurable, much deeper than the more
manic pleasures the world tends to offer us.

NOVEMBER 1
Hope for Us All
Despite our pronounced irrational tendencies, two factors should give us all
hope. First and foremost is the existence throughout history and in all
cultures of people of high rationality, the types who have made progress
possible. They serve as ideals for all of us to aim for. These include
Pericles, the ruler Aśoka of ancient India, Marcus Aurelius of ancient
Rome, Marguerite de Valois in medieval France, Leonardo da Vinci,
Charles Darwin, Abraham Lincoln, the writer Anton Chekhov, the
anthropologist Margaret Mead, and the businessman Warren Buffett, to
name but a few. All of these types share certain qualities—a realistic
appraisal of themselves and their weaknesses; a devotion to truth and
reality; a tolerant attitude toward people; and the ability to reach goals that
they have set. The second factor is that almost all of us at some point in our
lives have experienced moments of greater rationality. This often comes
with what we shall call the maker’s mindset. We have a project to get done,
perhaps with a deadline. The only emotion we can afford is excitement and
energy. Other emotions simply make it impossible to concentrate. Because
we have to get results, we become exceptionally practical. We focus on the
work—our mind calm, our ego not intruding. If people try to interrupt or
infect us with emotions, we resent it.
Daily Law: These moments—as fleeting as a few weeks or hours—reveal the rational self
that is waiting to come out. It just requires some awareness and some practice.
The Laws of Human Nature, 1: Master Your Emotional Self—The Law of Irrationality

NOVEMBER 2
Keep Free of the Emotional Whirlpool
To succeed, you have to master your emotions. But even if you succeed in
gaining such balance and self-control, you can never control the
temperamental dispositions of those around you. And this presents a great
danger. Most people operate in a whirlpool of emotions, constantly reacting,
churning up squabbles and conflicts. Your self-control and autonomy will
only bother and infuriate them. They will try to draw you into the
whirlpool, begging you to take sides in their endless battles, or to make
peace for them. If you succumb to their emotional entreaties, little by little
you will find your mind and time occupied by their problems. Do not allow
whatever compassion and pity you possess to suck you in. You can never
win in this game; the conflicts can only multiply. You may be afraid that
people will condemn you as heartless, but in the end, maintaining your
independence and self-reliance will gain you more respect and place you in
a position of power from which you can choose to help others on your own
initiative.
Daily Law: Remember that you have only so much energy and so much time. Every
moment wasted on the dramas of others subtracts from your strength.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 20: Do Not Commit to Anyone

NOVEMBER 3
Increase Your Reaction Time
“Trust your feelings!”—But feelings are nothing final or original; behind feelings there stand
judgments and evaluations which we inherit in the form of . . . inclinations, aversions. The
inspiration born of a feeling is the grandchild of a judgment—and often of a false judgment!—
and in any event not a child of your own! To trust one’s feelings—means to give more
obedience to one’s grandfather and grandmother and their grandparents than to the gods which
are in us: our reason and our experience.
—friedrich nietzsche
This power comes through practice and repetition. When some event or
interaction requires a response, you must train yourself to step back. This
could mean physically removing yourself to a place where you can be alone
and not feel any pressure to respond. Or it could mean writing that angry
email but not sending it. You sleep on it for a day or two. You do not make
phone calls or communicate while feeling some sudden emotion,
particularly resentment. If you find yourself rushing to commit to people, to
hire or be hired by them, step back and give it a day. Cool the emotions
down. The longer you can take the better, because perspective comes with
time.
Daily Law: Consider this like resistance training—the longer you can resist reacting, the
more mental space you have for actual reflection, and the stronger your mind will
become.
The Laws of Human Nature, 1: Master Your Emotional Self—The Law of Irrationality

NOVEMBER 4
Make Envy a Spur to Achievement
Instead of wanting to hurt or steal from the person who has achieved more,
we should desire to raise ourselves up to his or her level. In this way, envy
becomes a spur to excellence. We may even try to be around people who
will stimulate such competitive desires, people who are slightly above us in
skill level. To make this work requires a few psychological shifts. First, we
must come to believe that we have the capacity to raise ourselves up.
Confidence in our overall abilities to learn and improve will serve as a
tremendous antidote to envy. Instead of wishing to have what another has
and resorting to sabotage out of helplessness, we feel the urge to get the
same for ourselves and believe we have the ability to do so. Second, we
must develop a solid work ethic to back this up. If we are rigorous and
persistent, we will be able to overcome almost any obstacle and elevate our
position. People who are lazy and undisciplined are much more prone to
feeling envy.
Daily Law: We cannot stop the comparing mechanism in our brains, so it is best to
redirect it into something productive and creative.
The Laws of Human Nature, 10: Beware the Fragile Ego—The Law of Envy

NOVEMBER 5
Know Yourself Thoroughly
He who knows others is wise; he who knows himself is enlightened.
—lao tzu
The Emotional Self thrives on ignorance. The moment you are aware of
how it operates and dominates you is the moment it loses its hold on you
and can be tamed. Therefore, your first step toward the rational is always
inward. You want to catch that Emotional Self in action. For this purpose,
you must reflect on how you operate under stress. What particular
weaknesses come out in such moments—the desire to please, to bully or
control, deep levels of mistrust? Look at your decisions, especially those
that have been ineffective—can you see a pattern, an underlying insecurity
that impels them? Examine your strengths, what makes you different from
other people. This will help you decide upon goals that mesh with your
long-term interests and that are aligned with your skills. By knowing and
valuing what marks you as different, you will also be able to resist the pull
of group bias and effect.
Daily Law: Can you look at yourself with some distance and see through the fog of self-
deception?
The Laws of Human Nature, 1: Master Your Emotional Self—The Law of Irrationality

NOVEMBER 6
Who Is to Blame?
Whenever anything goes wrong, it is human nature to blame this person or
that. Let other people engage in such stupidity, led around by their noses,
seeing only what is immediately visible to the eye. You see things
differently. When an action goes wrong—in business, in politics, in life—
trace it back to the policy that inspired it in the first place. The goal was
misguided. This means that you yourself are largely the agent of anything
bad that happens to you. With more prudence, wiser policies, and greater
vision, you could have avoided the danger. So when something goes wrong,
look deep into yourself—not in an emotional way, to blame yourself or
indulge your feelings of guilt, but to make sure that you start your next
campaign with a firmer step and greater vision.
Daily Law: See the role you played in any failure; it can always be found.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 12: Lose Battles but Win the War—Grand Strategy

NOVEMBER 7
Practice Mitfreude
The serpent that stings us means to hurt us and rejoices as it does so; the lowest animal can
imagine the pain of others. But to imagine the joy of others and to rejoice at it is the highest
privilege of the highest animals.
—friedrich nietzsche
Schadenfreude, the experience of pleasure in the pain of other people, is
distinctly related to envy, as several studies have demonstrated. When we
envy someone, we are prone to feel excitement, even joy, if they experience
a setback or suffer in some way. But it would be wise to practice instead the
opposite, what the philosopher Friedrich Nietzsche called Mitfreude
—“joying with.” This means that instead of merely congratulating people
on their good fortune, something easy to do and easily forgotten, you must
instead actively try to feel their joy, as a form of empathy. This can be
somewhat unnatural, as our first tendency is to feel a pang of envy, but we
can train ourselves to imagine how it must feel to others to experience their
happiness or satisfaction. This not only cleans our brain of ugly envy but
also creates an unusual form of rapport. If we are the targets of Mitfreude,
we feel the other person’s genuine excitement at our good fortune, instead
of just hearing words, and it induces us to feel the same for them. Because it
is such a rare occurrence, it contains great power to bond people.
Daily Law: Internalize other people’s joy. In doing so, we increase our own capacity to
feel this emotion in relation to our own experiences.
The Laws of Human Nature, 10: Beware the Fragile Ego—The Law of Envy

NOVEMBER 8
Supreme Patience
Time is an artificial concept that we ourselves have created to make the
limitlessness of eternity and the universe more bearable, more human. Since
we have constructed the concept of time, we are also able to mold it to
some degree, to play tricks with it. The time of a child is long and slow,
with vast expanses; the time of an adult whizzes by frighteningly fast. Time,
then, depends on perception, which, we know, can be willfully altered. This
is the first thing to understand in mastering the art of timing. If the inner
turmoil caused by our emotions tends to make time move faster, it follows
that once we control our emotional responses to events, time will move
much more slowly. This altered way of dealing with things tends to
lengthen our perception of future time, opens up possibilities that fear and
anger close off, and allows us the patience that is the principal requirement
in the art of timing.
Never seem to be in a hurry—hurrying betrays a lack of control over
yourself, and over time. Always seem patient, as if you know that
everything will come to you eventually. Become a detective of the right
moment; sniff out the spirit of the times, the trends that will carry you to
power. Learn to stand back when the time is not yet ripe, and to strike
fiercely when it has reached fruition.
Daily Law: Practice patience. Wait a day before taking action on that pressing problem.
The 48 Laws of Power, Law 35: Master the Art of Timing

NOVEMBER 9
Channel Your Grandiose Impulses
Grandiosity is a form of primal energy we all possess. It impels us to want
something more than we have, to be recognized and esteemed by others,
and to feel connected to something larger. The problem is not with the
energy itself, which can be used to fuel our ambitions, but with the direction
it takes. Normally grandiosity makes us imagine we are greater and more
superior than is actually the case. We can call this fantastical grandiosity
because it is based on our fantasies and the skewed impression we get from
any attention we receive. Fantastical grandiosity will make you flit from
one fantastic idea to another, imagining all the accolades and attention
you’ll receive but never realizing any of them. You must do the opposite.
You want to get into the habit of focusing deeply and completely on a single
project or problem. You want the goal to be relatively simple to reach, and
within a time frame of months and not years. You will want to break this
down into mini steps and goals along the way. Your objective here is to
enter a state of flow, in which your mind becomes increasingly absorbed in
the work, to the point at which ideas come to you at odd hours. This feeling
of flow should be pleasurable and addicting. If you do not enter this state of
flow, you are inevitably multitasking and stopping the focus. Work on
overcoming this. This could be a project you work on outside your job. It is
not the number of hours you put in but the intensity and consistent effort
you bring to it. Related to this, you want this project to involve skills you
already have or are in the process of developing. Your goal is to see
continual improvement in your skill level, which will certainly come from
the depth of your focus. Your confidence will rise. That should be enough to
keep you advancing.
Daily Law: Don’t allow yourself to engage in fantasies about other projects on the
horizon. You want to channel this grandiose energy by absorbing yourself in your work
as deeply as possible.
The Laws of Human Nature, 11: Know Your Limits—The Law of Grandiosity

NOVEMBER 10
Transcending Tribalism
Tribalism has its roots in the deepest and most primitive parts of our nature,
but it is now coupled with much greater technological prowess, which
makes it all the more dangerous. What allowed us thousands of years ago to
bind our group tightly and survive could now easily lead to our extinction
as a species. The tribe feels its very existence at stake by the presence of the
enemy. There is little middle ground. Battles can be more intense and
violent between tribes. The future of the human race will likely depend on
our ability to transcend this tribalism and to see our fate as interconnected
with everyone else’s. We are one species, all descendants of the same
original humans, all brothers and sisters. Our differences are mostly an
illusion. Imagining differences is part of the madness of groups. We must
see ourselves as one large reality group and experience a deep sense of
belonging to it. To solve the man-made problems threatening us will require
cooperation on a much higher level and a practical spirit missing from the
tribe. This does not mean the end of diverse cultures and the richness that
comes with them. In fact, the reality group encourages inner diversity.
Daily Law: We must come to the conclusion that the primary group we belong to is that
of the human race. That is our inevitable future. Anything else is regressive and far too
dangerous.
The Laws of Human Nature, 14: Resist the Downward Pull of the Group—The Law of
Conformity

NOVEMBER 11
Ascend the Mountain
For us humans, locked in the present moment, it is as if we are living at the
base of the mountain. What is most apparent to our eyes—the other people
around us, the surrounding forest—gives us a limited, skewed vision of the
reality. The passage of time is like a slow ascent up the mountain. The
emotions we felt in the present are no longer so strong; we can detach
ourselves and see things more clearly. The further we ascend with the
passage of time, the more information we add to the picture. What we saw
three months after the fact is not quite as accurate as what we come to know
a year later. It is in the animal part of your nature to be most impressed by
what you can see and hear in the present—the latest news reports and
trends, the opinions and actions of the people around you, whatever seems
the most dramatic. This is what makes you fall for alluring schemes that
promise quick results and easy money. This is also what makes you
overreact to present circumstances—becoming overly exhilarated or
panicky as events turn one direction or the other. Your eyes must be on the
larger trends that govern events, on that which is not immediately visible.
Never lose sight of your long-term goals. With an elevated perspective, you
will have the patience and clarity to reach almost any objective.
Daily Law: Manufacture the effect of time by giving yourself an expanded view in the
present moment.
The Laws of Human Nature, 6: Elevate Your Perspective—The Law of Shortsightedness

NOVEMBER 12
Break the Codes of Convention
For centuries, and still to this day, gender roles represent the most powerful
convention of all. What men and women can do or say has been highly
controlled, to the point where it seems almost to represent biological
differences instead of social conventions. Women in particular are
socialized to be extra nice and agreeable. They feel continual pressure to
adhere to this and mistake it for something natural and biological. Some of
the most influential women in history were those who deliberately broke
with these codes—performers like Marlene Dietrich and Josephine Baker,
political figures such as Eleanor Roosevelt, businesswomen such as Coco
Chanel. They brought out their Shadow and showed it by acting in ways
that were traditionally thought of as masculine, blending and confusing
gender roles. Even Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis gained great power by
playing against the type of the traditional political wife. She had a
pronounced malicious streak. When people displeased her, she showed it
rather openly. She seemed to care little what others thought of her. And she
became a sensation because of the naturalness she exuded. In general,
consider this a form of exorcism. Once you show these desires and
impulses, they no longer lie hidden in corners of your personality, twisting
and operating in secret ways.
Daily Law: Show the Shadow. Release your demons and enhance your presence as an
authentic human.
The Laws of Human Nature, 9: Confront Your Dark Side—The Law of Repression

NOVEMBER 13
Suffer Fools Gladly
You cannot be everywhere or fight everyone. Your time and energy are
limited, and you must learn how to preserve them. Exhaustion and
frustration can ruin your presence of mind. The world is full of fools—
people who cannot wait to get results, who change with the wind, who can’t
see past their noses. You encounter them everywhere: the indecisive boss,
the rash colleague, the hysterical subordinate. When working alongside
fools, do not fight them. Instead think of them the way you think of
children, or pets, not important enough to affect your mental balance. The
ability to stay cheerful in the face of fools is an important skill.
Daily Law: Detach yourself emotionally from fools. And while you’re inwardly laughing
at their foolishness, indulge them in one of their more harmless ideas.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 3: Amidst the Turmoil of Events, Do Not Lose Your
Presence of Mind—The Counterbalance Strategy

NOVEMBER 14
Project Saintliness
No matter what historical period we are living through, there are certain
traits that are always seen as positive and that you must know how to
display. For instance, the appearance of saintliness never goes out of
fashion. Appearing saintly today is certainly different in content from the
sixteenth century, but the essence is the same—you embody what is
considered good and above reproach. In the modern world, this means
showing yourself as progressive, supremely tolerant, and open minded. You
will want to be seen giving generously to certain causes and supporting
them on social media. Projecting sincerity and honesty always plays well. A
few public confessions of your weaknesses and vulnerabilities will do the
trick. For some reason people see signs of humility as authentic, even
though people might very well be simulating them. Learn how to
occasionally lower your head and appear humble. If dirty work must be
done, get others to do it. Your hands are clean. Never overtly play the
Machiavellian leader—that only works well on television.
Daily Law: If people largely judge others by appearances, learn to take control of the
dynamic by adopting the appropriate persona. An air of humility, even saintliness,
always works well. Avoid any indication of hypocrisy or superiority in this.
The Laws of Human Nature, 3: See Through People’s Masks—The Law of Role-Playing

NOVEMBER 15
Adopt a Generous Spirit
We all carry with us traumas and hurts from early childhood. In our social
life, as we get older, we accumulate disappointments and slights. We are
often haunted by a sense of worthlessness, of not really deserving the good
things in life. We all have moments of great doubt about ourselves. These
emotions can lead to obsessive thoughts that dominate our minds. They
make us curtail what we experience as a way to manage our anxiety and
disappointments. They make us turn to alcohol or any kind of habit to numb
the pain. Without realizing it, we assume a negative and fearful attitude
toward life. This becomes our self-imposed prison. But this is not how it
has to be. We can free ourselves. It comes from a choice, a different way of
looking at the world, a change in attitude. This freedom essentially comes
from adopting a generous spirit—toward others and toward ourselves. By
accepting people, by understanding and if possible even loving them for
their human nature, we can liberate our minds from obsessive and petty
emotions. We can stop reacting to everything people do and say. We can
have some distance and stop ourselves from taking everything personally.
Mental space is freed up for higher pursuits. Once we feel the exhilarating
power from this new attitude, we will want to take it as far as possible.
Daily Law: When we feel generous toward ourselves and others, they feel drawn to us
and want to match our spirit.
The Laws of Human Nature, 8: Change Your Circumstances by Changing Your Attitude—
The Law of Self-Sabotage

NOVEMBER 16
Integrate the Shadow Side
From an early age, Abraham Lincoln liked to analyze himself, and a
recurrent theme in his self-examinations was that he had a split personality
—on the one hand an ambitious almost cruel streak to his nature, and on the
other a sensitivity and softness that made him frequently depressed. Both
sides of his nature made him feel uncomfortable and odd. On the rough
side, for instance, he loved boxing and thoroughly thrashing his opponent in
the ring. In law and politics he had a rather scathing sense of humor. On his
soft side, he loved poetry, felt tremendous affection for animals, and hated
witnessing any kind of physical cruelty. At his worst, he was prone to fits of
deep melancholy and brooding over death. All in all, he felt himself to be
far too sensitive for the rough-and-tumble world of politics. Instead of
denying this side of himself, he channeled it into incredible empathy for the
public, for the average man and woman. Caring deeply about the loss of
lives in the war, he put all his efforts into ending it early. He did not project
evil onto the South but rather empathized with its plight and planned on a
peace that was not retributive. He also incorporated it into a healthy sense
of humor about himself, making frequent jokes about his ugliness, high-
pitched voice, and brooding nature. By embracing and integrating such
opposing qualities into his public persona, he gave the impression of
tremendous authenticity. People could identify with him in a way never
seen before with a political leader.
Daily Law: Your goal must be not only complete acceptance of your Shadow side but
also the desire to integrate it into your present personality. By doing so, you will be a
more complete human and will radiate an authenticity that will draw people to you.
The Laws of Human Nature, 9: Confront Your Dark Side—The Law of Repression

NOVEMBER 17
Balance Imagination and Reality
Your project begins with an idea, and as you try to hone this idea, you let
your imagination take flight, being open to various possibilities. At some
point you move from the planning phase to execution. Now you must
actively search for feedback and criticism from people you respect or from
your natural audience. You want to hear about the flaws and inadequacies in
your plan, for that is the only way to improve your skills. If the project fails
to have the results you imagined, or the problem is not solved, embrace this
as the best way to learn. Analyze what you did wrong in depth, being as
brutal as possible. Once you have feedback and have analyzed the results,
you then return to this project or start a new one, letting your imagination
loose again but incorporating what you have learned from the experience.
You keep cycling endlessly through this process, noticing with excitement
how you are improving by doing so. If you stay too long in the imagination
phase, what you create will tend to be grandiose and detached from reality.
If you only listen to feedback and try to make the work a complete
reflection of what others tell you or want, the work will be conventional and
flat. By maintaining a continual dialogue between reality (feedback) and
your imagination, you will create something practical and powerful.
Daily Law: By continually cycling between your imagination and people’s feedback,
what you produce will be both unique and connected to your audience—the perfect
blend.
The Laws of Human Nature, 11: Know Your Limits—The Law of Grandiosity

NOVEMBER 18
Focus Outwardly
We humans are self-absorbed by nature and spend most of our time
focusing inwardly on our emotions, on our wounds, on our fantasies. You
want to develop the habit of reversing this as much as possible. You do this
in three ways. First, you hone your listening skills, absorbing yourself in the
words and nonverbal cues of others. You train yourself to read between the
lines of what people are saying. You attune yourself to their moods and
their needs, and sense what they are missing. You do not take people’s
smiles and approving looks for reality but rather sense the underlying
tension or fascination. Second, you dedicate yourself to earning people’s
respect. You do not feel entitled to it; your focus is not on your feelings and
what people owe you because of your position and greatness (an inward
turn). You earn their respect by respecting their individual needs and by
proving that you are working for the greater good. Third, you consider
being a leader a tremendous responsibility, the welfare of the group hanging
on your every decision. What drives you is not getting attention but
bringing about the best results possible for the most people. You absorb
yourself in the work, not your ego. You feel a deep and visceral connection
to the group, seeing your fate and theirs as deeply intertwined.
Daily Law: If you exude this attitude, people will feel it, and they will be drawn to you by
the simple fact that it is rare to encounter a person so sensitive to people’s moods and
focused so supremely on results.
The Laws of Human Nature, 15: Make Them Want to Follow You—The Law of Fickleness

NOVEMBER 19
Destiny
The true self of each person is the mind. Know therefore that you are a god. For a god is
someone who moves, who feels, who remembers, who looks to the future, who rules over and
guides and directs the body he is master of, just as that Supreme God directs the universe. And
just as this eternal God controls the universe, which is partly mortal, so too your eternal spirit
directs your fragile body.
—cicero
In ancient times, many great leaders, such as Alexander the Great and Julius
Caesar, felt that they were descended from gods and part divine. Such self-
belief would translate into high levels of confidence that others would feed
off and recognize. It became a self-fulfilling prophecy. You do not need to
indulge in such grandiose thoughts, but feeling that you are destined for
something great or important will give you a degree of resilience when
people oppose or resist you. You will not internalize the doubts that come
from such moments. You will have an enterprising spirit. You will
continually try new things, even taking risks, confident in your ability to
bounce back from failures and feeling destined to succeed.
Daily Law: You’re destined to accomplish great things, and by thinking that, you will
create a self-fulfilling dynamic.
The Laws of Human Nature, 8: Change Your Circumstances by Changing Your Attitude—
The Law of Self-Sabotage

NOVEMBER 20
Focus and Prioritize
Nothing really belongs to us but time, which even he has who has nothing else. It is equally
unfortunate to waste your precious life in mechanical tasks or in a profusion of important
work.
—baltasar gracián
Certain activities are a waste of time. Certain people of a low nature will
drag you down, and you must avoid them. Keep your eye on your long- and
short-term goals, and remain concentrated and alert. Allow yourself the
luxury of exploring and wandering creatively, but always with an
underlying purpose.
Daily Law: In a world full of endless distractions, you must focus and prioritize.
The Laws of Human Nature, 15: Make Them Want to Follow You—The Law of Fickleness

NOVEMBER 21
Connect to What Is Nearest to You
Life is short and we have only so much energy. Led by our covetous
desires, we can waste so much time in futile searches and changes. In
general, do not constantly wait and hope for something better, but rather
make the most of what you have. Reality beckons you. To absorb your mind
in what is nearest, instead of most distant, brings a much different feeling.
With the people in your circle, you can always connect on a deeper level.
There is much you will never know about the people you deal with, and this
can be a source of endless fascination. You can connect more deeply to your
environment. The place where you live has a deep history that you can
immerse yourself in. Knowing your environment better will present many
opportunities for power. As for yourself, you have mysterious corners you
can never fully understand. In trying to know yourself better, you can take
charge of your own nature instead of being a slave to it. And your work has
endless possibilities for improvement and innovation, endless challenges for
the imagination. These are the things that are closest to you and compose
your real, not virtual world.
Daily Law: In the end what you really must covet is a deeper relationship to reality,
which will bring you calmness, focus, and practical powers to alter what it is possible to
alter.
The Laws of Human Nature, 5: Become an Elusive Object of Desire—The Law of
Covetousness

NOVEMBER 22
Embrace Whatever Happens to You
On hearing of the interesting events which have happened in the course of a man’s experience,
many people will wish that similar things had happened in their lives too, completely
forgetting that they should be envious rather of the mental aptitude which lent those events the
significance they possess when he describes them.
—arthur schopenhauer
By 1928 the actress Joan Crawford had a reasonably successful career in
Hollywood, but she was feeling increasingly frustrated by the limited roles
she was receiving. She saw other less talented actresses vault ahead of her.
Perhaps the problem was that she was not assertive enough. She decided
she needed to voice her opinion to one of the most powerful production
chiefs on the MGM lot, Irving Thalberg. Little did she realize that Thalberg
viewed this as impudence and that he was vindictive by nature. He therefore
cast her in a Western, knowing that was the last thing she wanted and that
such a fate was a dead end for many an actress. Joan had learned her lesson
and decided to embrace her fate. She made herself love the genre. She
became an expert rider. She read up on the Old West and became fascinated
by its folklore. If that’s what it took to get ahead, she decided to become the
leading actress of Westerns. At the very least this would expand her acting
skills. This became her lifelong attitude toward work and the supreme
challenges an actress faced in Hollywood, where careers were generally
very short. Every setback was a chance to grow and develop.
Daily Law: Embrace all obstacles as learning experiences, as means to getting stronger.
The Laws of Human Nature, 8: Change Your Circumstances by Changing Your Attitude—
The Law of Self-Sabotage

NOVEMBER 23
Admire Human Greatness
Admiration is the polar opposite of envy—we are acknowledging people’s
achievements, celebrating them, without having to feel insecure. We are
admitting their superiority in the arts or sciences or in business without
feeling pain from this. But this goes further. In recognizing the greatness of
someone, we are celebrating the highest potential of our species. We are
experiencing Mitfreude with the best in human nature. We share the pride
that comes from any great human achievement. Such admiration elevates us
above the pettiness of our day-to-day life and will have a calming effect.
Daily Law: Although it is easier to admire without any taint of envy those who are dead,
try to include at least one living person in our pantheon. If we are young enough, such
objects of admiration can also serve as models to emulate.
The Laws of Human Nature, 10: Beware the Fragile Ego—The Law of Envy

NOVEMBER 24
Seek the Upward Pull of the Group
The reality for a group is as follows: It exists in order to get things done, to
make things, to solve problems. It has certain resources it can draw upon—
the labor and strengths of its members, its finances. It operates in a
particular environment that is almost always highly competitive and
constantly changing. The healthy group puts primary emphasis on the work
itself, on getting the most out of its resources and adapting to all of the
inevitable changes. Not wasting time on endless political games, such a
group can accomplish ten times more than the dysfunctional variety. It
brings out the best in human nature—people’s empathy, their ability to
work with others on a high level.
We like to focus on the psychological health of individuals, and how
perhaps a therapist could fix any problems they might have. What we don’t
consider, however, is that being in a dysfunctional group can actually make
individuals unstable and neurotic. The opposite is true as well: by
participating in a high-functioning reality group, we can make ourselves
healthy and whole. Such experiences are memorable and life-changing. We
gain confidence in our own abilities, which such a group rewards. We feel
connected to reality. We are brought into the upward pull of the group,
realizing our social nature on the high level it was intended for. We feel a
charge of energy that comes from feeling connected to others who are
working with the same urgent spirit.
Daily Law: You must have a thorough understanding of the effect groups have on your
thinking and emotions. With such awareness, you can attach yourself to groups that
exert an upward pull.
The Laws of Human Nature, 14: Resist the Downward Pull of the Group—The Law of
Conformity

NOVEMBER 25
Transform Self-Love into Empathy
We imagine that we understand quite well the people we deal with. Life can
be harsh and we have too many other tasks to attend to. We are lazy and
prefer to rely upon predigested judgments. But in fact it is a matter of life
and death and our success does depend on the development of these skills.
We simply are not aware of this because we do not see the connection
between problems in our lives and our constant misreading of people’s
moods and intentions and the endless missed opportunities that accrue from
this. The first step, then, is the most important: to realize you have a
remarkable social tool that you are not cultivating—empathy. The best way
to see this is to try it out. Stop your incessant interior monologue and pay
deeper attention to people. Attune yourself to the shifting moods of
individuals and the group. Get a read on each person’s particular
psychology and what motivates them. Try to take their perspective, enter
their world and value system. You will suddenly become aware of an entire
world of nonverbal behavior you never knew existed, as if your eyes could
now suddenly see ultraviolet light. Once you sense this power, you will feel
its importance and awaken to new social possibilities.
Daily Law: We are all narcissists, some deeper on the spectrum than others. Our mission
in life is to come to terms with this self-love and learn how to turn our sensitivity
outward, toward others, instead of inward.
The Laws of Human Nature, 2: Transform Self-Love into Empathy—The Law of
Narcissism

NOVEMBER 26
The Confirmation Bias
The test of a first-rate intelligence is the ability to hold two opposing ideas in mind at the same
time and still retain the ability to function.
f. scott fitzgerald
To hold an idea and convince ourselves we arrived at it rationally, we go in
search of evidence to support our view. What could be more objective or
scientific? But because of the pleasure principle and its unconscious
influence, we manage to find the evidence that confirms what we want to
believe. This is known as confirmation bias. When investigating
confirmation bias in the world, take a look at theories that seem a little too
good to be true. Statistics and studies are trotted out to prove them; these
are not very difficult to find, once you are convinced of the rightness of
your argument. On the internet, it is easy to find studies that support both
sides of an argument. In general, you should never accept the validity of
people’s ideas because they have supplied “evidence.” Instead, examine the
evidence yourself in the cold light of day, with as much skepticism as you
can muster.
Daily Law: Your first impulse should always be to find the evidence that disconfirms
your most cherished beliefs and those of others. That is true science.
The Laws of Human Nature, 1: Master Your Emotional Self—The Law of Irrationality

NOVEMBER 27
Assume You’re Misjudging the People Around
You
The greatest danger you face is your general assumption that you really
understand people and that you can quickly judge and categorize them.
Instead, you must begin with the assumption that you are ignorant and that
you have natural biases that will make you judge people incorrectly. The
people around you present a mask that suits their purposes. You mistake the
mask for reality. Let go of your tendency to make snap judgments. Open
your mind to seeing people in a new light. Do not assume that you are
similar or that they share your values. Each person you meet is like an
undiscovered country, with a very particular psychological chemistry that
you will carefully explore. You are more than ready to be surprised by what
you uncover.
Daily Law: This flexible, open spirit is similar to creative energy—a willingness to
consider more possibilities and options. In fact, developing your empathy will also
improve your creative powers.
The Laws of Human Nature, 2: Transform Self-Love into Empathy—The Law of
Narcissism

NOVEMBER 28
Make the Past Come to Life
We are not aware of all this, but we in the present are motley products of all
the accumulated changes in human thinking and psychology. By making the
past into something dead, we are merely denying who we are. We become
rootless and barbaric, disconnected from our nature. You must radically
alter your own relationship to history, bringing it back to life within you.
Begin by taking some era in the past, one that particularly excites you for
whatever reason. Try to re-create the spirit of those times, to get inside the
subjective experience of the actors you are reading about, using your active
imagination. See the world through their eyes. Make use of the excellent
books written in the last hundred years to help you gain a feel for daily life
in particular periods (for example, Everyday Life in Ancient Rome by Lionel
Casson or The Waning of the Middle Ages by Johan Huizinga). In the
literature of the time you can detect the prevailing spirit. The novels of F.
Scott Fitzgerald will give you a much livelier connection to the Jazz Age
than any scholarly book on the subject. Drop any tendencies to judge or
moralize.
Daily Law: People were experiencing their present moment within a context that made
sense to them. You want to understand that from the inside out.
The Laws of Human Nature, 17: Seize the Historical Moment—The Law of Generational
Myopia

NOVEMBER 29
The Rider and the Horse
The ancient Greeks had an appropriate metaphor: the rider and the horse.
The horse is our emotional nature continually impelling us to move. This
horse has tremendous energy and power, but without a rider it cannot be
guided; it is wild, subject to predators, and continually heading into trouble.
The rider is our thinking self. Through training and practice, it holds the
reins and guides the horse, transforming this powerful animal energy into
something productive. The one without the other is useless. Without the
rider, no directed movement or purpose. Without the horse, no energy, no
power. In most people the horse dominates, and the rider is weak. In some
people the rider is too strong, holds the reins too tightly, and is afraid to
occasionally let the animal go into a gallop. The horse and rider must work
together. This means we consider our actions beforehand; we bring as much
thinking as possible to a situation before we make a decision. But once we
decide what to do, we loosen the reins and enter action with boldness and a
spirit of adventure. Instead of being slaves to this energy, we channel it.
That is the essence of rationality. As an example of this ideal in action, try
to maintain a perfect balance between skepticism (rider) and curiosity
(horse). In this mode you are skeptical about your own enthusiasms and
those of others. You do not accept at face value people’s explanations and
their application of “evidence.” You look at the results of their actions, not
what they say about their motivations. But if you take this too far, your
mind will close itself off from wild ideas, from exciting speculations, from
curiosity itself. You want to retain the elasticity of spirit you had as a child,
interested in everything, while retaining the hard-nosed need to verify and
scrutinize for yourself all ideas and beliefs. The two can coexist. It is a
balance that all geniuses possess.
Daily Law: We cannot divorce emotions from thinking. The two are completely
intertwined. But there is inevitably a dominant factor, some people more clearly
governed by emotions than others. Learn to channel your emotions instead of following
them where they lead you.
The Laws of Human Nature, 1: Master Your Emotional Self—The Law of Irrationality

NOVEMBER 30
Advance with a Sense of Purpose
In military history, we can identify two types of armies—those that fight for
a cause or an idea, and those that fight largely for money, as part of a job.
Those that go to war for a cause fight with greater intensity. They tie their
individual fate to that of the cause and the nation. They are more willing to
die in battle for the cause. Those in the army who are less enthusiastic get
swept up in the group spirit. The general can ask more of his soldiers. The
battalions are more unified, and the various battalion leaders are more
creative. Fighting for a cause is known as a force multiplier—the greater the
connection to the cause, the higher the morale, which translates into greater
force. Such an army can often defeat one that is much larger but less
motivated. We can say something similar about your life: operating with a
high sense of purpose is a force multiplier. All of your decisions and actions
have greater power behind them because they are guided by a central idea
and purpose. The many sides to your character are channeled into this
purpose, giving you more sustained energy. Your focus and your ability to
bounce back from adversity give you ineluctable momentum. You can ask
more of yourself.
Daily Law: In a world where so many people are meandering, those with a sense of
purpose spring past the rest with ease and attract attention for this. Find yours and
elevate it by making the connection as deep as possible.
The Laws of Human Nature, 13: Advance with a Sense of Purpose—The Law of
Aimlessness

December
The Cosmic Sublime
expanding the mind to its furthest reaches
You determine the quality of your mind by the nature of your daily
thoughts. If they circle around the same obsessions and dramas, you create
an arid and monotonous mental landscape, and this secretly makes you
miserable. Instead, you must seek to radiate your mind outward, to unleash
your imagination and intensify your experience of life. And the furthest you
can expand the mind is by connecting it to the Cosmic Sublime. Consider
the limitlessness of space and time, the unspeakably awesome chain of
events triggered by the Big Bang. Return to the very origins of our planet
by visiting certain primeval landscapes. Think of the infinite nature of the
human brain as a mirror of the infinite cosmos. Meditate on our common
mortality. You are in fact surrounded every day by endless marvels, and to
the degree you let them into your daily consciousness, you expand your
mind and reinvigorate its immense powers. The month of December will
help you expand your mind to its furthest reaches: the Cosmic Sublime
Death—it’s our greatest fear. But this fear has effects we are not even aware
of. It infects our mental life in general. It secretly instills a fear of life.
Much of the latent, chronic anxiety that plagues most of us is rooted in the
inability to confront our mortality.
We live in a culture that takes death denial to the extreme, banishing the
presence of death as much as is possible.
If you go back hundreds of years, you could not have failed to see
people die in front of you. You might see it on the streets or in your home.
Most people had to kill their own food. You saw animals being slaughtered
in front of your eyes.
Death had a presence. It was constantly there. And so people were
thinking about it all the time. And they had religion to help soothe the idea
of their mortality.
We now live in a world where it’s the complete opposite. We have to
repress the very thought of it. We can’t see it anywhere. It’s put into
hospitals where it’s sanitized, where it happens behind closed doors.
Nobody ever talks about it. Nobody tells you this is probably the most
important life skill that you could have—to know how to deal with that fear
of mortality. Nobody teaches that. Your parents don’t talk about it. Your
girlfriend or boyfriend—they don’t talk about it. Nobody. It’s a dirty little
secret. But it’s the only reality we have. We’re all going to die.
So if you’re in denial of it, if you’re repressing it—which most people
are—it comes out in secret ways. It makes you anxious in your daily life
because you’re not dealing with the one most important thing. You don’t
realize it, but it’s infecting you in your day-to-day decisions, how you
interact with people. It is very simple: you need to confront this fear and
find ways to transform it into vitality and power.
Think of it this way—you could die tomorrow. You have no control over
this. You could be young, you could be twenty-four years old—people die
young all the time. Understand what that means—it means your time is
limited. You don’t have these vast decades of life in front of you. You have
dreams and aspirations and things you want to accomplish—knowing the
shortness and precariousness of life gives you a sense of urgency. It makes
you also appreciate everything around you that you see. It makes life more
vivid and intense by understanding that any day now, it could be ripped
away from you.
I personally had this brought home to me like a slap in the face. Two
months after I finished The Laws of Human Nature, I suffered a stroke. It
was a rather severe stroke in which I was very fortunate to survive and not
have permanent brain damage. It was just a matter of minutes and then it
was over. I was in a coma, and upon waking from that the whole left side of
my body was basically paralyzed. Movement slowly came back. But I had
to confront this reality just after I wrote the chapter on meditating on our
common mortality. And what I wrote about in the book is true.
Now, I look around me at all I see, I look at all that I have—and the
experience makes everything more intense. The colors are more intense.
The sounds are more intense. The feeling of being connected to other
people is more intense because now I’m aware not just of my own mortality
but that of the people I’m with. My girlfriend, she could be gone tomorrow.
My mother and sister, they could be gone tomorrow. My friends, they could
be gone tomorrow. I have to appreciate them on a higher level. I have to
understand that everybody has this in them. And knowing that other people
are also facing it is a way for me to connect to them, a way to deepen my
empathy on a very primal human level.
The essential power that confronting your mortality will give you—I call
it the Sublime. Because it also opens up this idea of how amazing the world
is that we live in, and how much we take for granted because we think that
we’re going to live forever. It’s an incredibly important concept to me and
it’s also very personal in the sense that I came this close to dying myself.
I compare it to standing at the shore of some vast ocean. The fear of that
dark ocean makes you turn away and retreat. I want you to get into your
little boat and I want you to go into that ocean and explore it.

DECEMBER 1
The Infinite and the Awesome
Whereas all the other animals have their heads low, eyes fixed upon the ground, the gods
desired to give to man a sublime face, a face that could raise its eyes to the heavens above,
contemplating the very stars in the sky.
—ovid
We can define the Cosmic Sublime in the following way: it is an encounter
with any physical object that embodies or implies a sense of the infinite, in
space or time. In the ancient world, our ancestors understood this deep
human need. In cultures all around the world, they created rituals, often
rites of initiation, that triggered an awareness of the magnificent forces that
transcend the human. Shamans or wise elders often served as guides. In our
culture we do not easily find such guides or accepted means for
encountering the Cosmic Sublime. In fact, we find the opposite: the media
that dominates our minds gluts us on trivia and the exaggerated dramas of
the moment. If we seek the expansion that will pull us out of our mental
ruts, we are largely on our own. Fortunately, however, this is not as difficult
as we might imagine: we are surrounded by embodiments of the infinite and
the awesome. The infinite comes in many forms—silence, seemingly
endless horizons, blank spaces, et cetera. What matters is our level of
attunement to these places—our desire to expand and transcend our usual
limits, and our willingness to let go of any distractions and open ourselves
to the elements. We are after an experience—not more talk.
Daily Law: Pull your mind away from the dramas of the moment and seek the
expansion.
Law of the Sublime, 1: Expand the Mind to Its Furthest Reaches—The Cosmic Sublime

DECEMBER 2
A Most Improbable Occurrence
The model for feeling the Sublime comes in our meditation on mortality,
but we can train our minds to experience it through other thoughts and
actions. For instance, when we look up at the night sky, we can let our
minds try to fathom the infinity of space and the overwhelming smallness
of our planet, lost in all the darkness. We can encounter the Sublime by
thinking about the origin of life on earth, how many billions of years ago
this occurred, perhaps at some particular moment, and how unlikely it was,
considering the thousands of factors that had to converge for the experiment
of life to begin on this planet. Such vast amounts of time and the actual
origin of life exceed our capacity to conceptualize them, and we are left
with a sensation of the Sublime. We can take this further: Several million
years ago, the human experiment began as we branched off from our
primate ancestors. But because of our weak physical nature and small
numbers, we faced the continual threat of extinction. If that more-than-
likely event had happened—as it had occurred for so many species,
including other varieties of humans—the world would have taken a much
different turn. In fact, the meeting of our own parents and our birth hung on
a series of chance encounters that were equally unlikely.
Daily Law: This causes us to view our present existence as an individual, something we
take for granted, as a most improbable occurrence, considering all of the fortuitous
elements that had to fall into place.
The Laws of Human Nature, 18: Meditate on Our Common Mortality—The Law of Death
Denial

DECEMBER 3
Turn and Face Your Mortality
For it’s always that way with the sacred value of life. We forget it as long as it belongs to us,
and give it as little attention during the unconcerned hours of our life as we do the stars in the
light of day. Darkness must fall before we are aware of the majesty of the stars above our
heads.
—stefan zweig
Most of us spend our lives avoiding the thought of death. Instead, the
inevitability of death should be continually on our minds. Understanding
the shortness of life fills us with a sense of purpose and urgency to realize
our goals. Training ourselves to confront and accept this reality makes it
easier to manage the inevitable setbacks, separations, and crises in life. It
gives us a sense of proportion, of what really matters in this brief existence
of ours. Most people continually look for ways to separate themselves from
others and feel superior. Instead, we must see the mortality in everyone,
how it equalizes and connects us all.
Daily Law: By becoming deeply aware of our mortality, we intensify our experience of
every aspect of life.
The Laws of Human Nature, 18: Meditate on Our Common Mortality—The Law of Death
Denial

DECEMBER 4
The Universe Is within You
I am glad to the brink of fear. . . . Standing on the bare Ground,—my head bathed by the blithe
air, and uplifted into infinite spaces—all mean egotism vanishes. I become a transparent
eyeball; I am nothing; I see all the currents of the Universal Being circulate through me; I am
part or parcel of God.
—ralph waldo emerson
The one form of infinity that is perhaps the most sublimely marvelous to
contemplate is the one that is closest to you—your own brain. Consider the
following: There are approximately 1 million billion synapses (the links
between nerve cells) in the cortical sheet of the human brain. As the
biologist Gerald Edelman speculated, if you were to count these synapses
one per second, it would take you about 32 million years to complete. Then,
if you tried to calculate all the possible paths these synapses could take to
connect, the number would be hyperastronomical—in the vicinity of twenty
followed by millions of zeros, a sum greater than all the positively charged
particles in the universe, and more than all the matter that it contains. The
neuroscientist Christof Koch once declared that the human brain is “the
most complex object in the known Universe.” Equally remarkable are the
hyperspeeds with which the human brain operates. The inner space of the
human brain matches the outer space of the Universe; it is nearly infinite in
scope. (And all this speed and power come from an organ composed of the
basic elements found in rocks.)
Daily Law: The grandeur of the Universe is truly within us.
Law of the Sublime, 1: Expand the Mind to Its Furthest Reaches—The Cosmic Sublime

DECEMBER 5
Immerse the Mind in the Moment
Every morning, before I eat or do anything, I meditate for forty minutes. It’s
a very intense forty minutes because I’m emptying the mind. I’ve been
doing it religiously every morning for close to a decade now, and I wish it’d
been longer. You think, “only forty minutes,” but it is intense and it is
extremely difficult. You try stilling the mind for that amount of time, and
you’ll find out how incredibly difficult it is. But it’s immensely powerful—
the ability to focus and still the mind. The thinking, talking mind is what
messes people up. You can see it in a golfer who’s lining up a twenty-foot
putt on the eighteenth hole or a baseball batter in the bottom of the ninth
with two outs or a field-goal kicker with the game on the line—they’re
thinking, and that thinking interrupts the physical process. Even if you have
the muscle memory mastered, the thinking will mess you up every single
time. This is why samurai warriors were obsessed with Zen Buddhism and
zazen meditation. You think that golfer or that batter or that kicker is in a
pressure situation, but in a sword fight, it’s life or death. If the samurai can’t
still the thinking mind, they die. Zen Buddhism was a way to alter the
mental aspect. It gave them mental control. It made them one with moment.
Daily Law: This is the most powerful point you can reach in sports or any other
endeavor—when you are no longer thinking, you are in the moment. Make it a daily
practice: to focus intensely on the present moment.
“Robert Greene: Mastery and Research,” Finding Mastery: Conversations with Michael
Gervais, January 25, 2017

DECEMBER 6
Alive Time or Dead Time?
Vivre sans temps mort. (Live without wasted time.)
—parisian political slogan
The time that you are alive is the only real possession that you have.
Everything else that you have can be taken away from you—your family,
your house, your cars, your job. The time that you’re alive is the only thing
you truly possess, and you can give it away. You can give it away by
working for other people—they own your time and you can be miserable.
You can give it away by reaching for external pleasures and distractions—
spending the time that you have as a slave to different passions and
different obsessions. Or you can make the time that you’re alive your own.
You can actually come and possess it and take ownership of this time and
make each moment count. And when you do that, that means that time is
yours. It’s alive within you. It’s green. It’s growing. You own it and you’re
making it happen. Another way of looking at it—the way I’ve always
thought of it—is making things your own. Everything that you do in life is a
process of making your own—your time, your ideas, your mental life, and
on and on and on.
Daily Law: Never waste a minute. Make today your own—whether you’re stuck in
traffic, sick in bed, or working long hours.
Daily Stoic, “Robert Greene on the Idea of Alive Time vs. Dead Time,” YouTube, May 10,
2020

DECEMBER 7
The Bullet in the Side
The reality of death has come upon us and a consciousness of the power of God has broken
our complacency, like a bullet in the side. A sense of the dramatic, of the tragic, of the infinite,
has descended upon us, filling us with grief, but even above grief, wonder.
—flannery o’connor
After the onset of lupus at the age of twenty-five, Flannery O’Connor stared
down the barrel of the gun pointed at her, refusing to look away, for over
thirteen years. She used her proximity to death as a call to stir herself to
action, to feel a sense of urgency, to deepen her religious faith and spark her
sense of wonder at all mysteries and uncertainties of life. She used the
closeness of death to teach her what really matters and to help her steer
clear of the petty squabbles and concerns that plagued others. She used it to
anchor herself in the present, to make her appreciate every moment and
every encounter. We tend to read stories like Flannery O’Connor’s with
some distance. We can’t help but feel some relief that we find ourselves in a
much more comfortable position. But we make a grave mistake in doing so.
By having her mortality so present and palpable, she had an advantage over
us—she was compelled to confront death and make use of her awareness of
it. We, on the other hand, are able to dance around the thought, to envision
endless vistas of time ahead of us and dabble our way through life. And
then, when reality hits us, when we perhaps receive our own bullet in the
side in the form of an unexpected crisis in our career, or a painful breakup
in a relationship, or the death of someone close, or even our own life-
threatening illness—we are not usually prepared to handle it.
Daily Law: Flannery O’Connor’s fate is our fate—we are all in the process of dying, all
facing the same uncertainties.
The Laws of Human Nature, 18: Meditate on Our Common Mortality—The Law of Death
Denial

DECEMBER 8
Connect to Something Larger Than Yourself
In 1905, the twenty-three-year-old writer Virginia Woolf returned for the
first time since her childhood to the seaside cottage in Cornwall, England,
where her family had spent many idyllic summers. Her mother had died
when she was young, and recently her father and closest stepsister had also
died, and she had fallen into a deep depression. The moment she
approached the cottage, she saw the ghosts of her childhood—all those who
had died or moved far away—inhabiting the place. The abandoned house
with its derelict furnishings spoke to her of the relentless passage of time.
Outside, the rhythmic sound of the waves, a sound that had been the same
for millions of years in the past and would continue for the same span of
time into the future, long after she was gone, evoked an overwhelming
sense of the infinite. Connected to something much larger than herself, she
reexperienced the sensations and intensity of her childhood. Encountering
the Cosmic Sublime put her own problems and feelings of depression into
proper perspective. Over the next thirty years, she kept returning to the
place to help heal her. She later immortalized these experiences in her semi-
autobiographical novel To the Lighthouse.
Daily Law: You can try something similar as you age, by returning to places of your
youth or childhood, feeling the passage of time all around you, and connecting this to the
eternal cycles of nature of which you are a part.
Law of the Sublime, 1: Expand the Mind to Its Furthest Reaches—The Cosmic Sublime

DECEMBER 9
Encounters with the Inhuman and the Infinite
If the doors of perception were cleansed, everything would appear to man as it is—infinite.
—william blake
Most of us rarely leave the human bubble we live in—we are immersed in
words, symbols, physical structures, and a domesticated nature that bear our
imprint on almost everything we see. To leave that bubble and travel into
the wilderness is not enough. You will tend to carry with you your
technology and the obsessive thoughts that trail you everywhere you go.
Your brain has become too accustomed to its own patterns. To really access
the Cosmic Sublime wherever you travel, you must go through the
following process. First, you must visit places where the human influence is
nil or barely detectable. Fortunately, you do not have to travel far for this
adventure—such places are all around you and easily reachable. You need
to penetrate as deeply as you can into these landscapes. Second, you must
leave behind as much technology as possible. In this more naked state, you
must welcome any physical challenges and even manageable dangers.
Third, bereft of your usual distractions, try to let go of all previous patterns
of thinking and seeing—travel back in time and feel the ancientness of
these places, signs of Earth long before we humans dominated the scene.
Let the elements of these landscapes fill your mind as far as possible and
feel yourself merging with them. When you return back to your familiar
environment, notice how different things appear to you, and any changes
from within.
Daily Law: Leave the human bubble today.
Law of the Sublime, 1: Expand the Mind to Its Furthest Reaches—The Cosmic Sublime

DECEMBER 10
See the Whole
We humans tend to see things in isolation. We see ourselves and others as
individuals, not realizing how our very existence, our consciousness, our
brains, and our physiology, depend on all those in the past before us,
stretching far back in time. When we look at other animals, we imagine an
unbridgeable gulf between us and them. The threads that connect all life-
forms are simply not visible to us and so not a part of our daily
consciousness. You must train yourself to think and feel differently, always
seeking to pick out the hidden threads. Imagine that there is a Whole that
every event and phenomenon is a part of—the Whole that is your
psychology and all your unconscious motivations stretching back to early
childhood; the Whole that is you and all the various influences in your life,
including parents, friends, society, and the cultural zeitgeist; the Whole that
is you and all the past generations of humans that have shaped the world
you now live in; and finally the Whole that is you and all the life-forms that
have led to the evolution of humans and that live within you.
Daily Law: When you look at the world, stop fixating on all the separate forms you see
and view it as all one—one throbbing, pulsating web stretching from 4 billion years ago
to the present, with you as a tiny but necessary speck on a single thread.
Law of the Sublime, 2: Awaken to the Strangeness of Being Alive—The Biological
Sublime

DECEMBER 11
The Child’s Sense of Scale
If we were honest with ourselves, many of us would have to admit to
feeling a certain flatness in our experience: so much seems the same, and
there is little to surprise us. Something is missing in our lives, but it is hard
to pinpoint what it is. Feeling restless, we travel, have a love affair, change
jobs, anything to shake us up. But when the novelty wears off, the flatness
returns. Instead of looking for any possible specific causes of the problem,
let us try to attack it from another, more global angle. Perhaps the source
lies in the overall sense of scale we develop as adults, and to understand the
role this plays in our emotional states, we have to look back at our own
childhood, when our perspective was much different. The fundamental
reality of childhood was our smallness and weakness in comparison to
almost everything around us. We were surrounded by objects and forces
that dwarfed us in size and power—trees, buildings, hills and mountains,
the ocean, storms, the social life of adults. This feeling of smallness sparked
intense curiosity about this world. By trying to understand the world around
us, in some way we could bring it down to size and make it less frightening.
And because we were so small in a world so immense, everything we saw
seemed novel, marvelous, and full of mystery.
Daily Law: Try to encounter the world today with the sense of scale you had as a child.
Law of the Sublime, 1: Expand the Mind to Its Furthest Reaches—The Cosmic Sublime

DECEMBER 12
Life and Death
We are afraid of the old age which we may never attain.
—jean de la bruyère
We can describe the contrast between life and death in the following
manner: Death is absolute stillness, without movement or change except
decay. In death we are separated from others and completely alone. Life, on
the other hand, is movement, connection to other living things, and
diversity of life forms. By denying and repressing the thought of death, we
feed our anxieties and become more deathlike from within—separated from
other people, our thinking habitual and repetitive, with little overall
movement and change. On the other hand, the familiarity and closeness
with death, the ability to confront the thought of it has the paradoxical effect
of making us feel more alive.
Daily Law: By connecting to the reality of death, we connect more profoundly to the
reality and fullness of life. By separating death from life and repressing our awareness of
it, we do the opposite.
The Laws of Human Nature, 18: Meditate on Our Common Mortality—The Law of Death
Denial

DECEMBER 13
How to View the World
See yourself as an explorer. With the gift of consciousness, you stand before
a vast and unknown universe that we humans have just begun to investigate.
Most people prefer to cling to certain ideas and principles, many of them
adopted early on in life. They are secretly afraid of what is unfamiliar and
uncertain. They replace curiosity with conviction. By the time they are
thirty, they act as if they know everything they need to know. As an
explorer you leave all that certainty behind you. You are in continual search
of new ideas and new ways of thinking. You see no limits to where your
mind can roam, and you are not concerned with suddenly appearing
inconsistent or developing ideas that directly contradict what you believed a
few months before. Ideas are things to play with. If you hold on to them for
too long, they become something dead. You are returning to your childlike
spirit and curiosity, from before you had an ego and being right was more
important than connecting to the world. You explore all forms of
knowledge, from all cultures and time periods. You want to be challenged.
As part of this, be open to exploring the insights that come from your own
unconscious, as revealed in your dreams, in moments of tiredness, and in
the repressed desires that leak out in certain moments. You have nothing to
be afraid of or to repress there. The unconscious is merely one more realm
for you to freely explore.
Daily Law: By opening the mind in this way, you will unleash unrealized creative
powers, and you will give yourself great mental pleasure.
The Laws of Human Nature, 8: Change Your Circumstances by Changing Your Attitude—
The Law of Self-sabotage

DECEMBER 14
Release Yourself from Habits and Banality
Whereas the beautiful is limited, the sublime is limitless, so that the mind in the presence of
the sublime, attempting to imagine what it cannot, has pain in the failure but pleasure in
contemplating the immensity of the attempt
—immanuel kant
We can experience the Sublime by contemplating other forms of life. We
have our own belief about what is real based on our nervous and perceptual
systems, but the reality of bats, which perceive through echolocation, is of a
different order. They sense things beyond our perceptual system. What are
the other elements we cannot perceive, the other realities invisible to us?
(The latest discoveries in most branches of science will have this eye-
opening effect, and reading articles in any popular scientific journal will
generally yield a few sublime thoughts.) We can also expose ourselves to
places on the planet where all our normal compass points are scrambled—a
vastly different culture or certain landscapes where the human element
seems particularly puny, such as the open sea, a vast expanse of snow, a
particularly enormous mountain. Physically confronted with what dwarfs
us, we are forced to reverse our normal perception, in which we are the
center and measure of everything.
Daily Law: In the face of the Sublime, we feel a shiver, a foretaste of death itself,
something too large for our minds to encompass. And for a moment, it shakes us out of
our smugness and releases us from the deathlike grip of habit and banality.
The Laws of Human Nature, 18: Meditate on Our Common Mortality—The Law of Death
Denial

DECEMBER 15
Create Physical Death Awareness
Always do what you are afraid to do.
—ralph waldo emerson
For Japanese samurai warriors, the center of our most sensitive nerves and
our connection to life was in the gut, the viscera; it was also the center of
our connection to death, and they meditated on this sensation as deeply as
possible, to create physical death awareness. But beyond the gut, we can
also feel something similar in our bones when we are weary. We can often
sense its physicality in those moments before we fall asleep—for a few
seconds we feel ourselves passing from one form of consciousness to
another, and that slip has a deathlike sensation. There is nothing to be afraid
of in this; in fact, in moving in this direction, we make major advancements
in diminishing our chronic anxiety.
Daily Law: We can use our imagination in this as well, by envisioning the day our death
arrives, where we might be, how it might come. We must make this as vivid as possible.
It could be tomorrow.
The Laws of Human Nature, 18: Meditate on Our Common Mortality—The Law of Death
Denial

DECEMBER 16
The Near-Death Experience
You could leave life right now. Let that determine what you do and say and think.
—marcus aurelius
There are books written by people who’ve had near-death experiences and
they’re fascinating. The effect is usually as follows: Normally we go
through life in a very distracted, dreamlike state, with our gaze turned
inward. Much of our mental activity revolves around fantasies and
resentments that are completely internal and have little relationship to
reality. The proximity of death suddenly snaps us to attention as our whole
body responds to the threat. We feel the rush of adrenaline, the blood
pumping extra hard to the brain and through the nervous system. This
focuses the mind to a much higher level and we notice new details, see
people’s faces in a new light, and sense the impermanence in everything
around us, deepening our emotional responses. This effect can linger for
years, even decades.
Daily Law: We cannot reproduce that experience without risking our lives, but we can
gain some of the effect through smaller doses. We must begin by meditating on our death
and seeking to convert it into something more real and physical.
The Laws of Human Nature, 18: Meditate on Our Common Mortality—The Law of Death
Denial

DECEMBER 17
Let the Impermanence of It All Sink In
If man were never to fade away like the dews of Adashino, never to vanish like the smoke
over Toribeyama, but lingered on forever in the world, how things would lose their power to
move us! The most precious thing in life is its uncertainty.
—yoshida kenkō
Try to look at the world as if we were seeing things for the last time—the
people around us, the everyday sights and sounds, the hum of the traffic, the
sound of the birds, the view outside our window. Let us imagine these
things still going on without us, then suddenly feel ourselves brought back
to life—those same details will now appear in a new light, not taken for
granted or half perceived. Let the impermanence of all life-forms sink in.
The stability and solidity of the things we see are mere illusions. We must
not be afraid of the pangs of sadness that ensue from this perception. The
tightness of our emotions, usually so wound up around our own needs and
concerns, is now opening up to the world and to the poignancy of life itself,
and we should welcome this.
Daily Law: Today, pretend you are seeing things for the last time.
The Laws of Human Nature, 18: Meditate on Our Common Mortality—The Law of Death
Denial

DECEMBER 18
Have a Sense of Urgency and Desperation
Life is a gift, life is happiness, every minute could have been an eternity of happiness! If youth
only knew! Now my life will change; now I will be reborn. Dear brother, I swear that I shall
not lose hope. I will keep my soul pure and my heart open. I will be reborn for the better.
—fyodor dostoyevsky
When we unconsciously disconnect ourselves from the awareness of death,
we forge a particular relationship to time—one that is rather loose and
distended. We come to imagine that we always have more time than is the
reality. Our minds drift to the future, where all our hopes and wishes will be
fulfilled. If we have a plan or a goal, we find it hard to commit to it with a
lot of energy. We’ll get to it tomorrow, we tell ourselves. Perhaps we are
tempted in the present to work on another goal or plan—they all seem so
inviting and different, so how can we commit fully to one or another? We
experience a generalized anxiety, as we sense the need to get things done,
but we are always postponing and scattering our forces. Then, if a deadline
is forced upon us on a particular project, that dreamlike relationship to time
is shattered and for some mysterious reason we find the focus to get done in
days what would have taken weeks or months. The change imposed upon us
by the deadline has a physical component: our adrenaline is pumping,
filling us with energy and concentrating the mind, making it more creative.
It is invigorating to feel the total commitment of mind and body to a single
purpose, something we rarely experience in the world today, in our
distracted state.
Daily Law: We must think of our mortality as a kind of continual deadline, giving a
similar effect as described above to all our actions in life.
The Laws of Human Nature, 18: Meditate on Our Common Mortality—The Law of Death
Denial

DECEMBER 19
Feel Reborn
Life is a constant process of dying.
—arthur schopenhauer
In December of 1849, the twenty-seven-year-old writer Fyodor
Dostoyevsky, imprisoned for participating in an alleged conspiracy against
the Russian czar, found himself and his fellow prisoners suddenly
transported to a square in St. Petersburg, and told that they were about to be
executed for their crimes. This death sentence was totally unexpected.
Dostoyevsky had only a few minutes to prepare himself before he faced the
firing squad. In those few minutes, emotions he had never felt before came
rushing in. He noticed the rays of light hitting the dome of a cathedral and
saw that all life was as fleeting as those rays. Everything seemed more
vibrant to him. He noticed the expressions on his fellow prisoners’ faces,
and how he could see the terror behind their brave facades. It was as if their
thoughts and feelings had become transparent. At the last moment, a
representative from the czar rode into the square, announcing that their
sentences had been commuted to several years’ hard labor in Siberia.
Utterly overwhelmed by his psychological brush with death, Dostoyevsky
felt reborn. And the experience remained embedded in him for the rest of
his life, inspiring new depths of empathy and intensifying his observational
powers. This has been the experience of others who have been exposed to
death in a deep and personal way.
Daily Law: Imagine that you have been spared from a death sentence, now every day is
one you didn’t think you’d get. Live accordingly.
The Laws of Human Nature, 18: Meditate on Our Common Mortality—The Law of Death
Denial

DECEMBER 20
Know What Matters
You act like mortals in all that you fear, and like immortals in all that you desire.
—seneca
We have goals to reach, projects to get done, relationships to improve. This
could be our last such project, our last battle on earth, given the
uncertainties of life, and we must commit completely to what we do. With
this continual awareness we can see what really matters, how petty
squabbles and side pursuits are irritating distractions. We want that sense of
fulfillment that comes from getting things done. We want to lose the ego in
that feeling of flow, in which our minds are at one with what we are
working on. When we then turn away from our work, the pleasures and
distractions we pursue have all the more meaning and intensity, knowing
their evanescence.
Daily Law: Let the awareness of the shortness of life clarify our daily actions.
The Laws of Human Nature, 18: Meditate on Our Common Mortality—The Law of Death
Denial

DECEMBER 21
Let Death Awareness Disperse Our Differences
Another Plague Year would reconcile all these Differences, a close conversing with Death, or
with Diseases that threaten Death, would scum off the Gall from our Tempers, remove the
Animosities among us, and bring us to see with differing Eyes.
—daniel defoe
In 1665 a terrible plague roared through London, killing close to 100,000
inhabitants. The writer Daniel Defoe was only five years old at the time, but
he witnessed the plague firsthand and it left a lasting impression on him.
Some sixty years later, he decided to re-create the events in London that
year through the eyes of an older narrator, using his own memories, much
research, and the journal of his uncle, creating the book A Journal of the
Plague Year. As the plague raged, the narrator of the book notices a
peculiar phenomenon: people tend to feel much greater levels of empathy
toward their fellow Londoners; the normal differences between them,
particularly over religious issues, vanish.
With our philosophy of life through death, we want to manufacture the
cleansing effect that the plague has on our tribal tendencies and usual self-
absorption. We want to begin this on a smaller scale, by looking first at
those around us, seeing and imagining their deaths and noting how this can
suddenly alter our perception of them.
Daily Law: Experience other people’s vulnerability to pain and death, not just your own.
The Laws of Human Nature, 18: Meditate on Our Common Mortality—The Law of Death
Denial

DECEMBER 22
The Ultimate in Stupidity
There are only three events in a man’s life; birth, life and death; he is not conscious of being
born, he dies in pain and he forgets to live.
—jean de la bruyère
I’m often asked what I think of Silicon Valley’s obsession now with either
indefinitely prolonging death or ending death. I think it’s the ultimate
stupidity and I’ve been ranting against it for years. It’s like you’re running
away from the only reality that exists. We can argue about what reality is.
We have our own reality. Our reality is not what a bat or a fly sees. We
don’t have echolocation. Every creature has its own reality. But the one
thing that we can say is that we’re born and we die. And the idea that you
want to escape death and prolong your life—how selfish and narcissistic is
this? What if everybody tries to extend their life for 50, 100 years? What
will happen to the planet? We already have 8 billion people on this planet.
People need to die or we won’t have resources, we won’t have air to
breathe, water to drink. So in trying to prolong life, you’re prioritizing
yourself. You’re going to go on consuming more Me, more energy, taking
up more space in the world? So now instead of 8 billion, we have 15 billion
people? What kind of insanity is that? It’s the ultimate form of stupidity and
insanity.
Daily Law: To deny mortality and fight against it is the ultimate form of human
stupidity and the ultimate insult to human nature, as if you can transcend nature. You
can’t transcend nature, it defines you.
“The Laws of Human Nature: An Interview with Robert Greene,” dailystoic.com, October
23, 2018

DECEMBER 23
Avoid the False Sublime
The problem we face today is that many of us are too sophisticated and
skeptical to consider such a quaint and old-fashioned concept as the
Sublime, which reeks of religious experiences we have seemingly
outgrown. But whenever we humans attempt to repress or deny something
so natural and embedded in our psychological makeup, all that happens is
that the repressed desire returns in corrupted forms, in what we shall call
the False Sublime. The False Sublime can be sought through drugs, alcohol,
and any kind of stimulant that temporarily frees us from our rigid selves and
gives us a feeling of expansion and power, or at least numbs the depression
we experience in the modern world. It can also be sought through video
games or pornography, in which the violence and level of stimulation has to
be continually upped to have the same effect. Then there are all the
microcauses and cults sprouting up to channel people’s latent rage and
restlessness. Through these groups, people can experience a temporary lift
out of the banality of their lives, until the aura of the cause fades and a new
one must be found. And in this age, technology itself can become the new
religion. Through technology and algorithms, we tell ourselves, we can
solve anything. These are all false forms for the following reason: the True
Sublime can be triggered by some external source—the view of a mountain,
the night sky, an encounter with an animal, the dipping of a cake in tea, an
intense group experience, a deep love for a person or for nature. But in
these instances, a transformation occurs within us. Our perceptions are
altered, our minds expanded beyond the circle. From then on, we see the
world differently.
Daily Law: The False Sublime comes from external sources and leaves no lasting
internal changes except for increased dependency on the substance itself. All of the
addictions plaguing twenty-first-century humanity are false and degraded forms of the
Sublime.
Law of the Sublime, Introduction

DECEMBER 24
Place Yourself on Death Ground
Leaders of armies have thought about this subject since armies existed: how
can soldiers be motivated, be made more aggressive, more desperate? Some
generals have relied on fiery oratory, and those particularly good at it have
had some success. But over two thousand years ago, the Chinese strategist
Sun Tzu came to believe that listening to speeches, no matter how rousing,
was too passive an experience to have an enduring effect. Instead, Sun Tzu
talked of a “death ground”—a place where an army is backed up against
some geographical feature like a mountain, a river, or a forest and has no
escape route. Without a way to retreat, Sun Tzu argued, an army fights with
double or triple the spirit it would have on open terrain, because death is
viscerally present. Sun Tzu advocated deliberately stationing soldiers on
death ground to give them the desperate edge that makes men fight like the
devil. The world is ruled by necessity: People change their behavior only if
they have to. They will feel urgency only if their lives depend on it.
Daily Law: Put yourself in situations where you have too much at stake to waste time or
resources—if you cannot afford to lose, you won’t. Place yourself on “death ground,”
where your back is against the wall and you have to fight like hell to get out alive.
The 33 Strategies of War, Strategy 4: Create a Sense of Urgency and Desperation—The
Death-Ground Strategy

DECEMBER 25
This Too Will Not Last
The human mind naturally freezes the relentless passage of time by
presenting us with static images of people, our culture, and our own self-
identity. But if we were truly sensitive to evolution, we would realize these
are only passing shadows in a world of ceaseless flux. Every minute of
every day we are aging; every encounter with others alters and shapes our
ideas; we are a continuous work in progress, never quite the same. As
Heraclitus once said, “You cannot step into the same river twice; it is not
the same river, and you are not the same person.” Evolution requires this
continuous flux and periodic cycles of mass destruction to create space for
new forms and experiments. We humans, however, aware of our mortality,
recoil from this; we want to hold onto the past and mentally stop the flow.
We want to hold onto our grievances and even our pain, as well as our
pleasures—all to create an illusion of inner permanence and stability.
Instead, we must learn to let go, to accept completely all the separations life
forces upon us. It is the very impermanence of our experiences and all
living things around us that give them poignancy and significance. Be
consoled that nothing will last—not the depression nor disappointments we
feel in the present. The sublimity of the world around us is heightened by
knowing how short our time is to witness it.
Daily Law: Let go of the past and feel yourself carried along by the stream of life and all
the power and energy that it will bring us in its wake.
Law of the Sublime, 2: Awaken to the Strangeness of Being Alive—The Biological
Sublime

DECEMBER 26
Journey Inside the Global Brain
You become what you think, your daily thoughts your reality. You create
the rich or arid landscape of your brain. If you constrict your thoughts to the
same obsessions, to the tiny realm of your smartphone, that is the world that
you create for yourself. What a waste of this magnificent instrument that
you have inherited! But if you attempt to move in the opposite direction,
you will notice the opposite dynamic—continual expansion, mental doors
opening up in every direction, creative connections and new ideas flooding
your brain. You will not want to stop exploring, because your exploration
becomes a continuous source of pleasure for the restless energy of the
human mind. This is a choice you make. It is interesting to note that we
humans have unconsciously created an analog to this infinite inner space in
the form of the internet, a kind of global brain. It contains almost all of
recorded history, the ideas and experiences of billions of people in all fields
and endeavors; much of its content is nonsense, but some of it contains new
possibilities in the form of connections between different ideas and fields.
Daily Law: Instead of using this remarkable instrument as a means to get attention or to
vent your rage and display your superiority, see the internet in this different light—an
invitation to a fascinating journey inside a global brain and the surprises it can bring
you by roaming freely in this vast space and making surprising connections.
Law of the Sublime, 1: Expand the Mind to Its Furthest Reaches—The Cosmic Sublime

DECEMBER 27
Amor Fati
My formula for greatness in a human being is amor fati: that one wants nothing to be other
than it is, not in the future, not in the past, not in all eternity. Not merely to endure that which
happens of necessity . . . but to love it.
—friedrich nietzsche
What amor fati (love of fate) means is the following: There is much in life
we cannot control, with death as the ultimate example of this. We will
experience illness and physical pain. We will go through separations with
people. We will face failures from our own mistakes and the nasty
malevolence of our fellow humans. And our task is to accept these
moments, and even embrace them, not for the pain but for the opportunities
to learn and strengthen ourselves. In doing so, we affirm life itself,
accepting all of its possibilities. And at the core of this is our complete
acceptance of death.
Daily Law: We put this into practice by continually seeing events as fateful—everything
happens for a reason, and it is up to us to glean the lesson.
The Laws of Human Nature, 18: Meditate on Our Common Mortality—The Law of Death
Denial

DECEMBER 28
The Sky and the Stars
The stars. . . . Every night come out these envoys of beauty, and light the universe with their
admonishing smile.
—ralph waldo emerson
On a cloudless day, alone with your own thoughts and no distractions, look
up and let your mind expand along with the infinite blue of the sky. Try to
feel the limitless space. Then glance at the sun. Normally you take its
existence for granted, but this time see it as a star like any other star, one
that was born and is in the process of dying. Try to grasp for a moment this
utterly insane reality—its perfect distance from Earth to allow for life; and
life adding such variety of colors illuminated by that very sun. Apollo
astronauts who walked on the Moon remarked on the depressing ashen
grays and browns that dominated its lifeless landscapes. Knowing how
unlikely its existence is, see the phenomenon of color itself as surprising
and wondrous. At night, realize that when you look at the Moon or stars,
you are seeing the same sights that so dazzled and mesmerized our
ancestors—the Babylonians, the ancient Egyptians and Greeks, and the
Maya, to name a few. They constructed entire myths and belief systems out
of the night sky, making the cosmos come to life. Try, as you take it in, to
drop your sophisticated modern perspective and to see the sky as something
animated—see it through pagan eyes. When you look at the Moon, think of
its origins as dust from the collision of the Earth and Theia (a former planet
in our solar system). Reflect on the fact that when you look upon stars, you
are seeing light that has taken millions, sometimes billions, of years to
reach us.
Daily Law: Look at the sky and stars as if seeing them for the first time.
Law of the Sublime, 1: Expand the Mind to Its Furthest Reaches—The Cosmic Sublime

DECEMBER 29
Meditate on the Mysteries
Begin with yourself. Your mind and body are in fact mysteries. You have no
access to the source of your emotions; you cannot see inside your brain and
the processes that call up certain thoughts, or the degree to which your ideas
are the products of so many external influences. You also cannot see into
your bodily processes, the high-level complexity of everything within you
that makes you alive. Your senses only reveal to you a partial version of
reality. You cannot perceive what a bat or a dolphin can see, nor hear what a
cat or a dog can hear. So much remains invisible to your senses.
Contemplate the total mystery that is yourself, and then expand this
outward. You really have no clue as to the thoughts and inner lives of the
people around you. They are far more complex than you imagine. You have
no real grasp of the trends rolling through the present moment in culture,
and the future that they herald. You don’t understand the inner workings
and experiences of other life forms, nor the origins of the very Earth you
walk upon. Keep expanding. Planets in our galaxy and beyond contain
endless mysteries, and even the possibilities of very strange alien life forms.
The universe is mostly dark matter and energy. You are enveloped in what
is truly invisible. Ponder the fact that the further science advances, the more
mysteries it uncovers. On and on you voyage, finally reaching the frontiers
of the known Universe—what could lie on the other side is beyond what we
can envision, perhaps the ultimate mystery.
Daily Law: Contemplate any feelings of uncertainty and even discomfort and hold fast to
them. Amid such uncertainty your dormant sense of wonder will begin to stir, and things
will start to appear novel and surprising as they did when you were very young.
Law of the Sublime, 1: Expand the Mind to Its Furthest Reaches—The Cosmic Sublime

DECEMBER 30
Accept Your Insignificance
Begin by imagining yourself gradually shrinking in size, back to where you
were as a child. For a moment, re-experience the sensation of your
smallness in relation to your parents, to the school you went to, and to the
physical world around you. Return to those sensations of fear and
excitement in the face of what seemed immense. Then, keep shrinking to
your infancy and reimagine feelings of terror that you once had in any form
of darkness or shadow. Imagine continuing this further, returning to the
womb, to your smallest origins as a living thing, all the way down to the
cellular level, to mere molecules, then atoms, to a particle, to the point of
literally dissolving into the atmosphere—a kind of reverse death process.
Feel for a moment the sensation of smallness to such a degree that nothing
separates you from everything in the universe.
Once you have felt from within this dissolution into nothingness, think
of the following: this is your reality as an individual in relation to infinite
space and time.
Daily Law: The fact that you are aware of this insignificance and smallness is
paradoxically what renders you powerful and significant. It is an understanding of
reality that no other animal is capable of. Such awareness can begin to restore to you
that sense of awe and connection that comes from a proper sense of scale.
Law of the Sublime, 1: Expand the Mind to Its Furthest Reaches—The Cosmic Sublime

DECEMBER 31
The Ultimate Freedom
Premeditation of death is premeditation of freedom. . . . He who has learned how to die has
unlearned how to be a slave. Knowing how to die frees us from all subjection and constraint.
—michel de montaigne
In the end, think of this philosophy of life through death in the following
terms: Since the beginning of human consciousness, our awareness of death
has terrified us. This terror has shaped our beliefs, our religions, our
institutions, and so much of our behavior in ways we cannot see or
understand. We humans have become the slaves to our fears and our
evasions. When we turn this around, becoming more aware of our mortality,
we experience a taste of true freedom. We no longer feel the need to restrict
what we think and do, in order to make life predictable. We can be more
daring without feeling afraid of the consequences. We can cut loose from all
the illusions and addictions that we employ to numb our anxiety. We can
commit fully to our work, to our relationships, to all our actions.
Daily Law: Once we taste some of this freedom, we will want to explore further and
expand our possibilities as far as time will allow us.
The Laws of Human Nature, 18: Meditate on Our Common Mortality—The Law of Death
Denial

To continue this journey with a free daily meditation from Robert Greene, sign up at
TheDailyLaws.com

About the Author
Robert Greene, the #1 New York Times bestselling author of The Laws of
Human Nature, The 48 Laws of Power, The 33 Strategies of War, The Art of
Seduction, The 50th Law (with 50 Cent), and Mastery, is an internationally
renowned expert on power strategies. He lives in Los Angeles.
 




